polymers 
Article
Impact of Enzymatic Degradation on the Material Properties of
Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate)
Teresa Menzel 1,† , Sebastian Weigert 2,†
 , Andreas Gagsteiger 2
 , Yannik Eich 1, Sebastian Sittl 3,
Georg Papastavrou 3, Holger Ruckdäschel 1, Volker Altstädt 1
 and Birte Höcker 2, *
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Menzel, T.; Weigert, S.;
Gagsteiger, A.; Eich, Y.; Sittl, S.;
Papastavrou, G.; Ruckdäschel, H.;
Altstädt, V .; Höcker, B. Impact of
Enzymatic Degradation on the
Material Properties of Poly(Ethylene
Terephthalate). Polymers 2021, 13,
3885. https://doi.org/10.3390/
polym13223885
Academic Editor: Andrea Sorrentino
Received: 23 September 2021
Accepted: 8 November 2021
Published: 10 November 2021
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1 Department of Polymer Engineering, University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstraße 30,
95447 Bayreuth, Germany; Teresa.Menzel@uni-bayreuth.de (T.M.); bt716629@uni-bayreuth.de (Y.E.);
holger.ruckdaeschel@uni-bayreuth.de (H.R.); volker.altstaedt@uni-bayreuth.de (V .A.)
2 Department of Biochemistry, University of Bayreuth, Universitätsstraße 30, 95447 Bayreuth, Germany;
Sebastian.Weigert@uni-bayreuth.de (S.W.); Andreas.Gagsteiger@uni-bayreuth.de (A.G.)
3 Department of Physical Chemistry II, University of Bayreuth, Universitätstraße 30, 95447 Bayreuth, Germany;
sebastian.sittl@uni-bayreuth.de (S.S.); Georg.Papastavrou@uni-bayreuth.de (G.P .)
* Correspondence: birte.hoecker@uni-bayreuth.de
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract: With macroscopic litter and its degradation into secondary microplastic as a major source
of environmental pollution, one key challenge is understanding the pathways from macro- to
microplastic by abiotic and biotic environmental impact. So far, little is known about the impact of
biota on material properties. This study focuses on recycled, bottle-grade poly(ethylene terephthalate)
(r-PET) and the degrading enzyme PETase from Ideonella sakaiensis. Compact tension (CT) specimens
were incubated in an enzymatic solution and thermally and mechanically characterized. A time-
dependent study up to 96 h revealed the formation of steadily growing colloidal structures. After
96 h incubation, high amounts of BHET dimer were found in a near-surface layer, affecting crack
propagation and leading to faster material failure. The results of this pilot study show that enzymatic
activity accelerates embrittlement and favors fragmentation. We conclude that PET-degrading
enzymes must be viewed as a potentially relevant acceleration factor in macroplastic degradation.
Keywords: polymer degradation; microplastic; nanoplastic; PET ase; crack formation; fatigue crack propa-
gation resistance; BHET; enzymatic degradation; enzyme;Ideonella sakaiensis; bis(hydroxyethyl)terephthalate
1. Introduction
Since the discovery of microplastics (MPs) in 2004 [1], particles have been detected
in almost every natural environment. Primary MP is already produced on a micrometer
scale, whereas secondary MP arises by degradation and fragmentation of macroplastic.
As the amount of secondary MP to be found in nature is drastically larger than that of
primary MP , the degradation of macroplastic has recently gained new attention [2–4]. Once
in the environment, polymers are exposed to a range of external environmental impacts.
These can be categorized as abiotic factors such as UV-radiation, temperature, humidity,
and mechanical stress, and biotic factors such as living or dead organisms, e.g., bioﬁlm
formation by bacteria, fungi, algae, or ingestion [5,6]. A complex interplay of natural stress
factors is supposed to lead to molecular degradation, fragmentation, and therefore MP
formation [7–9]. However, knowledge of the underlying processes is still lacking. It is
evident that material properties decisively inﬂuence the fragmentation towards MP and
dramatically change during this process, creating a feedback loop on the degradation itself.
Regarding biotic degradation, polyesters, especially polyethylene terephthalate (PET),
are the subject of many studies due to their molecular structure [ 10]. Ester bonds are
omnipresent in key positions within metabolic networks and biological molecules. Al-
though other common polymer bond types like C-C are more challenging in a biological
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13223885 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/polymers
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 2 of 13
perspective, a whole variety of hydrolases is known to deal with ester bonds in nature.
Particularly in recent years, PET-degrading enzymes have come into focus as a new per-
spective for biological MP decomposition and recycling applications [11]. In this regard,
cutinase enzymes are of particular interest, as their aliphatic ester substrate, cutin, has a
chemical resemblance to PET. Consequently, all PET-degrading enzymes with relevant
activity known to date can be assigned to this group of cutinases [10], including the best-
studied variants TfCut-1/2 (Thermobiﬁda fusca) [11], LCC (uncultured organism) [12], and
PETase (Ideonella sakaiensis) [13]. The latter piqued researchers’ interest, as it appeared as
the ﬁrst evolved PET-degrading enzyme with substantial activity at ambient temperatures.
This activity proﬁle, combined with the presence of potential PET-degrading enzymes in
different ecosystems [14], suggests the altering of PET’s material properties upon biological
activity under real conditions.
On a chemical level, abiotic factors are relatively well characterized: Photooxidation
by UV radiation and oxygen leads to radical-induced chain scission and the formation
of new polar functional end groups, e.g., carboxylic acids, aldehydes, hydroxides, or
peroxides [15–18]. Hydrolytic degradation strongly depends on an interplay of humidity,
temperature, pH, and the crystallinity of the material [17,19–21]. Both processes lead to
a decrease in the molecular weight. Regarding material properties, it is well known that
the transition of the molecular weight below the critical molar mass (Mc, 17 kg/mol for
PET [22]) causes a change in material behavior from ductile to brittle [ 23]. In general,
abiotic degradation and stepwise embrittlement accelerate the fragmentation upon external
mechanical forces like wind and waves [24,25]. However, except for one study [22], there is
a lack of detailed information about changes in mechanical properties on PET depending
on environmental impact in the literature. When it comes to biotic degradation of PET and
its impact on the material, even less is known besides the investigation of changes in PET
crystallinity during enzymatic degradation [26].
A sensitive method for the determination of micromechanical material changes can
be supplied by mechanical testing under dynamic load [ 27,28]. This technique gives
precise information on the fatigue crack propagation (FCP) behavior at various crack
propagation speeds and is claimed to be the most sensitive regarding the relationships
between the polymer structure and deformation mechanism. The stress state at the crack
tip is well deﬁned compared to conventional tensile or impact testing. This allows possible
correlations between the interaction of the crack tip, propagation of the fatigue crack, and
the sensitivity of a speciﬁc polymer to environmental stress. It is well known that the
FCP rate is strongly affected by the degree of crystallinity and the tie molecule density
of polymers [ 29,30], as well as by their molecular weight [ 31]. Eventually, the linear
dependency of the FCP rate on the applied stress intensity, indicating stable crack growth,
provides qualitative information about improved or deteriorated material behavior [32].
To the best of our knowledge, there have been no studies focusing on the impact of
biotic stresses on macroscopic PET properties. For detailed information on the formation
of MP on their pathway from macro to micro, biotic factors on material properties must
be considered. Within this feasibility study, we combine the methods and techniques of
biochemistry and engineering sciences. This interdisciplinary combination allows ﬁrst
insights into the change of material properties in a laboratory-controlled biotic degradation
process. Overall, the aim of our study is to understand the impact of biotic degradation by
PETase on a macro- and microscopic level by focusing on PET material properties. Insights
into the underlying processes enable us to comprehend how biotic degradation impacts
PET fragmentation.
2. Materials and Methods
A commercially available, recycled, low-molecular-weight PET (CleanPET® FK) (Veo-
lia Deutschland GmbH, Berlin, Germany) was used with a number-averaged molecular
weight of Mn = 30.155 g/mol and dispersity Ð = 1.8 determined by GPC measurements
(Agilent 1200 Series, Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany) with HFIP with potas-
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 3 of 13
sium triﬂuoroacetate (4.8 g in 600 mL HFIP) as solvent. The PET ﬂakes were acquired from
disposable, post-consumer bottles and therefore contained an undeterminable amount of
several additives. Thus, the material composition reﬂected a realistic condition regarding
real-life environmental conditions.
2.1. Protein Production and Puriﬁcation
The gene of isPETase was cloned via Gibson assembly [ 33] in a pMAL-p4x vector,
in which the MPB sequence was replaced with the mauC signal peptide for periplasmic
expression. E. coli BL21 cells containing the plasmid were grown in TB media at 37◦C; after
an OD600 of 1.5 was reached the temperature was lowered to 18 ◦C and protein expression
was induced with a ﬁnal concentration of 300 µM IPTG. After 18 h, cells were harvested
and resuspended for sonication in lysis buffer (300 mM NaCl, 40 mM imidazole, 50 mM
phosphate pH 7.4). The lysate was clariﬁed through centrifugation (50,000× g) and vacuum
ﬁltration (0.2 µm ﬁlter), and subsequently loaded onto a NiIMAC column (HisTrap FF
5 mL, Cytiva Europe, Freiburg, Germany). After loading and washing, the protein was
recovered from the column with elution buffer (300 mM NaCl, 400 mM imidazole, 50 mM
phosphate pH 7.4). For ﬁnal polishing, the protein was applied to a SEC column (Superdex
75pg 26/60, Cytiva) equilibrated with SEC buffer (150 mM NaCl, 25 mM HEPES, pH 7.4).
A total of 100 µL aliquots of the enzyme with a concentration of 25 µM were ﬂash frozen
and kept at −80 ◦C until further use.
2.2. PET Sample Preparation
Compact tension (CT) specimens with a width and thickness of 40 and 4 mm, respec-
tively, were prepared by injection molding (Arburg Allrounder 470H 1000-170, Arburg
GmbH, Loßburg, Germany). Each sample was tapped with a new razor blade into the
V-notch to create a sharp crack. For a time-dependent degradation study of the surfaces,
squares with 2 cm edge length were sawn out of the injection-molded CT specimen for
easier handling.
2.3. Sample Incubation with PETase
For the time-dependent degradation study, the squares with 2 cm edge length were
fully covered with an enzyme-buffer solution in a 50 mL centrifuge tube. The enzyme
concentration was constantly set to 200 nM in a reaction buffer of 50 nM NaCl and 50 mM
borate at pH 8.5. A control sample was covered under the absence of enzyme with a buffer
solution only. All samples were incubated at 30 ◦C for 24 h, 48 h, and 96 h, respectively.
The sample without enzyme is further referred to as control. The PET samples, additionally
incubated with enzyme, are further referred to as PET*24 h, PET*48 h, and PET*96 h.
For mechanical testing, the CT specimens were placed in purpose-built holders made
of stainless steel (Figure 1). This setup ensured the sufﬁcient coverage of solution at the
notch and along the expected crack propagation. The sample holder was assembled with
a specimen and ﬁlled with 2 mL of the abovementioned enzyme-buffer solution. Again,
a specimen incubated with buffer solution only serves as control sample. The sample
holders were placed in a gastight container comprising additional reaction buffer on the
bottom to minimize evaporation of the solution within the sample holder. The specimens
for mechanical testing were incubated at 30 ◦C for 96 h. After exposure, the CT specimen
was rinsed with water and a standard PET drying procedure (6 h at 140 ◦C) was applied to
eliminate the inﬂuence of moisture in further characterization steps.
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 4 of 13
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 4 of 13  
 
 
Figure 1. CT specimen and sample holders for the incubation with enzyme-buffer solution. The CT 
specimen is placed between two perfectly fitting parts, and tightly secured with screws. The inden-
tations are filled either with buffer or enzyme-buffer solution. To avoid leakage of the solutions, U-
shaped seals are fixed between specimen and sample holder. The setup ensures the total coverage 
of the specimen with solution within the expected crack propagation direction. 
For this study, incubation parameters such as buffer composition, temperature, and 
enzyme concentration were chosen primarily to optimize enzymatic activity. Although 
they did not necessarily reflect conditions in natural settings, they allowed for the best 
results to establish the methodology.  
2.4. Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC) 
The water-soluble degradation products of PET were quantified with a Thermofisher 
RS3000 UHPLC system equipped with a Phenomenx Kinetex 1.7 µm EVO C18 (100 Å,  
50 mm × 2.1 mm) reversed-phase column. For sample preparation, one part of the sample 
buffer solution of the PET control, PET*24 h, PET*48 h, and PET*96 h after incubation was 
mixed with four parts acidic acetonitrile (1% formic acid) and centrifuged at 21,000× g for 
10 min. A quantity of 1 µL of the supernatant was applied to the column running a gradi-
ent from 100% solvent A (water + 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) to 20% solvent A and 80% 
solvent B (acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 1.3 mL/min and the column was heated to 55 °C. 
The product amounts for TPA, MHET, and BHET were quantified based on calibration 
runs. For the time-dependent monitoring of the enzymatic activity, the three degradation 
products were summed up to the total product concentration for better comparison.  
2.5. Optical and Topographical Characterization 
To visualize the enzymatic degradation on a microscopic scale, field-emission scan-
ning electron microscopy (FESEM) was performed on the surfaces with a Zeiss Ultra plus 
(Carl Zeiss Microscopy Deutschland GmbH, Oberkochen, Germany) at an acceleration 
voltage of 3 kV for the control and the enzyme-degraded samples. All samples were sput-
tered with 1.3 nm platin at a Cressington Platin-Sputter Coater 208HR (TESCAN GmbH, 
Dortmund, Germany) and additionally steamed with 20 nm carbon at a Leica EM ACE 
600 (Leica Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany).  
The surface topography of the enzymatically degraded PET*96 h and control PET 
sample was acquired by atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging in PeakForce tapping 
mode in air. All images were acquired using a Dimension Icon AFM (Bruker Corporation 
Billerica, Massachusetts, USA) equipped with a NanoScope V controller. For imaging, 
ScanAsyst Air cantilevers (Bruker Nano Inc., nominal spring constant 0.4 N/m, nominal 
resonance frequency 70 kHz) were used. The PeakForce frequency was set to 2 kHz with 
an amplitude of 150 nm. The AFM images were processed with NanoScope Analysis soft-
ware (version 1.80, Bruker Nano Inc.). In an additional set of experiments, the samples, 
i.e., enzyme-degraded and control sample surfaces, were treated for about 30 s by a CO2 
gun (SnowJet, Tectra GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany) in order to remove potential organic 
contaminants. 
Figure 1. CT specimen and sample holders for the incubation with enzyme-buffer solution. The
CT specimen is placed between two perfectly ﬁtting parts, and tightly secured with screws. The
indentations are ﬁlled either with buffer or enzyme-buffer solution. To avoid leakage of the solutions,
U-shaped seals are ﬁxed between specimen and sample holder. The setup ensures the total coverage
of the specimen with solution within the expected crack propagation direction.
For this study, incubation parameters such as buffer composition, temperature, and
enzyme concentration were chosen primarily to optimize enzymatic activity. Although
they did not necessarily reﬂect conditions in natural settings, they allowed for the best
results to establish the methodology.
2.4. Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography (UHPLC)
The water-soluble degradation products of PET were quantiﬁed with a Thermoﬁsher
RS3000 UHPLC system equipped with a Phenomenx Kinetex 1.7 µm EVO C18 (100 Å,
50 mm × 2.1 mm) reversed-phase column. For sample preparation, one part of the sample
buffer solution of the PET control, PET*24 h, PET*48 h, and PET*96 h after incubation was
mixed with four parts acidic acetonitrile (1% formic acid) and centrifuged at 21,000 × g
for 10 min. A quantity of 1 µL of the supernatant was applied to the column running a
gradient from 100% solvent A (water + 0.1% triﬂuoroacetic acid) to 20% solvent A and 80%
solvent B (acetonitrile) at a ﬂow rate of 1.3 mL/min and the column was heated to 55 ◦C.
The product amounts for TPA, MHET, and BHET were quantiﬁed based on calibration
runs. For the time-dependent monitoring of the enzymatic activity, the three degradation
products were summed up to the total product concentration for better comparison.
2.5. Optical and Topographical Characterization
To visualize the enzymatic degradation on a microscopic scale, ﬁeld-emission scanning
electron microscopy (FESEM) was performed on the surfaces with a Zeiss Ultra plus (Carl
Zeiss Microscopy Deutschland GmbH, Oberkochen, Germany) at an acceleration voltage
of 3 kV for the control and the enzyme-degraded samples. All samples were sputtered with
1.3 nm platin at a Cressington Platin-Sputter Coater 208HR (TESCAN GmbH, Dortmund,
Germany) and additionally steamed with 20 nm carbon at a Leica EM ACE 600 (Leica
Microsystems GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany).
The surface topography of the enzymatically degraded PET*96 h and control PET
sample was acquired by atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging in PeakForce tapping
mode in air. All images were acquired using a Dimension Icon AFM (Bruker Corporation
Billerica, Massachusetts, USA) equipped with a NanoScope V controller. For imaging,
ScanAsyst Air cantilevers (Bruker Nano Inc., nominal spring constant 0.4 N/m, nominal
resonance frequency 70 kHz) were used. The PeakForce frequency was set to 2 kHz with
an amplitude of 150 nm. The AFM images were processed with NanoScope Analysis
software (version 1.80, Bruker Nano Inc.). In an additional set of experiments, the samples,
i.e., enzyme-degraded and control sample surfaces, were treated for about 30 s by a
CO2 gun (SnowJet, Tectra GmbH, Frankfurt, Germany) in order to remove potential
organic contaminants.
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 5 of 13
2.6. Thermal Characterization
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) was examined with a Mettler Toledo DSC I
(Mettler-Toldeo GmbH, Gießen, Germany) with 8–10 mg sample material. Material was
collected between 0 and 1 mm depth from the surface. The samples were heated under an
N2 atmosphere from −10 ◦C to 300 ◦C (1st heating run), and cooled to −10 ◦C again after
an isothermal stage of 5 min at 300 ◦C. For determination of the degree of crystallinity xc a
fusion enthalpy of ∆Hm◦ = 140.1 J/g for a hypothetically 100% crystalline PET was used,
based on the literature [34].
2.7. Mechanical Characterization
The FCP behavior was determined according to test method ISO 15850/ASTM E647
at 23 ◦C and a relative humidity of 50% on a servo-hydraulic testing machine (IST IPLH10I,
Schenck, Germany) applying a dynamical load with a frequency of 10 Hz to the samples.
The stress intensity factor’s ∆K = Kmax − Kmin amplitude was increased in proportion
to the crack length with a constant R = K min/Kmax of 0.1. The crack was supposed to
grow perpendicular to the load within the solution covered area until the end of the
sample. For measurement of the crack opening displacement during crack growth, a
clip-on extensometer (632.29-30, MTS Sensor Technology GmbH & Co. KG, Rottenburg am
Neckar, Germany) was used. Each experiment loaded under tension mode was repeated
at least three times. Analysis was done with the software R [ 35]; Zone II was deﬁned
manually between ∆K = 2.2 and ∆K = 3.05.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Analysis of Soluble Products
To monitor enzymatic degradation on the molecular level, the control buffer solution
and enzyme buffer solution were analyzed by ultra-high-performance liquid chromatogra-
phy (UHPLC) after the given incubation time of 24 h, 48 h, and 96 h. Regarding product
composition, the exemplarily plotted buffer solution of PET*96 h contained the typical
degradation products terephthalic acid (TPA), mono-(2-hydroxyethyl)terephthalic acid
(MHET), and bis(hydroxyethyl)terephthalate (BHET) (Figure 2a). In the case of the con-
trol buffer, none of the typical degradation products could be detected (Figure 2a). The
quantiﬁcation of the degradation products for PET*96 h (Figure 2b) gave high amounts of
MHET and TPA with 2.3 mM and 1.3 mM, respectively. Further, small amounts of0.1 mM
BHET were identiﬁed. For the time-dependent study, the total product concentration
for PET*24 h, PET*48 h, and PET*96 h was determined. The total product concentration
increased in relation to the incubation time, with a slight slowdown after 48 h (Figure 2c).
The results of the solution analysis represent a typical activity proﬁle for PETase on PET
with MHET as the dominant product [13].
The UHPLC measurements verify that the observed PET degradation could only be
attributed to enzymatic activity and no side reaction or autohydrolysis occurred during
incubation. Furthermore, the results reﬂect the consistency in our setup, including sample
generation and incubation. True to expectations [36], the total product release, consisting
of TPA, MHET, and BHET, steadily rose with increasing exposure time (Figure 2c). This
indicates a constantly ongoing degradation of PET by PETase over incubation time. In
summary, the setup ensured a reliable procedure for monitoring enzymatic activity of a
macroscopic substrate on the molecular level.
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 6 of 13
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 6 of 13  
 
a) 
 
b) 
 
c) 
 
 
Figure 2. Analysis of soluble products. (a) UHPLC results of the control buffer solution (blue) and enzyme buffer solution 
(orange) of PET*96 h. For the control buffer solution, no release products could be detected. (b) Product concentrations of 
PET*96 h to display the product composition in mM and (c) total product concentration of PET*24 h, PET*48 h, and PET*96 
h solution versus incubation time. 
The UHPLC measurements verify that the observed PET degradation could only be 
attributed to enzymatic activity and no side reaction or autohydrolysis occurred during 
incubation. Furthermore, the results reflect the consistency in our setup, including sample 
generation and incubation. True to expectations [36], the total product release, consisting 
of TPA, MHET, and BHET, steadily rose with increasing exposure time (Figure 2c). This 
indicates a constantly ongoing degradation of PET by PETase over incubation time. In 
summary, the setup ensured a reliable procedure for monitoring enzymatic activity of a 
macroscopic substrate on the molecular level.  
3.2. Characterization of PET Material Properties 
To investigate the result of degradation on a visible level, scanning electron micros-
copy (SEM) micrographs of the surfaces of the control and incubated PET samples were 
recorded (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. SEM micrographs for comparison of the (a) control PET surface and (b) PET surface of 
PET*96 h after incubation. 
In the case of the control PET, the micrographs displayed a smooth and unaffected 
surface (Figure 3a). The exposure of the samples to PETase enzyme led to visible degra-
dation by surface erosion (Figure 3b), indicating successful trials and degradation. The 
overview at low magnification depicted the spatial heterogeneity of the enzymatic treat-
ment, reflected by the presence of unaffected and degraded areas. Furthermore, the inves-
tigation of the control sample surface verified that it was not affected by autohydrolysis 
of the buffer solution and degradation only arose due to the impact of enzymes. For a 
deeper investigation of the topographical surfaces’ changes, a time-dependent surface 
SEM study was performed.  
100 µm100 µmb)a)
Figure 2. Analysis of soluble products. (a) UHPLC results of the control buffer solution (blue) and enzyme buffer solution
(orange) of PET*96 h. For the control buffer solution, no release products could be detected. ( b) Product concentrations
of PET*96 h to display the product composition in mM and ( c) total product concentration of PET*24 h, PET*48 h, and
PET*96 h solution versus incubation time.
3.2. Characterization of PET Material Properties
To investigate the result of degradation on a visible level, scanning electron microscopy
(SEM) micrographs of the surfaces of the control and incubated PET samples were recorded
(Figure 3).
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 6 of 13  
 
a) 
 
b) 
 
c) 
 
 
Figure 2. Analysis of soluble products. (a) UHPLC results of the control buffer solution (blue) and enzyme buffer solution 
(orange) of PET*96 h. For the control buffer solution, no release products could be detected. (b) Product concentrations of 
PET*96 h to display the product composition in mM and (c) total product concentration of PET*24 h, PET*48 h, and PET*96 
h solution versus incubation time. 
The UHPLC measurements verify that the observed PET degradation could only be 
attributed to enzymatic activity and no side reaction or autohydrolysis occurred during 
incubation. Furthermore, the results reflect the consistency in our setup, including sample 
generation and incubation. True to expectations [36], the total product release, consisting 
of TPA, MHET, and BHET, steadily rose with increasing exposure time (Figure 2c). This 
indicates a constantly ongoing degradation of PET by PETase over incubation time. In 
summary, the setup ensured a reliable procedure for monitoring enzymatic activity of a 
macroscopic substrate on the molecular level.  
3.2. Characterization of PET Material Properties 
To investigate the result of degradation on a visible level, scanning electron micros-
copy (SEM) micrographs of the surfaces of the control and incubated PET samples were 
recorded (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. SEM micrographs for comparison of the (a) control PET surface and (b) PET surface of 
PET*96 h after incubation. 
In the case of the control PET, the micrographs displayed a smooth and unaffected 
surface (Figure 3a). The exposure of the samples to PETase enzyme led to visible degra-
dation by surface erosion (Figure 3b), indicating successful trials and degradation. The 
overview at low magnification depicted the spatial heterogeneity of the enzymatic treat-
ment, reflected by the presence of unaffected and degraded areas. Furthermore, the inves-
tigation of the control sample surface verified that it was not affected by autohydrolysis 
of the buffer solution and degradation only arose due to the impact of enzymes. For a 
deeper investigation of the topographical surfaces’ changes, a time-dependent surface 
SEM study was performed.  
100 µm100 µmb)a)
Figure 3. SEM micrographs for comparison of the ( a) control PET surface and ( b) PET surface of
PET*96 h after incubation.
In the case of the control PET, the micrographs displayed a smooth and unaffected sur-
face (Figure 3a). The exposure of the samples to PETase enzyme led to visible degradation
by surface erosion (Figure 3b), indicating successful trials and degradation. The overview
at low magniﬁcation depicted the spatial heterogeneity of the enzymatic treatment, re-
ﬂected by the presence of unaffected and degraded areas. Furthermore, the investigation
of the control sample surface veriﬁed that it was not affected by autohydrolysis of the
buffer solution and degradation only arose due to the impact of enzymes. For a deeper
investigation of the topographical surfaces’ changes, a time-dependent surface SEM study
was performed.
The SEM micrographs of the time-dependent degradation study are shown inFigure 4.
The affected areas at higher magnitudes showed the presence of colloidal structures upon
enzymatic treatment. They constantly grew with increasing incubation time to a diameter of
approx. 2 µm. However, at that point we could not distinguish between surface erosion and
the congregation of side products on the PET surface during the enzymatic degradation.
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 7 of 13
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 7 of 13  
 
The SEM micrographs of the time-dependent degradation study are shown in Figure 
4. The affected areas at higher magnitudes showed the presence of colloidal structures 
upon enzymatic treatment. They constantly grew with increasing incubation time to a di-
ameter of approx. 2 µm. However, at that point we could not distinguish between surface 
erosion and the congregation of side products on the PET surface during the enzymatic 
degradation.  
 
Figure 4. Time-dependent SEM micrographs at different degradation stages of (a) PET*24 h, (b) PET*48 h, and (c) PET*96 
h and with higher magnification at (d) PET*24 h, (e) PET*48 h, and (f) PET*96 h. 
To corroborate the topography changes upon enzymatic treatment as determined by 
SEM, we studied the PET surface of the control and enzyme-treated PET*96 h sample ad-
ditionally by AFM. For those measurements we used PeakForce Tapping mode (Figure 5) 
as the imaging mode to correlate the colloidal growth with surface roughness.  
 
Figure 5. PeakForce Tapping mode AFM images of the control PET surface (a) and PET*96 h surface 
(b). 
The blank PET surface was smooth (Figure 5a). The sample showed a homogeneous 
surface without any distinct topographical features. On the other hand, the PET*96 h sur-
face, which was incubated and treated with the PETase, showed a significant increase in 
roughness. Figure 5b bears distinct differences in surface topography with features that 
are absent for the bare control PET substrate (cf. Figure 5a). The observed increase in sur-
face roughness is in line with the findings from the SEM investigations (cf. Figure 4) and 
indicates that the enzymatic treatment was accompanied by changes in the surface topog-
raphy. In order to further quantify this finding, the arithmetic surface roughness was eval-
uated for at least three AFM images for each type of PET sample. The untreated surface 
20 µm20 µm20 µma)b)c)d)e)f)4 µm4 µm4 µm
a) b)
Figure 4. Time-dependent SEM micrographs at different degradation stages of (a) PET*24 h, (b) PET*48 h, and (c) PET*96 h
and with higher magniﬁcation at (d) PET*24 h, (e) PET*48 h, and (f) PET*96 h.
To corroborate the topography changes upon enzymatic treatment as determined
by SEM, we studied the PET surface of the control and enzyme-treated PET*96 h sample
additionally by AFM. For those measurements we used PeakForce Tapping mode(Figure 5)
as the imaging mode to correlate the colloidal growth with surface roughness.
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 7 of 13  
 
The SEM micrographs of the time-dependent degradation study are shown in Figure 
4. The affected areas at higher magnitudes showed the presence of colloidal structures 
upon enzymatic treatment. They constantly grew with increasing incubation time to a di-
ameter of approx. 2 µm. However, at that point we could not distinguish between surface 
erosion and the congregation of side products on the PET surface during the enzymatic 
degradation.  
 
Figure 4. Time-dependent SEM micrographs at different degradation stages of (a) PET*24 h, (b) PET*48 h, and (c) PET*96 
h and with higher magnification at (d) PET*24 h, (e) PET*48 h, and (f) PET*96 h. 
To corroborate the topography changes upon enzymatic treatment as determined by 
SEM, we studied the PET surface of the control and enzyme-treated PET*96 h sample ad-
ditionally by AFM. For those measurements we used PeakForce Tapping mode (Figure 5) 
as the imaging mode to correlate the colloidal growth with surface roughness.  
 
Figure 5. PeakForce Tapping mode AFM images of the control PET surface (a) and PET*96 h surface 
(b). 
The blank PET surface was smooth (Figure 5a). The sample showed a homogeneous 
surface without any distinct topographical features. On the other hand, the PET*96 h sur-
face, which was incubated and treated with the PETase, showed a significant increase in 
roughness. Figure 5b bears distinct differences in surface topography with features that 
are absent for the bare control PET substrate (cf. Figure 5a). The observed increase in sur-
face roughness is in line with the findings from the SEM investigations (cf. Figure 4) and 
indicates that the enzymatic treatment was accompanied by changes in the surface topog-
raphy. In order to further quantify this finding, the arithmetic surface roughness was eval-
uated for at least three AFM images for each type of PET sample. The untreated surface 
20 µm20 µm20 µma)b)c)d)e)f)4 µm4 µm4 µm
a) b)
Figure 5. PeakForce Tapping mode AFM images of the control PET surface ( a) and PET*96 h
surface (b).
The blank PET surface was smooth (Figure 5a). The sample showed a homogeneous
surface without any distinct topographical features. On the other hand, the PET*96 h
surface, which was incubated and treated with the PETase, showed a signiﬁcant increase in
roughness. Figure 5b bears distinct differences in surface topography with features that
are absent for the bare control PET substrate (cf. Figure 5a). The observed increase in
surface roughness is in line with the ﬁndings from the SEM investigations (cf. Figure 4)
and indicates that the enzymatic treatment was accompanied by changes in the surface
topography. In order to further quantify this ﬁnding, the arithmetic surface roughness was
evaluated for at least three AFM images for each type of PET sample. The untreated surface
bore a roughness of 7.3 nm ± 3.7 nm and the PETase-treated samples bore a roughness of
37.0 nm ± 7.8 nm, respectively.
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements allow inferences to be drawn
from thermal transition temperatures about molecular arrangements. Until now, the focus
in literature dealing with enzymatic degradation has been the identiﬁcation of degradation
products in solution [13,26,37], but no concrete measurements have been carried out on
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 8 of 13
PET sample surfaces. DSC thermograms of the heating curves and cooling curves for the
PET control and PET*96 h sample are shown in Figure 6. The DSC samples were taken
along the crack of a CT specimen at a 0–1 mm sample depth.
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 8 of 13  
 
surface bore a roughness of 7.3 nm ± 3.7 nm and the PETase-treated samples bore a 
roughness of 37.0 nm ± 7.8 nm, respectively. 
Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements allow inferences to be drawn 
from thermal transition temperatures about molecular arrangements. Until now, the focus 
in literature dealing with enzymatic degradation has been the identification of 
degradation products in solution [13,26,37], but no concrete measurements have been 
carried out on PET sample surfaces. DSC thermograms of the heating curves and cooling 
curves for the PET control and PET*96 h sample are shown in Figure 6. The DSC samples 
were taken along the crack of a CT specimen at a 0–1 mm sample depth. 
a)
 
b)
 
Figure 6. DSC thermograms of the first heating run (a) and first cooling run (b) for PET blank (blue) 
and PET incubated with PETase (orange). For the enzyme-treated samples, the rise of a second 
melting peak was identified as BHET dimer. 
In the first heating curve (Figure 6a), both samples showed the PET typical melting 
point Tm = 250 °C [38]. Beside the glass transition Tg,b = 76 °C, the control sample 
additionally showed an exothermic peak at Tcryst,b = 120 °C related to amorphous phase 
crystallization. In the case of the incubated PET*96 h sample, the glass transition showed 
a weak signal at Tg,e = 84 °C. The increase in the glass transition temperature of incubated 
PET can be explained by the emergence of crystalline units of two different molecular 
species in a range from 109 to 172 °C (Figure 6a). They were supposed to immobilize the 
amorphous chains [39], which led to the slight increase of 8 K.  
The appearance of these new melting peaks can be attributed in detail to PET 
oligomers with a varying length of one and two monomer repeating units, respectively 
[40]. Whereas the weaker signal from 109 °C to 135 °C could be attributed to monomeric 
BHET, the melting point at Tm,dimer = 164 °C clearly indicates the presence of BHET dimer 
[41–43]. The observed BHET dimer was water-insoluble and therefore not detectable in 
UHPLC measurements of the solutions. We conclude that the observed colloidal 
structures (Figure 4) on the surface were composed of BHET oligomer species. However, 
the accumulation of BHET and its dimer indicates that they were not preferably degraded 
by the PETase.  
A possible explanation for this behavior lies in the topology of the enzyme itself. 
Although there is no experimental proof for the exact binding mode of PET substrate to 
PETase, it is known that the PET binding site includes an L-shaped shallow grove 
neighboring the active site. Several studies using computational calculations to dock a 
PET oligomer in the active and binding site yielded a binding pose that provides space for 
the equivalent of either a BHET trimer or tetramer [26,44,45]. Shorter substrates such as 
the BHET dimer are not able to cover the full binding site, leading to a potentially 
decreased number of atomic contacts that contribute to the binding of the substrate. This 
would result in a higher affinity for higher oligomers in enzymatic catalysis followed by 
Tcryst,bTm,dimerTg,bEndoTg,eTc,dimerTc,PET
Figure 6. DSC thermograms of the ﬁrst heating run (a) and ﬁrst cooling run (b) for PET blank (blue)
and PET incubated with PETase (orange). For the enzyme-treated samples, the rise of a second
melting peak was identiﬁed as BHET dimer.
In the ﬁrst heating curve (Figure 6a), both samples showed the PET typical melting
point Tm = 250 ◦C [38]. Beside the glass transition T g,b = 76 ◦C, the control sample ad-
ditionally showed an exothermic peak at T cryst,b = 120 ◦C related to amorphous phase
crystallization. In the case of the incubated PET*96 h sample, the glass transition showed a
weak signal at Tg,e = 84 ◦C. The increase in the glass transition temperature of incubated
PET can be explained by the emergence of crystalline units of two different molecular
species in a range from 109 to 172 ◦C (Figure 6a). They were supposed to immobilize the
amorphous chains [39], which led to the slight increase of 8 K.
The appearance of these new melting peaks can be attributed in detail to PET oligomers
with a varying length of one and two monomer repeating units, respectively [40]. Whereas
the weaker signal from 109 ◦C to 135 ◦C could be attributed to monomeric BHET, the melt-
ing point at Tm,dimer = 164 ◦C clearly indicates the presence of BHET dimer [41–43]. The
observed BHET dimer was water-insoluble and therefore not detectable in UHPLC mea-
surements of the solutions. We conclude that the observed colloidal structures(Figure 4)
on the surface were composed of BHET oligomer species. However, the accumulation of
BHET and its dimer indicates that they were not preferably degraded by the PETase.
A possible explanation for this behavior lies in the topology of the enzyme itself.
Although there is no experimental proof for the exact binding mode of PET substrate
to PETase, it is known that the PET binding site includes an L-shaped shallow grove
neighboring the active site. Several studies using computational calculations to dock a PET
oligomer in the active and binding site yielded a binding pose that provides space for the
equivalent of either a BHET trimer or tetramer [26,44,45]. Shorter substrates such as the
BHET dimer are not able to cover the full binding site, leading to a potentially decreased
number of atomic contacts that contribute to the binding of the substrate. This would result
in a higher afﬁnity for higher oligomers in enzymatic catalysis followed by an accumulation
of BHET dimer. Consequently, enzymatic activity might be underestimated when only
soluble products are tracked.
The degree of crystallinity decreased with enzymatic treatment from xc,b = 22% for
the PET control to xc,e = 18% for the PET*96 h sample. It is known that high crystallinity
impairs enzymatic activity, which led to the conclusion that PETase was mainly active in
the amorphous regions. If this was the case, crystallinity should have increased. However,
our results show that the degree of PET crystallinity decreased after enzymatic incubation,
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 9 of 13
as reported in previous studies [22]. We assume that this lower degree in crystallinity of
PET was not directly caused by enzymatic attack on crystalline regions, but rather by BHET
species disrupting the crystalline order on the surface, explaining how crystallinity can
decrease despite preferred enzymatic degradation of amorphous regions. The presence of
BHET was also observed in the cooling curves (Figure 6b). Whereas the control sample only
showed one sharp recrystallization peak at Tc,PET = 200 ◦C typical for PET, the PET*96 h
cooling curve showed an additional peak at T c,dimer = 117 ◦C, corresponding to BHET
dimer recrystallization. The earlier onset of PET incubated with PETase recrystallization
could be a nucleation effect induced by the additional oligomeric fraction.
To further investigate the impact of enzymatic degradation on the surface and therefore
on the material’s properties, dynamic mechanical measurement over a whole range of stress
intensities was performed. In Figure 7, the fatigue growth rate, da/dN, for six averaged
curves of PET*96 h and PET control sample versus the applied stress intensity factor ∆K at
the crack tip was plotted to investigate the FCP behavior.
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 9 of 13  
 
The degree of crystallinity decreased with enzymatic treatment from xc,b = 22% for the 
PET control to xc,e = 18% for the PET*96 h sample. It is known that high crystallinity impairs 
enzymatic activity, which led to the conclusion that PETase was mainly active in the amor-
phous regions. If this was the case, crystallinity should have increased. However, our re-
sults show that the degree of PET crystallinity decreased after enzymatic incubation, as 
reported in previous studies [22]. We assume that this lower degree in crystallinity of PET 
was not directly caused by enzymatic attack on crystalline regions, but rather by BHET 
species disrupting the crystalline order on the surface, explaining how crystallinity can 
decrease despite preferred enzymatic degradation of amorphous regions. The presence of 
BHET was also observed in the cooling curves (Figure 6b). Whereas the control sample 
only showed one sharp recrystallization peak at Tc,PET = 200 °C typical for PET, the PET*96 
h cooling curve showed an additional peak at Tc,dimer = 117 °C, corresponding to BHET 
dimer recrystallization. The earlier onset of PET incubated with PETase recrystallization 
could be a nucleation effect induced by the additional oligomeric fraction. 
To further investigate the impact of enzymatic degradation on the surface and there-
fore on the material’s properties, dynamic mechanical measurement over a whole range 
of stress intensities was performed. In Figure 7, the fatigue growth rate, da/dN, for six 
averaged curves of PET*96 h and PET control sample versus the applied stress intensity 
factor ΔK at the crack tip was plotted to investigate the FCP behavior. 
 
Figure 7. FCP behavior of the PET control (light blue, blue, dark blue) and PET*96 h (yellow, orange, 
brown) samples in a double logarithmic scale with the division into three relevant regions, marked 
by the dashed lines and grey color. 
In general, da/dN curves can be subdivided into three different crack propagation 
regions, as shown in Figure 7. Region I describes the crack propagation after reaching the 
threshold value ∆Kth. Below this value, crack propagation is negligibly low. Region II rep-
resents stable crack growth according to the Paris–Erdogan Equation da/dN = C (∆K)m, 
where C and m are material constants. Region III is determined by instable crack propa-
gation until the final fracture of the sample.  
In the case of PET, the behavior of the material did not significantly differ from the 
control sample in region I, except for one enzyme-incubated sample with a lower thresh-
old value. This can be explained by the inhomogeneities of biotic treatment, as observed 
in SEM (Figure 3). However, with increasing mechanical load upon region II, the 
Region I Region IIRegion III
Figure 7. FCP behavior of the PET control (light blue, blue, dark blue) and PET*96 h (yellow, orange,
brown) samples in a double logarithmic scale with the division into three relevant regions, marked
by the dashed lines and grey color.
In general, da/dN curves can be subdivided into three different crack propagation
regions, as shown in Figure 7. Region I describes the crack propagation after reaching the
threshold value ∆Kth. Below this value, crack propagation is negligibly low. Region II
represents stable crack growth according to the Paris–Erdogan Equationda/dN = C (∆K)m,
where C and m are material constants. Region III is determined by instable crack propaga-
tion until the ﬁnal fracture of the sample.
In the case of PET, the behavior of the material did not signiﬁcantly differ from
the control sample in region I, except for one enzyme-incubated sample with a lower
threshold value. This can be explained by the inhomogeneities of biotic treatment, as
observed in SEM (Figure 3). However, with increasing mechanical load upon region II, the
empowered crack propagation rates of the PET*96 h samples indicate the reduction in crack
growth resistance. These results are consistent with the formation of BHET species on the
surface, which is associated with the breakdown of individual polymer chains and material
deterioration. The degradation of individual polymer chains results in a decreasing number
of links between the crystalline PET units, so-called tie-molecules. With decreasing tie-
molecule density, the craze network is destabilized, and the induced dynamic load causes
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 10 of 13
molecular fracture, resulting in macroscopically brittle behavior [46,47]. Additionally, the
development of a craze network could be interrupted by those additional crystalline units
of BHET oligomers. Consequently, complete failure of the enzyme-treated material can
be investigated at lower stress intensities compared to the control samples in region III
accompanied by a faster crack growth velocity.
To quantify the inﬂuence of enzymatic degradation, a ﬁt was applied to each measure-
ment in the linear-dependent stable crack propagation in region II (Figure 8). The linear
ﬁt in a logarithmic scale shows the impact of enzymes in combination with mechanical
stress. Without enzymatic treatment, an average slope of mb = 5.5 ± 1.1 can be calculated
according to y = a × xm for the PET control. In comparison to the PET*96 h sample, the
value of the slope increased to me = 10.2 ± 1.4. This clearly identiﬁes an impact of PETase
on the degradation behavior on the path from macro- to microplastic by fragmentation due
to mechanical stress.
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 10 of 13  
 
empowered crack propagation rates of the PET*96 h samples indicate the reduction in 
crack growth resistance. These results are consistent with the formation of BHET species 
on the surface, which is associated with the breakdown of individual polymer chains and 
material deterioration. The degradation of individual polymer chains results in a decreas-
ing number of links between the crystalline PET units, so-called tie-molecules. With de-
creasing tie-molecule density, the craze network is destabilized, and the induced dynamic 
load causes molecular fracture, resulting in macroscopically brittle behavior [46,47]. Ad-
ditionally, the development of a craze network could be interrupted by those additional 
crystalline units of BHET oligomers. Consequently, complete failure of the enzyme-
treated material can be investigated at lower stress intensities compared to the control 
samples in region III accompanied by a faster crack growth velocity.  
To quantify the influence of enzymatic degradation, a fit was applied to each meas-
urement in the linear-dependent stable crack propagation in region II (Figure 8). The lin-
ear fit in a logarithmic scale shows the impact of enzymes in combination with mechanical 
stress. Without enzymatic treatment, an average slope of mb = 5.5 ± 1.1 can be calculated 
according to y = a × xm for the PET control. In comparison to the PET*96 h sample, the 
value of the slope increased to me = 10.2 ± 1.4. This clearly identifies an impact of PETase 
on the degradation behavior on the path from macro- to microplastic by fragmentation 
due to mechanical stress. 
 
Figure 8. Power function fit of the FCP data on the linear range in region II in a double logarithmic 
scale with curves for the PET control (light blue, blue, dark blue) and PET*96 h (yellow, orange, dark 
orange). The averaged parameters for the fit are mb = 5.5 ± 1.1, Cb = 10–7.9 ± 0.5 for the PET control 
samples, and me = 10.2 ± 1.4, Ce = 10–8.4 ± 0.6 for PET*96 h. 
4. Conclusions 
The time-dependent investigation of PET samples exposed to PETase showed the 
formation of colloidal structures growing with incubation time and thereby increasing the 
surface roughness. These structures could be attributed to BHET dimer affecting the crys-
talline structure on the PET surface. The interruption of the crystalline order accompanied 
by the degradation of single polymer chains facilitated the crack propagation under me-
chanical stress, resulting in earlier failure of the incubated sample compared to the control. 
Within this study, we showed that biotic factors have a relevant impact on the pathway 
Region I Region IIRegion III1mda/dN = C (DK)mControl PETPET*96h
Figure 8. Power function ﬁt of the FCP data on the linear range in region II in a double logarithmic
scale with curves for the PET control (light blue, blue, dark blue) and PET*96 h (yellow, orange, dark
orange). The averaged parameters for the ﬁt are m b = 5.5 ± 1.1, Cb = 10–7.9 ± 0.5 for the PET control
samples, and me = 10.2 ± 1.4, Ce = 10–8.4 ± 0.6 for PET*96 h.
4. Conclusions
The time-dependent investigation of PET samples exposed to PETase showed the
formation of colloidal structures growing with incubation time and thereby increasing
the surface roughness. These structures could be attributed to BHET dimer affecting
the crystalline structure on the PET surface. The interruption of the crystalline order
accompanied by the degradation of single polymer chains facilitated the crack propagation
under mechanical stress, resulting in earlier failure of the incubated sample compared to
the control. Within this study, we showed that biotic factors have a relevant impact on
the pathway from macro- to microplastic, as material properties play a decisive role in the
progress of plastic fragmentation. The investigations further hinted at certain preferences
in substrate binding to PETase. Our results provide a ﬁrst step towards understanding
the impact of enzymatic treatment through the establishment of a reliable method for the
quantiﬁcation and development of a new experimental setup. The applied methods provide
reliable data for the quantitative analysis of biotic impact by enzymatic degradation.
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 11 of 13
The results gained from this pilot study provide the basis for future interdisciplinary
research combining biochemistry and material science. Here, we established a method for
the determination of enzymatic activity on material properties in a quantiﬁable fashion.
This protocol can act as a foundation towards a full understanding of the interplay between
enzyme and material. Future experiments must consider time-resolved analysis as well
as a detailed characterization of the surface erosion and chemistry. Moreover, to fully
cover the degradation process in nature with its implications on material properties, there
is a need to include abiotic factors such as temperature, pH, stage of weathering of PET
material, and material composition with the parameters of biotic degradation like enzyme
type or concentrations, incubation time, and buffer composition. The described method
now provides a reliable platform to perform these studies in the future.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, T.M., S.W. and B.H.; writing—original draft preparation,
T.M. and S.W.; writing—review and editing, B.H., H.R. and V .A.; investigation, T.M., S.W., A.G., Y.E.
and S.S.; supervision, B.H., H.R., V .A. and G.P . All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation)—project number 391977956–SFB 1357 Microplastics, subproject B01, C01, and C03.
Data Availability Statement: The data set used in this study is published on Zenodo, https://doi.
org/10.5281/zenodo.5657200, accessed on 10 November 2021.
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank Sebastian Gröschel for sample preparation,
Rika Schneider for GPC measurements, Alexander Brückner for dynamic-mechanical measurements,
and Annika Pfaffenberger for SEM micrographs. We further acknowledge ﬁnancial support by the
University of Bayreuth Open Access Publishing Fund.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Thompson, R.C.; Olsen, Y.; Mitchell, R.P .; Davis, A.; Rowland, S.J.; John, A.W.G.; McGonigle, D.; Russell, A.E. Lost at Sea: Where
Is All the Plastic? Science 2004, 304, 838. [CrossRef]
2. Weinstein, J.E.; Crocker, B.K.; Gray, A.D. From macroplastic to microplastic: Degradation of high-density polyethylene, polypropy-
lene, and polystyrene in a salt marsh habitat. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 2016, 35, 1632–1640. [CrossRef]
3. Waldman, W.R.; Rillig, M.C. Microplastic Research Should Embrace the Complexity of Secondary Particles.Environ. Sci. Technol.
2020, 54, 7751–7753. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Khoironi, A.; Hadiyanto, H.; Anggoro, S.; Sudarno, S. Evaluation of polypropylene plastic degradation and microplastic
identiﬁcation in sediments at Tambak Lorok coastal area, Semarang, Indonesia. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2020, 151, 110868. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
5. Zhang, K.; Hamidian, A.H.; Tubi´ c, A.; Zhang, Y.; Fang, J.K.; Wu, C.; Lam, P .K. Understanding plastic degradation and microplastic
formation in the environment: A review. Environ. Pollut. 2021, 274, 116554. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Chamas, A.; Moon, H.; Zheng, J.; Qiu, Y.; Tabassum, T.; Jang, J.H.; Abu-Omar, M.M.; Scott, S.L.; Suh, S. Degradation Rates of
Plastics in the Environment. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2020, 8, 3494–3511. [CrossRef]
7. Julienne, F.; Delorme, N.; Lagarde, F. From macroplastics to microplastics: Role of water in the fragmentation of polyethylene.
Chemosphere 2019, 236, 124409. [CrossRef]
8. Kalogerakis, N.; Karkanorachaki, K.; Kalogerakis, G.C.; Triantafyllidi, E.I.; Gotsis, A.D.; Partsinevelos, P .; Fava, F. Microplastics
Generation: Onset of Fragmentation of Polyethylene Films in Marine Environment Mesocosms. Front. Mar. Sci. 2017, 4, 84.
[CrossRef]
9. Gewert, B.; Plassmann, M.M.; MacLeod, M. Pathways for degradation of plastic polymers ﬂoating in the marine environment.
Environ. Sci. Process. Impacts 2015, 17, 1513–1521. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Kawai, F.; Kawabata, T.; Oda, M. Current knowledge on enzymatic PET degradation and its possible application to waste stream
management and other ﬁelds. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2019, 103, 4253–4268. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Müller, R.-J.; Schrader, H.; Profe, J.; Dresler, K.; Deckwer, W.-D. Enzymatic Degradation of Poly(ethylene terephthalate): Rapid
Hydrolyse using a Hydrolase fromT. fusca. Macromol. Rapid Commun. 2005, 26, 1400–1405. [CrossRef]
12. Sulaiman, S.; Yamato, S.; Kanaya, E.; Kim, J.-J.; Koga, Y.; Takano, K.; Kanaya, S. Isolation of a Novel Cutinase Homolog with
Polyethylene Terephthalate-Degrading Activity from Leaf-Branch Compost by Using a Metagenomic Approach. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2012, 78, 1556–1562. [CrossRef]
13. Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Takehana, T.; Taniguchi, I.; Yamaji, H.; Maeda, Y.; Toyohara, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Kimura, Y.; Oda, K. A
bacterium that degrades and assimilates poly(ethylene terephthalate). Science 2016, 351, 1196–1199. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 12 of 13
14. Danso, D.; Schmeisser, C.; Chow, J.; Zimmermann, W.; Wei, R.; Leggewie, C.; Li, X.; Hazen, T.; Streit, W.R. New Insights into the
Function and Global Distribution of Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET)-Degrading Bacteria and Enzymes in Marine and Terrestrial
Metagenomes. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2018, 84, e02773-17. [CrossRef]
15. Fechine, G.; Souto-Maior, R.M.; Rabello, M.S. Structural changes during photodegradation of poly(ethylene terephthalate). J.
Mater. Sci. 2002, 37, 4979–4984. [CrossRef]
16. Fechine, G.; Rabello, M.; Maior, R.S.; Catalani, L. Surface characterization of photodegraded poly(ethylene terephthalate). The
effect of ultraviolet absorbers. Polymer 2004, 45, 2303–2308. [CrossRef]
17. Ioakeimidis, C.; Fotopoulou, K.N.; Karapanagioti, H.K.; Geraga, M.; Zeri, C.; Papathanassiou, E.; Galgani, F.; Papatheodorou, G.
The degradation potential of PET bottles in the marine environment: An ATR-FTIR based approach. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 23501.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Meides, N.; Menzel, T.; Poetzschner, B.; Löder, M.G.J.; Mansfeld, U.; Strohriegl, P .; Altstaedt, V .; Senker, J. Reconstructing the
Environmental Degradation of Polystyrene by Accelerated Weathering. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2021, 55, 7930–7938. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
19. Allen, N.S.; Edge, M.; Mohammadian, M.; Jones, K. Hydrolytic degradation of poly(ethylene terephthalate): Importance of chain
scission versus crystallinity. Eur. Polym. J. 1991, 27, 1373–1378. [CrossRef]
20. Edge, M.; Hayes, M.; Mohammadian, M.; Allen, N.; Jewitt, T.; Brems, K.; Jones, K. Aspects of poly(ethylene terephthalate)
degradation for archival life and environmental degradation. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 1991, 32, 131–153. [CrossRef]
21. Sammon, C.; Yarwood, J.; Everall, N. An FT–IR study of the effect of hydrolytic degradation on the structure of thin PET ﬁlms.
Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2000, 67, 149–158. [CrossRef]
22. Arhant, M.; Le Gall, M.; Le Gac, P .-Y.; Davies, P . Impact of hydrolytic degradation on mechanical properties of PET—Towards an
understanding of microplastics formation. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2019, 161, 175–182. [CrossRef]
23. Fayolle, B.; Audouin, L.; Verdu, J. A critical molar mass separating the ductile and brittle regimes as revealed by thermal oxidation
in polypropylene. Polymer 2004, 45, 4323–4330. [CrossRef]
24. Awaja, F.; Pavel, D. Recycling of PET. Eur. Polym. J. 2005, 41, 1453–1477. [CrossRef]
25. OECD. Improving Plastics Management: Trends, policy responses, and the role of international co-operation and trade. OECD
Environ. Policy Pap. 2018, 12, 20. [CrossRef]
26. Austin, H.P .; Allen, M.D.; Donohoe, B.S.; Rorrer, N.; Kearns, F.; Silveira, R.L.; Pollard, B.C.; Dominick, G.; Duman, R.;
El Omari, K.; et al. Characterization and engineering of a plastic-degrading aromatic polyesterase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 2018, 115, E4350–E4357. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Altstädt, V . The Inﬂuence of Molecular Variables on Fatigue Resistance in Stress Cracking Environments. InIntrinsic Molecular
Mobility and Toughness of Polymers II; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2005; pp. 105–152.
28. Liu, H.-Y.; Wang, G.; Mai, Y.-W. Cyclic fatigue crack propagation of nanoparticle modiﬁed epoxy.Compos. Sci. Technol. 2012, 72,
1530–1538. [CrossRef]
29. Runt, J.; Gallagher, K.P . The inﬂuence of microstructure on fatigue crack propagation in polyoxymethylene.J. Mater. Sci. 1991, 26,
792–798. [CrossRef]
30. Ramirez, A.; Manson, J.A.; Hertzberg, R.W. Fatigue crack propagation in amorphous poly(ethylene terephthalate). Polym. Eng.
Sci. 1982, 22, 975–981. [CrossRef]
31. Altstaedt, V .; Keiter, S.; Renner, M.; Schlarb, A. Environmental Stress Cracking of Polymers Monitored by Fatigue Crack Growth
Experiments. Macromol. Symp. 2004, 214, 31–46. [CrossRef]
32. Kothmann, M.; Zeiler, R.; de Anda, A.R.; Brückner, A.; Altstädt, V . Fatigue crack propagation behaviour of epoxy resins modiﬁed
with silica-nanoparticles. Polymer 2015, 60, 157–163. [CrossRef]
33. Gibson, D.G.; Young, L.; Chuang, R.Y.; Venter, J.C.; Hutchison, C.A.; Smith, H.O. Enzymatic assembly of DNA molecules up to
several hundred kilobases. Nat. Methods 2009, 6, 343–345. [CrossRef]
34. Wunderlich, B. Thermal Analysis of Polymeric Materials; Springer Science & Business Media: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2005.
35. R Core Team.R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing; R Foundation for Statistical Computing:Vienna, Austria, 2021.
36. Kawai, F. The Current State of Research on PET Hydrolyzing Enzymes Available for Biorecycling. Catalysts 2021, 11, 206.
[CrossRef]
37. Son, H.F.; Cho, I.J.; Joo, S.; Seo, H.; Sagong, H.-Y.; Choi, S.Y.; Lee, S.Y.; Kim, K.-J. Rational Protein Engineering of Thermo-Stable
PETase from Ideonella sakaiensis for Highly Efﬁcient PET Degradation. ACS Catalysts 2019, 9, 3519–3526. [CrossRef]
38. Groeninckx, G.; Reynaers, H. Morphology and melting behavior of semicrystalline poly(ethylene terephthalate). II. Annealed
PET. J. Polym. Sci. Polym. Phys. Ed. 1980, 18, 1325–1341. [CrossRef]
39. Mancini, S.D.; Zanin, M. Recyclability of PET from virgin resin. Mater. Res. 1999, 2, 33–38. [CrossRef]
40. Güçlü, G.; Kasgöz, A.; Özbudak, S.; Özgümüs, S.; Orbay, M. Glycolysis of poly(ethylene terephthalate) wastes in xylene. J. Appl.
Polym. Sci. 1998, 69, 2311–2319. [CrossRef]
41. Baliga, S.; Wong, W.T. Depolymerization of poly(ethylene terephthalate) recycled from post-consumer soft-drink bottles.J. Polym.
Sci. Part A Polym. Chem. 1989, 27, 2071–2082. [CrossRef]
42. Krehula, L.K.; Hrnjak-Murgi´ c, Z.; Jelenˇ ci´ c, J.; Andriˇ ci´ c, B. Evaluation of Poly(ethylene-terephthalate) Products of Chemical
Recycling by Differential Scanning Calorimetry. J. Polym. Environ. 2009, 17, 20–27. [CrossRef]
Polymers 2021, 13, 3885 13 of 13
43. Imran, M.; Kim, B.-K.; Han, M.; Cho, B.G.; Kim, D.H. Sub- and supercritical glycolysis of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) into
the monomer bis(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (BHET). Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2010, 95, 1686–1693. [CrossRef]
44. Fecker, T.; Galaz-Davison, P .; Engelberger, F.; Narui, Y.; Sotomayor, M.; Parra, L.P .; Ramírez-Sarmiento, C.A. Active Site Flexibility
as a Hallmark for Efﬁcient PET Degradation by I. sakaiensis PETase. Biophys. J. 2018, 114, 1302–1312. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Tournier, V .; Topham, C.M.; Gilles, A.; David, B.; Folgoas, C.; Moya-Leclair, E.; Kamionka, E.; Desrousseaux, M.-L.; Texier, H.;
Gavalda, S.; et al. An engineered PET depolymerase to break down and recycle plastic bottles. Nat. Cell Biol. 2020, 580, 216–219.
[CrossRef]
46. Pecorini, T.; Hertzberg, R. The fracture toughness and fatigue crack propagation behaviour of annealed PET.Polymer 1993, 34,
5053–5062. [CrossRef]
47. Yeh, J.T.; Runt, J. Fatigue crack-propagation in annealed poly(butylene terephthalate).J. Mater. Sci. 1989, 24, 2637–2642. [CrossRef]