Frontiers in Microbiology 01 frontiersin.org
Enzyme catalyzes ester bond 
synthesis and hydrolysis: The key 
step for sustainable usage of 
plastics
Jinghui Lai 1, Huiqin Huang 1, Mengwei Lin 1, Youqiang Xu 1*, 
Xiuting Li 1,2 and Baoguo Sun 1,2
1 Key Laboratory of Brewing Microbiology and Enzymatic Molecular Engineering of China General 
Chamber of Commence, Beijing Technology and Business University, Beijing, China, 2 Key 
Laboratory of Brewing Molecular Engineering of China Light Industry, Beijing Technology and 
Business University, Beijing, China
Petro-plastic wastes cause serious environmental contamination that 
require effective solutions. Developing alternatives to petro-plastics and 
exploring feasible degrading methods are two solving routes. Bio-plastics like 
polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs), polylactic acid (PLA), polycaprolactone (PCL), 
poly (butylene succinate) (PBS), poly (ethylene furanoate) s (PEFs) and poly 
(ethylene succinate) (PES) have emerged as promising alternatives. Meanwhile, 
biodegradation plays important roles in recycling plastics (e.g., bio-plastics 
PHAs, PLA, PCL, PBS, PEFs and PES) and petro-plastics poly (ethylene 
terephthalate) (PET) and plasticizers in plastics (e.g., phthalate esters, PAEs). 
All these bio- and petro-materials show structure similarity by connecting 
monomers through ester bond. Thus, this review focused on bio-plastics 
and summarized the sequences and structures of the microbial enzymes 
catalyzing ester-bond synthesis. Most of these synthetic enzymes belonged 
to α/β-hydrolases with conserved serine catalytic active site and catalyzed 
the polymerization of monomers by forming ester bond. For enzymatic 
plastic degradation, enzymes about PHAs, PBS, PCL, PEFs, PES and PET were 
discussed, and most of the enzymes also belonged to the α/β hydrolases with 
a catalytic active residue serine, and nucleophilically attacked the ester bond 
of substrate to generate the cleavage of plastic backbone. Enzymes hydrolysis 
of the representative plasticizer PAEs were divided into three types (I, II, and 
III). Type I enzymes hydrolyzed only one ester-bond of PAEs, type II enzymes 
catalyzed the ester-bond of mono-ester phthalates, and type III enzymes 
hydrolyzed di-ester bonds of PAEs. Divergences of catalytic mechanisms 
among these enzymes were still unclear. This review provided references for 
producing bio-plastics, and degrading or recycling of bio- and petro-plastics 
from an enzymatic point of view.
KEYWORDS
plastics, bio-plastics, plasticizers, enzyme, ester bond, recycling
TYPE Review
PUBLISHED 12 January 2023
DOI 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Lei Ren,  
Guangdong Ocean University,  
China
REVIEWED BY
Yang Jia,  
Wenzhou University,  
China
Jian Tian,  
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, 
China
*CORRESPONDENCE
Youqiang Xu  
 xuyouqiang@btbu.edu.cn
SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to  
Microbiotechnology,  
a section of the journal  
Frontiers in Microbiology
RECEIVED 01 December 2022
ACCEPTED 29 December 2022
PUBLISHED 12 January 2023
CITATION
Lai J, Huang H, Lin M, Xu Y, Li X and 
Sun B (2023) Enzyme catalyzes ester bond 
synthesis and hydrolysis: The key step for 
sustainable usage of plastics.
Front. Microbiol. 13:1113705.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
COPYRIGHT
© 2023 Lai, Huang, Lin, Xu, Li and Sun. This 
is an open-access article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, 
distribution or reproduction in other 
forums is permitted, provided the original 
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are 
credited and that the original publication in 
this journal is cited, in accordance with 
accepted academic practice. No use, 
distribution or reproduction is permitted 
which does not comply with these terms.
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 02 frontiersin.org
Introduction
Plastics were ubiquitous and indispensable in the modern 
society since 1950s (Geyer et al., 2017). Due to their flexibility, 
strength, versatility, durability and low cost, the global plastics 
production increased exponentially, from 2 million tons in 1950s 
to more than 380 million tons per year now, with production 
expected to double in the next 20 years (Viljakainen and Hug, 
2021; Gambarini et  al., 2022 ). The extensive use of plastics 
unavoidably generated a remarkable amount of plastic waste and 
caused a serious plastic pollution that required to be  settled 
urgently (Geyer et al., 2017). It was reported that approximately 
6,300 million metric ton of plastic waste had been generated until 
2015 (Geyer et al., 2017). There were two sources of raw materials 
for producing these plastics, petro-based and bio-based materials 
(Tang et al., 2012). The plastics market was dominated by those 
low-cost petro-plastics, including polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET), polyethylene (PE), polyvinyl chloride (PVC), 
polypropylene (PP), and polystyrene (PS; Chamas et al., 2020). 
However, these materials were resistant to degradation and 
persisted for a long time in the environment, and caused serious 
plastic pollution ( Webb et  al., 2012 ; Duis and Coors, 2016 ; 
Chamas et al., 2020). Furthermore, “microplastics, ” the tiny plastic 
pieces smaller than 5 mm in size, also posed a great threat to 
environment and human health (Qin et al., 2021). Studies showed 
that microplastics could change the distribution pattern and 
bio-accessibilities of persistent organic pollutants in soil due to 
microplastic’s persistency and large specific surface area ( Qin 
et al., 2021), and affected the composition of freshwater benthic 
communities and brought negative effects to the whole biosphere 
(Redondo-Hasselerharm et al., 2020).
Additionally, plasticizers were another kind of chemicals 
urgently needed to be treated (Xu et al., 2020). Plasticizers were 
often added to petro-plastics to improve the properties of 
products, such as flexibility and durability to meet industrial 
requirements (Katsikantami et al., 2016). Phthalate esters (PAEs) 
were the representative of plasticizers, which were one kind of 
di-ester compounds formed by esterification of alcohols with the 
two carboxyl groups of phthalic acid (Katsikantami et al., 2016; Xu 
et  al., 2020 ). PAEs accounted for more than 55% of global 
plasticizer market in 2020.1 In plastics, the amount of PAEs added 
was relatively in a large amount, for example, the amount of PAEs 
added in PVC plastics could reach more than 40% ( Graham, 
1973). Recent studies found that PAEs acted as endocrine 
disruptors, and brought serious negative effects to human health 
by causing abnormal lipid metabolism, childhood obesity, 
immune response interference, and neuropsychological disease 
(Xu et  al., 2020 ). According to the latest assessment by the 
European Food Safety Agency in 2019, the limitation of human 
tolerance to PAEs was lower than 50 μg/(Kg·d) (Xu et al., 2021b). 
1 Data available from https://www.spglobal.com/commodityinsights/
en/ci/products/plasticizers-chemical-economics-handbook.html
As there were no covalent bonds between PAEs and the plastic 
backbone, PAEs were easily escaped into the environment, such 
as farmland and water (Xu et al., 2021b). Studies found that the 
concentrations of PAEs in some surface water and soil were as 
high as 500 mg/l and 63 mg/Kg, respectively (Net et al., 2015 ). 
Meanwhile, crops could accumulate PAEs in the seeds, such as rice 
and wheat, and caused food contamination (Ma et al., 2013; Sun 
et al., 2015). Therefore, during plastic treatment, plasticizers in 
plastics was another kind of serious pollutant needed to 
be carefully considered.
Plastic recycling was one way to address current plastic 
pollution. One commonly used recycling method was mechanical 
recycling, which transformed plastics into raw materials through 
some mechanical handling, such as washing, shredding, melting 
and reshaping. However, the quality of the plastic materials 
obtained by this method went from bad to worse (Ragaert et al., 
2017). Another way was chemical recycling, which could produce 
higher quality products but with significantly higher economical 
cost and larger energy input (Ragaert et al., 2017). Bio-recycling 
was a promising method depending on the enzymatic degradation 
of plastics. The degraded monomers could be used as building 
blocks to manufacture new plastics or other higher value 
compounds in a circular economic manner (Zhu et al., 2022). The 
chemical bonds found in plastics generally were ester bonds, 
urethane bonds, ether bonds and carbon–carbon bonds, thereinto, 
ester bonds were common and easily be hydrolyzed ( Stubbins 
et al., 2021; Verschoor et al., 2022). One of the most commonly 
used and representative plastics, PET, attracted great attention by 
the enzymatic recycling studies through hydrolyzing the ester 
bonds of the backbone to realize biodegradation (Lu et al., 2022). 
However, for other kinds of petro-plastics with non-ester bonds 
linked monomers, biodegradation was still a bottleneck to 
be solved.
Bio-plastics, a promising alternative to petro-plastics, could 
be finally degraded to carbon dioxide, water, and biomass through 
microbial mineralization (Othman, 2014; Lambert and Wagner, 
2017). Studies showed that the carbon from each monomeric unit 
of bio-plastic poly(butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) (PBAT) was 
used by microorganisms, such as filamentous fungi, to obtain 
energy and form biomass ( Thomas et  al., 2018 ). Meanwhile, 
bio-plastics could serve some new applications related to human 
health, for example, they were used in medical industries because 
of their good processability, biocompatibility, and non-toxicity 
(Grigore et  al., 2019). All these bio-plastics showed a similar 
structural characteristic that the monomers were mostly linked by 
ester bonds to produce the polymers (Adrah et al., 2020).
Based on the structures of above petro-/bio- plastics or the 
plasticizer PAEs, a common point in structure was the ester bond, 
which was crucial for biodegradation of PET or PAEs and 
biosynthesis or degradation of bio-plastics. Therefore, this review 
summarized the bio-plastics synthesizing and degrading enzymes, 
including the sequences, structures and catalytic properties of 
these enzymes. The sequences, structures and catalytic properties 
of PET ester-bond hydrolases and PAEs ester-bond hydrolases 
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 03 frontiersin.org
were also investigated. Meanwhile, the current challenges and 
future perspectives of plastic recycling were discussed from the 
enzymatic perspective.
Materials for producing 
bio-plastics
Developing bio-plastics, an alternative to petro-plastics, was 
one promising way to deal with petro-plastic pollution. The 
materials for producing bio-plastics included bio-macromolecules 
and small molecule monomers ( Adrah et  al., 2020 ). 
Bio-macromolecules like starch, cellulose and protein were the 
materials for thermoplastic starch, cellulose-based plastics, and 
protein-based plastics, respectively, and they could be obtained 
from renewable resources (mainly plants; Adrah et  al., 2020). 
Recent studies also tried to develop plastic polymers using DNA 
as the raw materials (Han et al., 2021). However, these materials 
were generally not appropriated to use directly in the natural form, 
and needed to be modified by blending with other copolymers to 
show the properties of plastics, thus limited their application 
(Adrah et al., 2020). Therefore, these materials were not discussed 
in this review.
The small molecule monomers and their corresponding 
bio-polymers were shown in Table  1. These small monomers 
mainly included the molecules with one hydroxyl group and one 
carboxyl group, diols, dicarboxylic acids and cyclic monomers. 
Most of monomers could be obtained by biocatalytic methods. For 
example, ε-caprolactone, the monomer of polycaprolactone 
(PCL), could be obtained by the oxidation of cyclohexanone with 
the cyclohexanone monooxygenase from Acinetobacter 
calcoaceticus as the catalyst (Pyo et al., 2020). Glycolic acid, the 
monomer of poly(glycolic acid) (PGA), was produced from 
glycolonitrile using the nitrilase as catalyst in aqueous condition 
(Jem and Tan, 2020). As monomers of poly(ethylene furanoate) 
(PEF), ethylene glycol and 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (2,5-FDCA) 
could also be obtained through biocatalysis. Ethylene glycol could 
be  synthesized using glycerol as the raw material through the 
artificial enzymatic cascade containing alditol oxidase, catalase, 
glyoxylate/hydroxypyruvate reductase, pyruvate decarboxylase 
and lactaldehyde:propanediol oxidoreductase (Li et  al., 2021). 
FDCA could be obtained using 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) 
as the raw material catalyzed by 5-hydroxymethylfurfural oxidase 
and Novozym 435 (Wu et al., 2020). Although some monomers 
were obtained by chemical reaction, they might also be produced 
by biocatalytic methods in future. For example, 1,3-propanediol 
was previously produced using 1,2-ethanediol and acrolein from 
petroleum oil through chemical process, but now it could 
be produced through microbial cells such as engineered E. coli, 
Clostridium butyricum, and Klebsiella pneumoniae ( Lee et  al., 
2018; Lama et al., 2020; Lan et al., 2021).
In general, the monomers could be  polymerized into 
bio-polymers via biological catalysis and chemical polymerization. 
The chemical esterification method produced polymers including 
polypropylene carbonate (PPC), polyvinyl alcohol (PV A), 
Poly(butylene succinate-co-butylene adipate) (PBSA), PBAT, 
poly(butylene succinate-co-butylene terephthalate) (PBST) and 
poly(butylene 2,5-thiophenedicarboxylate) (PBTF). Among them, 
it was worth noting that PBTF , a possible alternative to FDCA-
polyester, was received great attention in recent years due to its 
exceptionally high gas barrier properties (Guidotti et al., 2018). 
Studies reported that thiophenedicarboxylic acid (TDCA)-
polyester showed similar or even better gas barrier performance 
as FDCA-polymers, but related industrial applications needed to 
be further developed (Guidotti et al., 2018). Biological catalysis 
converted monomers into polymers through formation of ester 
bonds with enzymes as catalysts. For example, 
polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs), polylactic acid (PLA), poly 
(butylene succinate) (PBS), PCL, and PES, the commercialized 
plastics (Ghorpade et al., 2022), could be synthesized by enzyme 
catalysis (Table 1). Recently, studies also developed novel materials 
and among them, PEF was one of the representatives. It performed 
higher barrier and heat resistance than that of PET ( Debuissy 
et al., 2018), and could replace PET in the fields of food packaging, 
personal and home care containers and thermoforming 
equipments (Pellis et al., 2016). PEF could be synthesized from 
2,5-FDCA and ethylene glycol by metal or organic non-metallic 
catalysts (Morales-Huerta et al., 2016), and also be catalyzed by 
the Candida antarctica lipse B (CALB; Nasr et al., 2022). Since this 
review mainly focused on the summary of enzyme catalyzed ester 
bond synthesis and hydrolysis of related polymers, the following 
part focused on the representative bio-polymers PHAs, PLA, PBS, 
PCL, PEF and PES, and fully discussed the sequence and structural 
characteristics of related enzymes. The summary could provide 
the enzymology reference and engineering strategy for the 
efficient production of bio-polymers.
Enzyme catalyzes the ester bond 
synthesis of bio-plastics
Enzymes catalyzing the synthesis of bio-plastics were 
summarized in Table 2, mainly involving PHA synthases (PhaCs) 
and lipases. In general, the sequence of an enzyme determines its 
structure, which in turn affects the catalytic property. Therefore, 
this part discussed the amino acid sequence and structure of 
these enzymes.
Sequences, structures and properties of 
enzymes for synthesis of PHAs
PHAs were aliphatic polyesters produced by various 
microorganisms under unbalanced growth condition (Stubbe and 
Tian, 2003; Tsuge et al., 2015). PHAs were mainly synthesized by 
PhaCs using 3-hydroxyalkanoates-coenzyme A (3HAs-CoA) as the 
substrate (Sagong et al., 2018). Studies also reported β-butyrolactone 
could be polymerized into polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) using the 
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 04 frontiersin.org
TABLE 1 Structure and production methods of bio-plastics and their materials.
Bio-plastics Materials Materials 
production
The 
production 
method of 
polymer
Reference
Biocatalytic Polycondensation or 
ring-opening 
polymerization 
(ROP) (metal-based 
or enzyme catalysis)
  Havstad 
(2020), 
Narayanan 
et al. (2004)
Chemical
Biocatalytic Metabolic synthesis   Dalton et al. 
(2022), 
Agostini et al. 
(1971), 
Vroman and 
Tighzert 
(2009)
Chemical ROP (metal-based or 
enzyme catalysis)
Chemical/
Biocatalytic
Polycondensation or 
ROP (enzyme 
catalysis)
  Maihom et al. 
(2008), Li et al. 
(2021), Xu and 
Guo (2010), 
Morales-
Huerta et al. 
(2017), Chen 
et al. (2009)
Chemical/
Biocatalytic
  
Chemical/ 
Biocatalytic
Polycondensation   Kraus (2008), 
Lee et al. 
(2018), Bikiaris 
et al. (2009)
Succinic acid Same as PES
1,3-Propanediol Same as PPSu Polycondensation   Morgan et al. 
(2002), Collias 
et al. (2014), 
Karayannidis 
et al. (2003)
 
Chemical/ 
Biocatalytic
  
 Chemical/
Biocatalytic
Copolycondensation   Lu et al. 
(2019), Wijaya 
et al. (2017), 
Cen et al. 
(2020)
Succinic acid Same as PES
Terephthalic acid Same as PPT
  
Biocatalytic Polycondensation/
ROP (metal-based or 
enzyme catalysis)
  Peñas et al. 
(2022), Xu and 
Guo (2010)
Chemical
Succinic acid Same as PES
(Continued)
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 05 frontiersin.org
TABLE 1 (Continued)
Bio-plastics Materials Materials 
production
The 
production 
method of 
polymer
Reference
BDO Same as PBS Copolycondensation   Pivsa-Art 
et al. (2011), 
Lang and Li 
(2022)
Succinic acid Same as PES
 
  
Chemical/
Biocatalytic
 
 Adipic acid Same as PBSA Polycondensation   Deng et al. 
(2016), 
Vroman and 
Tighzert 
(2009), Lang 
and Li (2022), 
Pang et al. 
(2016), Collias 
et al. (2014)
Terephthalic acid Same as PPT
BDO Same as PBS
Terephthalic acid Same as PPT Polycondensation   Zheng et al. 
(2021)BDO Same as PBS
Succinic acid Same as PES
Chemical ROP (metal-based or 
enzyme catalysis)
  Goyal et al. 
(2022), Pyo 
et al. (2020), 
Vroman and 
Tighzert (2009), 
Figueiredo et al. 
(2020)
Biocatalytic
 
Chemical Polymerization and 
hydrolysis
Caranton et al. 
(2020), Labet 
and 
Thielemans 
(2009)
Chemical Polycondensation or 
ROP
  Jem and Tan 
(2020)Biocatalytic
Glycolic acid/glycolide Same as PGA ROP (metal-based or 
enzyme catalysis)
  Chanfreau 
et al. (2010), 
Dechy-Cabaret 
et al. (2004)
Lactic acid Same as PLA
(Continued)
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 06 frontiersin.org
PHB depolymerase from Pseudomonas stutzeriwas or commercial 
lipases as catalysts (Matsumura et al., 1998; Suzuki et al., 2000; 
Table 2). However, the studies on these enzymes were relative rare, 
and hardly any studies reported about the structures of these 
enzymes. Therefore, the following paragraphs focused on PhaCs.
According to the reported pathways of PHA synthesis in 
microorganisms, acetyl-CoA was an important precursor. Among 
various PHAs, the synthetic pathway of PHB was firstly confirmed. 
Two acetyl-CoAs were condensed into acetoacetyl-CoA catalyzed 
by acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase (β-ketothiolase, PhaA), and then 
acetoacetyl-CoA was converted into (R)-3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA 
[(R)-3-HB-CoA] by acetoacetyl-CoA reductase (PhaB). Finally, 
(R)-3-HB-CoA was polymerized into PHB by the PhaC (Sagong 
et al., 2018 ). As referred above, PhaC played a crucial role for 
producing polymers. Therefore, the sequences and structures of 
PhaC were analyzed to provide a theoretical basis for enzymatic 
engineering to improve the catalytic efficiency of PhaC in 
future works.
As shown in Table  2, PhaCs were able to catalyze the 
polymerization of HAs-CoA to PHAs in vitro, which started 
polymerization with HAs-CoA as the substrate ( Sagong et al., 
2018). For example, PhaC from Bacillus megaterium could catalyze 
the polymerization of HB-CoA to PHA in vitro (McCool and 
Cannon, 2001). Using the D302A mutant of PHB synthase from 
Allochromatium Vinosum as the catalyst, P3HB was synthesized 
with HB-CoA as the substrate in vitro. As shown in Table 2, PhaCs 
showed different substrate specificities when catalyzed the 
synthesis of PHAs. High molecular weight poly [(R)-3-HB] was 
synthesized by PHA syntheses (PhaCDa) from Delftia acidovorans 
DS-17 (Hiroe et al., 2013). Similarly, the synthesis of a random 
copolymer poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyalkanoate) was 
realized by PhaC from Pseudomonas sp. strain 61–3, which 
showed substrate preference toward scl-3HA (with 3–5 carbons in 
the monomer) and mcl-3HA units (with 6–14 carbons in the 
monomer; Matsusaki et al., 1998). PhaC1Ps and PhaC2Ps, derived 
from P . stutzeri strain 1317, were both with the ability to synthesize 
PHAs (Chen et al., 2006 ), whereas, PhaC1Ps only catalyzed the 
synthesis of mcl-3HA, and PhaC2 Ps could catalyze the 
polymerization of both scl-3HA and mcl-3HA (Chen et al., 2006).
In previous studies, PHA synthases were divided into four 
classes (Class I, Class II, Class III and Class IV) according to their 
sequences and substrate specificities (Rehm, 2003). It was generally 
recognized that Class I, Class III and Class IV PhaCs preferred to 
use scl-3HA-CoAs as the substrate, while Class II generated PHAs 
with mcl-3HA-CoAs as the substrate (Neoh et al., 2022). However, 
the Class IV synthase resources were relatively rare, only two 
sequences were analyzed in previous works (Rehm, 2003). In this 
review, Class IV PHA synthases were supplemented, and sequence 
TABLE 1 (Continued)
Bio-plastics Materials Materials 
production
The 
production 
method of 
polymer
Reference
Carbon dioxide Chemical Copolymerization   Li et al. 
(2022), Zhang 
et al. (2017), 
Lee et al. 
(2018)
Biocatalytic
Chemical
Chemical/ 
Biocatalytic
Polycondensation/
ROP (non-metal/
metal-based or 
enzyme catalysis)
  Gorbanev 
et al. (2009), 
Wu et al. 
(2020), 
Maihom et al. 
(2008), Li et al. 
(2021), Loos 
et al. (2020), 
Tong et al. 
(2010)
Ethylene glycol Same as PES
 
2,5-Thiophenedicarboxylic 
acid (TDCA)
Chemical Polycondensation   Wang et al. 
(2022), Wang 
et al. (2019)
BDO Same as PBS
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 07 frontiersin.org
TABLE 2 Synthesis of bio-plastics by enzymes from different microbial sources.
Bio-plastics Substrate Enzyme type Source Synthesis 
method
Reference
PHAs
PHA Specific for short and medium 
chain length 3HA units
PHA synthases 1 Pseudomonas sp. 61–3 Expression in 
recombinant
Matsusaki et al. (1998)
P(3HB) Specific for short chain length PHB synthase (PhbCPs) Pseudomonas sp. 61–3 Expression in 
recombinant
Matsusaki et al. (1998)
PHA – PhaC1 Pseudomonas mendocina Expression in 
recombinant
Hein et al. (2002)
P(3HB) – PHA synthases Delftia acidovorans DS-17 Expression in 
recombinant
Hiroe et al. (2013)
PHA – PHA synthases (PhaC1HO1) Halomonas sp. O-1 Expression in 
recombinant
Ilham et al. (2014)
PHA – PHA synthase (PhaC1He) Halomonas elongata 
DSM2581
Ilham et al. (2014)
PHA Only mcl 3HA PHA synthase (PhaC1Ps) Pseudomonas stutzeri strain 
1,317
Expression in 
recombinant
Chen et al. (2006)
PHA Scl/mcl 3-hydroxybutyrate PHA synthase (PhaC2Ps) Chen et al. (2006)
P3HB [14C]-HB-CoA D302A-PhaCPhaE Allochromatium Vinosum In vitro, 30°C Tian et al. (2005)
Jia et al. (2000)
PHA HB-CoA PHA synthase (PhaCBm) Bacillus megaterium in vivo or in vitro McCool and Cannon 
(2001)
P(3HB) (R,S)-β-butyrolactone (BL) (PHB) depolymerase Pseudomonas stutzeriwas in vitro(ROP) Suzuki et al. (2000)
P(3HB) β-Butyrolactone Lipase (ESL-001, Lipase M) commercial in vitro(ROP) Xie et al. (1997)
Matsumura et al. (1998)
PLA
PLA (2600–
4,500 Da)
Lactic acid Lipase (Lipozyme TL IM) Thermomyces lanuginosus In vitro, toluene, 
50°C, 5 h
Chuensangjun et al. 
(2012)
PLA (26,000 Da) L-Lactide Lipase B (Novozym 435) Candida antarctica Toluene, at 80°C Omay and Guvenilir 
(2013)
Uppenberg et al. (1994)
PLA Lactide Lipase M Mucor javanicus In vitro, toluene, 40°C 
for 24 h
Y adav et al. (2021)
LA-based 
copolyesters
ε-Caprolactone and D,L-
lactide
Lipase B Candida antarctica In vitro (ROP) Kumar et al. (2000), 
Matsumoto and Taguchi 
(2010)
PLA L, L-/D,D-lactides Lipase B (Novozym 435) – In vitro Matsumoto and Taguchi 
(2010)
PLA (37,800 Da) L-LA Lipase B (Novozym 435) Candida antarctica In vitro; 65°C Chanfreau et al. (2010)
P(LA-co-3HB) – LA-polymerizing enzyme Pseudomonas sp. 61–3 whole-cell synthesis Song et al. (2012)
PLA L-lactide Lipase Candida rugosa In vitro, 90°C, 2% 
(w/w) lipase
Rahmayetty et al. (2018)
Domínguez de María 
et al. (2006)
PLGA(Poly (lactic-
co-glycolic acid) 
(PLGA))
L-Lactide and glycolide Lipase B (Novozym 435) Candida antarctica In vitro, 65°C in 
[HMIM][PF6]
Chanfreau et al. (2010)
PCL
PCL ε-Caprolactone Lipase B Candida antarctica In vitro, less than 10 h 
in bulk at 60°C
Kobayashi (2009)
(Continued)
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 08 frontiersin.org
alignment analysis was performed of 32 PHA synthases that were 
verified to show PHAs synthesis abilities. Results were shown in 
Figure  1A, with sequence identity between 23 and 100%, and 
carried conservative sequence G-X-C-X-G (where X was an 
arbitrary amino acid). Based on multiple sequence alignment, the 
phylogenetic tree was constructed for these 32 PhaCs (Figure 1B). 
All the PhaCs were divided into four classes, which was consistent 
with the current classification of PhaCs (Rehm, 2003).
Compared with many reported sequences of PhaCs, studies 
about the structures of PhaC were rare. Only two studies reported 
crystal structures of Class I PhaCs to date, and the two enzymes 
were derived from Cupriavidus necator H16 (Protein Data Bank 
(PDB) ID 5HZ2) and Chromobacterium sp. USM2 (PDB ID 5XAV), 
respectively. Sequences of the two enzymes showed the identity of 
51.79%. Based on this, the representative PhaCs from Class II, Class 
III, and Class IV were selected for homologous modeling with 
GenBank ID BAA36200.1 (Pseudomonas sp. 61-3), ADC61033.1 
(A. vinosum DSM 180), and BAC45232.1 (Bacillus sp. INT005). 
These structures were shown in Figure 2. The structure of PhaCs 
contained a canonical α/β hydrolase fold, consisting of a α/β core 
subdomain (the core catalytic subdomain) and a cap subdomain. 
The core catalytic subdomain was composed of 8 β-sheets 
surrounded by α-helices (Figures 2A–D). The cap subdomain of 
these enzymes all contained 6 α-helices, while Class I enzymes 
contained two reverse parallel β-sheets together with 6 α-helices 
(Figures 2A–D). There was also other structural divergence among 
these enzymes. For example, the 5th and 6th β-sheets of the core 
catalytic subdomain of Class I enzymes showed varied bending 
radian with the respective β-sheets of other enzymes (Figure 2E). 
The α-helices of the cap subdomain belonged to Class IV were 
shorter than those in the other Classes (Figure 2E). In addition, the 
cap subdomain had a short segment structure called lid region, 
which was highly dynamic and flexible. The change of the lid region 
was related to a closed or opened conformation of the enzyme, thus 
controlled the entrance of the substrate to the catalytic active pocket 
and affected the catalysis of PhaCs (Neoh et al., 2022).
The size of substrate binding pockets and substrate-entrance 
channels might be the reason why PhaCs showed different substrate 
specificities. Studies found that P245, I252, L253, F318, T393 and 
W425 of PhaC from C. necator H16 formed a hydrophobic catalytic 
pocket, and these residues were relatively conservative in Class I, 
Class III, and Class IV PhaCs (Kim et al., 2017). Meanwhile, the 
substrate binding pocket of Class II PhaCs was composed of different 
residues (P , V , F , A, V and W), and they were highly conservative in 
Class II PhaC (Figure 3; Kim et al., 2017). At the conserved site 
(position 318 in Class I PhaC from C. necator H16), phenylalanine 
or tyrosine was predominant in class I, III and IV PhaCs, while the 
small side chain amino acid alanine was in class II PhaC (Figure 3), 
which might lead to larger substrate binding pockets and 
accommodation for larger substrates in class II PhaC. Additionally, 
T393, F396, L397, Y445, I482 and V483 constituted the substrate 
channel of Class I PhaC from C. necator H16 (Kim et al., 2017). 
TABLE 2 (Continued)
Bio-plastics Substrate Enzyme type Source Synthesis 
method
Reference
PCL ε-Caprolactone Cutinase (HiC) Humicola insolens In vitro, 0.1% (w/w) 
HiC at 70°C in bulk 
for 24 h
Hunsen et al. (2007), 
Kold et al. (2014)
PCL (7,000 Da) ε-Caprolactone Lipase Pseudomonas fluorescens In vitro, 60°C in bulk 
for 10 days
Uyama and Kobayashi 
(1993)
PCL ɛ-Caprolactone Lipase Fervidobacterium nodosum 
Rt17-B1
In vitro, 90°C in 
toluene for 72 h
Li et al. (2011), Yu et al. 
(2010)
PCL ɛ-Caprolactone Carboxylesterase Archaeoglobus fulgidus In vitro, 80°C in 
toluene for 72 h
Ma et al. (2009)
PBS
PBS (130,000 Da) Dimethyl succinate and 
butane-1,4-diol
Lipase CA Candida antarctica In vitro, in toluene Sugihara et al. (2006)
PBS (73,000 Da) Succinic anhydride, butane-
1,4-diol, and succinic acid
Lipase B (Novozym 435) Candida antarctica In vitro Ren et al. (2015)
PEFs Dimethyl 
2,5-furandicarboxylate 
(DMFDCA) and aliphatic 
diols
Lipase B (Novozym 435) Candida antarctica In vitro, 80°C in 
diphenyl ether
Jiang et al. (2015)
PES (60,000 Da) Cyclic oligo(ethylene 
succinate)s
Lipase B (Novozym 435) Candida antarctica In vitro, 125°C in 
toluene
Morales-Huerta et al. 
(2017)
“–” means not found in literature.
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 09 frontiersin.org
AB
FIGURE 1
Sequence alignment and phylogenetic tree of PHA synthases. (A) Sequence alignment of PHA synthases. “*” Conservative amino acid. 
(B) Phylogenetic tree of PHA synthase.
AB C
DE
FIGURE 2
Homologous modeling of PHA synthases. (A) Class I PHA synthase (Cupriavidus necator H16), (B) Class II PHA synthase (Pseudomonas sp. 61-3) 
(C) Class III PHA synthase (Allochromatium vinosum DSM 180) (D) Class IV PHA synthase (Bacillus sp. INT005) (E) structure alignment of these PHA 
synthase.
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 10 frontiersin.org
Sequence alignment results showed that these amino acids were 
relatively conserved in class I, III and IV PhaCs, while V , W , M, F , 
I and T that constituted the substrate channel were highly conserved 
in class II PhaCs (Figure 3). These results indicated that substrate 
channels based on V , W , M, F , I and T might be more suitable for 
catalyzing the polymerization of substrates with long chains.
It was generally recognized that PhaC catalyzed PHAs 
synthesis in its dimeric form, and two catalytic mechanisms were 
proposed (Sagong et al., 2018). One was non-processive ping-pong 
model and the other was processive model (Sagong et al., 2018). 
The former model indicated that two active sites of the dimeric 
form PhaC were required to complete the elongation step. The 
substrate chain elongation of PHAs happened between the two 
cysteine residues in two protomer across the dimer interface, and 
the substrates and products shared the same channel during the 
catalytic process. Nevertheless, only one single catalytic active site 
was involved in completing the chain elongation in processive 
model. Two catalytic mechanisms were compared in detail (Sagong 
et al., 2018; Neoh et al., 2022). In general, cysteine nucleophilically 
attacked the thioester bond of acyl-CoA (such as 3HB-CoA), 
released CoA-SH and formed cysteine-3HB intermediate during 
the initial step. In the elongation step, the terminal hydroxyl group 
of substrate 3HB-CoA or (3HB)n-1-CoA was deprotonated and 
activated by histidine or aspartic acid, and then the activated 
substrate nucleophilic attacked thioester bond of 3HB-cysteine or 
(3HB)n-1-cysteine to generate (3HB)n-CoA (n ≥ 2; Figure 4).
Sequences, structures and properties of 
enzymes for synthesizing PLA, PLGA, 
PCL, PBS, PEF and PES
As shown in Table 2, the enzymes that catalyzed the synthesis 
of PLA, poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), PCL, PBS, PEF and 
PES were mainly lipase, and most of them were commercially 
available enzymes. In addition, some literatures referred to 
non-commercial ones such as LA polymerization enzyme (LPE), 
and carboxylesterase (Ma et al., 2009; Song et al., 2012). Among 
these enzymes, CALB was able to catalyze the synthesis of PLA, 
PLGA, PCL, PBS, PEF and PES, and exhibited excellent 
polymerization activity toward various substrates (Table 2). For 
example, PLGA was synthesized by using commercial CALB 
(Chanfreau et  al., 2010 ), and a series of furanic–aliphatic 
polyesters such as PEF , poly(butylene furanoate) (PBF) and 
poly(hexamethylene furanoate) (PHF) could also be obtained via 
the CALB-catalyzed polymerization (Jiang et al., 2015; Nasr et al., 
2022). However, studies showed that CALB exhibited higher 
polymerization efficiency toward lactones rather than lactide 
(Matsumoto and Taguchi, 2010). For example, the presence of 
lactide significantly reduced the rate of ε-caprolactone 
polymerization using CALB as the catalyst ( Matsumoto and 
Taguchi, 2010 ). The polymerization temperature of these 
polyesters catalyzed by these enzymes was usually at 50°C - 90°C 
with toluene as the solvent except PES with the polymerization 
temperature at 125°C (Morales-Huerta et al., 2017). However, the 
performance of enzymes catalyzing polymers might be influenced 
by the solvent. For example, cutinase from Humicola insolens 
catalyzing PCL synthesis were investigated using different solvent 
systems (Hunsen et al., 2007). Results showed that the molecular 
weight increased from 16,000 to 24,900 Da by performing poly(ε-
caprolactone) in toluene rather than in bulk (Hunsen et al., 2007).
The properties of an enzyme depended on its sequence and 
structure. The sequence identities of these enzymes were all less than 
28%. S-H-D were used as the catalytic triad for all enzymes except 
LPE (C-H-D), and all enzymes had G/A-X-S/C-X-G conserved 
sequence except CALB (T-X-S-X-G; Supplementary Figure S1). 
These enzymes also showed varied structures, for example, all 
enzymes harbored a reverse parallel arrangement of the second 
β-sheet except cutinase from H. indolens  and lipase from 
Fervidobacterium nodosum Rt17-B1 with parallel arrangement in 
the same direction of β-sheets (Supplementary Figure S2). These 
enzymes also varied in the lid region that affected the substrate 
entrance into the catalytic active pocket. Although some kinds of 
enzymes such as cutinases carried no typical lid region, most of α/β 
hydrolases had a lid region, and this structure played an important 
role in substrate selectivity and catalysis (Kold et al., 2014). The 
mechanism of polyesters synthesis catalyzed by these above enzymes 
were relatively well studied. Taking lactones as an example, the 
polymerization mechanism of polyesters with enzymes as the 
catalyst were demonstrated as follows. The opening of the lid region 
FIGURE 3
Residues involved in substrate binding pocket and substrate entrance channel of PHA synthases.
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 11 frontiersin.org
allowed the lactones entering into the catalytic active pocket, and 
formed the enzyme-substrate complex, followed by the ring opening 
of the substrate to form an active acyl-enzyme intermediate 
(enzyme-activated monomer, EAM). Thereafter, nucleophilic 
reagents (such as water molecules) attacked the acyl-carbon of the 
EAM to form ester bonds and initiated polymerization. Next, the 
hydroxyl oxygen atom of the ring opening product attacked the acyl 
carbon atom of another EAM, and esterification reaction occurred 
and promoted the polymerization (Figure  5; Kobayashi, 2006). 
Some bio-plastics (e.g., PBAT and PGA) were yet not reported 
through enzymatic synthesis, although their monomeric structures 
harbored carboxyl and hydroxyl groups and were similar to those 
of enzymatically synthesized polyesters (Table 1). This might be due 
to the low catalytic efficiency of the enzymes or limited enzyme 
resources. One of the key limitations for bio-plastics in industrial 
applications was the synthetic efficiency, which was directly related 
to the price competitiveness of products. Therefore, the systematic 
review and comparison of the sequence, structure and catalytic 
mechanism of enzymes were not only contributed to clarify the 
catalytic properties of different enzymes, but also provided a 
theoretical basis for discovering and designing enzymes. The 
development of new enzymatic resources with higher catalytic 
efficiency and expanded application scope through rational or de 
novo protein design methods to improve production efficiency and 
reduce costs should be  an important direction of enzymatic 
synthesis of bio-plastic polymers.
Enzyme catalyzes the ester bond 
hydrolysis of plastics and PAEs
Sequences, structures and properties of 
enzymes for PHAs and PLA hydrolysis
As one of the largest groups of bio-polyesters, PHAs received 
much attention as biodegradable plastics. Enzymatic ester-bond 
hydrolysis was the key step for the cleavage of the backbone of PHAs 
(Tarazona et al., 2020). Studies reported many PHAs- depolymerase 
and new group enzymes with varying properties were frequently 
identified (Supplementary Figure S3). Many of these enzymes were 
from marine bacteria, such as scl-PHA depolymerase (GenBank 
accession number BAA22882.1) from Comamonas testosteroni 
YM1004 isolated from seawater, and scl-PHA depolymerase 
(GenBank accession number BAC15574.1) from Marinobacter sp. 
NK-1 isolated from deep sea floor (Shinomiya et al., 1997; Kasuya 
et  al., 2003). Compost was another main source for identifying 
degrading strains and related enzymes as the temperature was 
relatively high and suitable for thermotolerant species, and a 
temperature near or higher than the softening temperature of PHAs 
polymers was beneficial to the enzymatic hydrolysis of ester bond 
(Scherer et al., 1999; Takaku et al., 2006). There were also some 
enzymes from fungi, such as scl-PHA depolymerase from Aspergillus 
fumigatus (Jung et al., 2018). Compared with enzymes from bacteria, 
enzymes from fungi were relative rare (Supplementary Figure S3a).
FIGURE 4
Catalytic mechanism of PHA synthase.
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 12 frontiersin.org
According to the hydrolytic properties, these enzymes were 
mainly divided into two groups, mcl-PHA depolymerases and 
scl-PHA depolymerases (Supplementary Figure S3a). Polygenetic 
analysis indicated the mcl-PHA depolymerases and scl-PHA 
depolymerases each were further divided into two subgroups 
(Supplementary Figure S3a). The sequence alignment indicated 
that these four groups of enzymes showed distinctive conserved 
regions. Group 1 mcl-PHA depolymerases harbored conserve five 
peptides GHSQG (Supplementary Figure S3b), group 2 mcl-PHA 
depolymerases carried the conserved peptide sequence “GISSG” 
(Supplementary Figure S3c ), and groups 1 and 2 scl-PHA 
depolymerases both showed the conserved region “GLSA/SG, ” 
while at the forth position, the amino acid residue “S” was more 
frequently appeared in group  2 scl-PHA depolymerases 
(Supplementary Figures S3d,e). This might serve as the sequence 
characteristics when distinguishing different groups of PHA 
depolymerases. There were also some scl-PHA depolymerases not 
belonged to the two subgroups, indicating diverged sequence 
identities and possibly different catalytic properties 
(Supplementary Figure S3a). The sequence divergences of these 
enzymes might finally affect the protein structure and the catalytic 
mechanisms, including substrate specificity, the rates of hydrolysis 
and types of products.
Few studies focused on catalytic mechanisms of PHA 
depolymerases, and the structures of such enzymes were only 
PHA depolymerase from Penicillium funiculosum (PDB ID 2D81) 
and PHA depolymerase from Paucimonas lemoignei (PDB ID 
4BRS). Both of them belonged to the serine hydrolase. The 
structure of PHB depolymerase from Pen. funiculosum was 
investigated together with the S39A mutant complexed with the 
methyl ester of a trimer (R)-3-PHB substrate. The catalytic triad 
S39-D121-H155 were located at topologically conserved positions. 
S40 and C250 of the main chain amide groups formed the 
oxyanion hole (Hisano et al., 2006). A crevice was located on the 
surface of the PHA depolymerase and benefited for substrate 
binding through hydrophobic interactions with several 
hydrophobic residues. Thirteen hydrophobic residues were located 
around the crevice, and contributed to the binding affinity of the 
enzyme to PHB substrates. The structure of the mutant S39A–
trimeric substrate complex showed the residue W307 was 
responsible for ester bond recognition, and at least three subsites 
were included for binding monomer units of substrates (Hisano 
et al., 2006). Structure analysis of Pau. lemoignei depolymerase 
provided us a more precise insight into substrate binding and 
catalysis (Jendrossek et  al., 2013). Structural analysis of PHB 
depolymerase PhaZ7 (S136A) with 3-hydroxybutyrate tetramer 
complex indicated the substrate binding cleft was composed of 
Y105, Y176, Y189 and Y190, and site-directed mutagenesis of 
these five sites confirmed their importance. All these residues were 
located at a single surface-exposed location ( Jendrossek et  al., 
2013). After substrate binding, the catalytic active residue S136 
nucleophilically attached the substrate and started hydrolysis. The 
proposed activation mechanism involved a conformational change 
of the lid region (281–294 loop) leading to the opening of the 
FIGURE 5
Mechanism of enzyme-catalyzed polymerization of lactones into polymers. 
 , Enzymes; EAM, enzyme-activated monomer.
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 13 frontiersin.org
active-site entrance channel and interaction with the hydrophobic 
substrate (Jendrossek et al., 2013). Studies found that A. fumigatus 
depolymerase showed the properties of both endo- and exo-modes 
of hydrolysis to degrade PHB and 3HB oligomers, indicating 
endo- and exo-cleavage mechanisms of PHA depolymerases but 
still needed in-depth investigation (Scherer et al., 2000).
Besides PHAs, PLA was another kind of bio-plastic widely used. 
Enzymatic depolymerization of PLA began in the 1980s (Williams, 
1981). Studies continuously focused on enzymatic PLA hydrolysis 
since then, and a series of enzymes were identified, including 
protease, lipase, cutinase, esterase and PLA depolymerase mainly 
from bacteria, such as Actinomadura keratinilytica, Amycolatopsis 
orientalis, Kibdelosporangium aridum , Laceyella sacchari , 
Pseudonocardia sp., and Streptomyces roseolus. Studies also reported 
other sources for PLA depolymerases such as the enzymes from 
fungi (Zaaba and Jaafar, 2020). The catalytic mechanisms of related 
enzymes were deeply analyzed. For example, the PLA degradation 
mechanism of proteases K indicated that the catalytic process took 
place in four stages, including substrate binding, nucleophilic attack, 
protonation, and ester bond hydrolysis, and catalytic active residue 
S329 attacked the ester bonds of the substrate as the nucleophile 
(Xiang et  al., 2017 ). Based on the ester bond hydrolysis 
characteristics of related enzymes, the degrading and recycling of 
PLA were realized, so this part will not repeatedly summarize 
related enzymes and the catalytic mechanism. PLA materials also 
showed disadvantages, such as poor hydrophilicity, wide range of 
molecular weight distribution, weak strength, and poor processing 
heat resistance, thus limited PLA manufacturing (Bai et al., 2017; 
Tawiah et  al., 2018 ). Therefore, some studies developed 
co-polymerized lactic acid molecules with other monomers to 
produce derivative polymers, and one of the representatives was 
poly(lactide-co-glycolide) (PLGA). PLGA hydrolysis by commercial 
hydrolase were performed, and among three kinds of commercially 
available hydrolase esterases, lipases and proteases, the lipases from 
C. antarctica, C. cylindracea, C. rugosa, Mucor miehei, Rhizopus 
arrhizus and porcine pancreas and the esterase from M. miehei 
showed good performance for PLGA degradation (Kemme et al., 
2011). However, due to the limited substrate spectrum of the 
enzyme, the hydrolysis mechanisms of the specific degrading 
enzymes for PLA derivatives were still not yet studied thoroughly.
Sequences, structures and properties of 
enzymes for PCL, PBS and derivatives, 
and PES hydrolysis
Enzymes related to the degradation of PCL, PBS and 
derivatives, and PES were all α/β fold hydrolases, mainly including 
lipase, cutinase and carboxylesterase (Maeda et al., 2005; Almeida 
et al., 2019 ; Rosato et al., 2022 ). The phylogenetic relationship 
analysis based on enzymatic sequences was performed of these 
enzymes (Figure 6A). These enzymes could be divided into four 
groups according to the characteristics of their respective 
substrates. Enzymes degrading PCL were mainly belonged to 
group  1 and group  2. Enzymes in group  1 showed highly 
conserved GH/WSMGGGG sequences ( Figure  6B). Enzymes 
belonged to group  2 showed the highly conserved GYSQG 
sequence ( Figure  6C). Few studies focused on the crystal 
structures of PCL hydrolases, and only two enzymes were 
identified in the PDB database, including carboxylesterase 
(MGS0156) from uncultured organism (PDB ID 5D8M) and 
esterase (AfEST) from Archaeoglobus fulgidus (PDB ID 1JJI). The 
structure of MGS0156 was composed of the α/β hydrolase fold 
together with a lid region. As the enzyme showed relatively strong 
binding affinity with long chain oligomers, short oligomers were 
generated one by one under enzymatic catalysis without repeatable 
binding and hydrolysis ( Feng et  al., 2020 ). The molecular 
mechanism of enzymatic hydrolysis of PCL was investigated. This 
process was mainly divided into two stages, acylation (triad-
assisted nucleophilically attacked to the substrate) and hydrolysis 
(C-O bond cleavage of the substrate), and the second stage was 
recognized as the rate-determining step ( Feng et  al., 2020 ). 
Additionally, studies indicated that G168, H231, D237, D372 and 
K382 residues played an important role during PCL hydrolysis 
(Feng et al., 2020). AfEST also harbored the classic α/β hydrolase 
domain and a cap domain. The catalytic mechanism of AfEST was 
similar to that of MGS0156. First, a nucleophilic attack performed 
by the catalytic S160 residue, and G88, G89 and A161 formed the 
oxyanion hole to stabilize the intermediate. Then the C − O bond 
was cleaved to form 6-hydroxycaproic acid (monomer) and acyl−
enzyme intermediate. Thereafter, acyl−enzyme intermediate was 
deacylated with one water molecule attack and released the 
product (Almeida et al., 2019).
PBS was industrialization for many years due to their thermo-
mechanical and physical properties since the first commercialized 
PBS produced by Showa High polymer (Xu and Guo, 2010). By 
copolymerization with other dicarboxylic acids or diols, PBS 
derivatives (such as PBSA and PBAT) also came into plastic 
market ( Xu and Guo, 2010 ). As shown in Figure  6A, PBS 
derivatives related degrading enzymes mainly belonged to group 3 
and group 4. Group 3 mainly included the enzymes degrading 
PBAT. Sequence alignment analysis showed that these enzymes 
contained the common catalytic residue serine, while showed 
different conserved residues (SMTK or AHSM) near the catalytic 
active site serine ( Figure  6D), indicating that there might 
be divergences in catalytic properties of these enzymes. Many of 
the enzymes in group 4 showed the ability to degrade multi-kinds 
of PBS derivatives ( Figure  6A). Studies found that enzymes 
showed varied substrate preferences when catalyzing different 
kinds of PBS polyesters, mainly affected by the carbon chain 
length of the monomer carboxylic acid of the substrate (Maeda 
et al., 2005). For example, the cutinase from A. oryzae showed a 
preference toward PBSA rather than PBS ( Maeda et al., 2005 ). 
Similarly, the cutinase from Pseudozyma antarctica JCM 10317 
showed a higher degrading rate toward PBSA than that of PBS 
(Shinozaki et  al., 2013 ). However, the enzymatic degradation 
mechanisms were not yet in-depth investigated for PBS 
derivatives, and they mainly focused on the hydrolysis mode, 
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 14 frontiersin.org
including endo-type hydrolysis and exo-type hydrolysis. Studies 
found that the catalytic process of cutinase hydrolyzing PBS could 
be explained by endo-type mechanism, meanwhile, the cutinase 
hydrolyzed PBSA through the exo-type mode (Rosato et al., 2022), 
which might be related to the hydrolysis preferentially occurring 
at the ester groups with much more methylene contents (Bai et al., 
2018). In addition, there were PES degrading enzymes in group 4 
(Figure 6A), mainly PHB and PLA depolymerases, such as P(3HB) 
depolymerase from A. clavatus NKCM 1003 (Ishii et al., 2007), 
and PHB depolymerase from A. fumigatus (Jung et al., 2018 ). 
However, studies focused on PES degrading enzymes were rare 
and hardly any studies about the enzymatic degradation 
mechanism of PES was reported.
Sequences, structures, and properties of 
enzymes for PEF hydrolysis
Although PEF polymers were considered to 
be biodegradable, there were few studies about enzymatic PEF 
degradation, and only three enzymes were reported with the 
ability to degrade PEFs, including cutinase from Thermobifida 
cellulosic, cutinase from H. insolens  (HiC), and PETase from 
Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6. (Pellis et al., 2016) used the cutinase 
from T. cellosilica to firstly investigate the enzymatic degradation 
on PEF , and found that the enzyme preferentially hydrolyzed 
PEF with higher molecular weights, and produced 
2,5-furandicarboxylic acid and oligomers. Other studies used 
enzyme HiC to degrade PEF films and a complete hydrolysis of 
PEF films was achieved within 72 h (Weinberger et al., 2017 ). 
Recently, the PETase from I. sakaiensis  201-F6 was found to 
hydrolyze PEF , and the hydrolysis activity of PETase was 
enhanced after site directed mutation (S238F/W159H; Austin 
et al., 2018). As the industrialization of PEF was in infancy, few 
studies focused on the catalytic mechanisms of PEF by enzymes, 
and thus would be an important direction in the future.
In short, many studies on the depolymerization of the above 
bio-plastics were based on the structure characteristic of such 
polymer materials connected by ester bonds, thus were 
recognized as easy to be  degraded. Some of the degradation 
studies only stayed on the phenomenon of microbial 
depolymerization, and did not deeply investigated the sequence 
and structural characteristics of depolymerases, and yet did not 
well revealed the molecular mechanism of ester bond cleavage of 
those enzymes. Although the bio-plastics could be biodegraded, 
only relying on the natural degradation still took a long half-life 
to depolymerize, such as PLA ( Rosli et  al., 2021 ). How to 
efficiently realize hydrolysis and recycling of related bio-plastics 
is still a mainstream and hot topic in future studies. Mining and 
rational design of enzymes will certainly provide effective tools 
for efficient depolymerization and recycling of these 
bio-polyesters.
AB
C
D
FIGURE 6
Sequence alignment of enzymes catalyzing the hydrolysis of PCL, PES, PBS, PBSA, and PBAT. (A) The phylogenetic tree of PCL, PES, PBS, PBSA, 
and PBAT depolymerase. The fan with light purple represents group1; the fan with light red represents group2; the fan with light green represents 
group3; the fan with light bule represents group4. (B) Sequence alignment of Group 1 enzymes, (C) Sequence alignment of Group 2 enzymes. 
(D) Sequence alignment of Group 3 enzymes. “*” The catalytic active site.
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 15 frontiersin.org
Sequences, structures, and properties of 
enzymes for PET hydrolysis
Bio-plastics showed short degradation half-life in natural 
environment compared with petro-plastics, thus drew great 
attentions by researchers. However, the dominating plastics were 
still petro-plastic products nowadays, typically represented by five 
kinds of most commonly used petro-plastics PE, PP , PVC, PS and 
PET, and among them PET was the only polymers contained 
ester-bond in the backbone (Verschoor et al., 2022). PET showed 
the advantages of light weight, insulation and durability, and 
widely used to produce synthetic fibers, as well as containers or 
outer packages of various liquids and solids in foods, cosmetics 
and daily chemical products industries (Kawai et al., 2020). The 
production of PET in 2021 was about 27.45 million tons, and the 
demands will be greatly increased in the future as the recycling 
property of PET (Kawai et al., 2020). PET was composed of ester 
bond-linked terephthalate (TPA) and ethylene glycol (EG) 
(Figure 7A). It had the hydrolysable ester bonds, but very stably in 
the natural environment, which was difficult to degrade with a 
half-life of hundreds of years. Enzymes were the preferred choice 
to treat with PET waste. Enzymatic ester bonds hydrolysis of PET 
made great progress in recent years.
The first report of enzymatic PET hydrolysis dated back to 
2005 (Müller et al., 2005), and it found that the polyester hydrolase 
from T. fusca DSM43793 (TfH) could hydrolyze about 40–50% 
PET films in three weeks, and since then PET hydrolases attracted 
much attention. A series of enzymes capable of hydrolyzing PET 
were identified, mainly carboxylic ester hydrolases including 
lipases, carboxylesterases, cutinases, and PETase (Gao et al., 2021). 
Among them, PETase from I. sakaiensis  showed the high 
hydrolytic efficiency of PET at a relative low temperature (Y oshida 
et al., 2016). For example, its hydrolytic activity on PET at 30°C 
– 40 °C was significantly higher than the previously reported 
enzymes PET hydrolases Tf HCut (T. fusca cutinase), LCC (leaf-
branch compost cutinase) and FsC ( Fusarium solani cutinase) 
(Y oshida et al., 2016). Due to the high catalytic efficiency toward 
PET, the crystal structure of PETase was extensively studied. There 
were 40 crystal structures of PETases in the PDB database, 
including protein structure, protein substrate complex, and 
mutanted PETases (Joo et al., 2018). PETase had the typical α/β 
hydrolase fold structure, with the core domain consisting of 9 
β-sheets surrounded by 7 α-helices, and the catalytic triad of S160-
D206-H237 (Figure 7B). Compared with other PET hydrolases, 
PETase had three extra residues (N244, S245, N246) in the β8-α6, 
which extended the cleft of the substrate binding pocket and 
enlarged the binding pocket toward macromolecular substrate 
(Joo et al., 2018).
According to the crystal structure, the catalytic mechanism of 
PETase was revealed through molecular docking, site directed 
mutagenesis and enzymatic property analysis (Han et al., 2017; 
Joo et al., 2018). The hydrolysis of PET by PETase included two 
steps, nick generation step and terminal digestion step. In the first 
step, PET combined to the substrate binding pocket on the surface 
of enzyme through hydrophobic interaction. Specifically, one 
mono(ethylene terephthalate) (MHET) was bound to subsite I and 
three MHETs to subsite II, and thus a long and shallow L-shaped 
cleft was formed on a flat surface. Thereafter, S160 nucleophilically 
attacked the carbonyl carbon atom in the ester bond between 
subsite I  and subsite II, generating the PET chain with 
hydroxyethyl-terminal (HE-terminal) and acyl-enzyme 
intermediates. Subsequently, acyl-enzyme intermediate was 
nucleophilically attacked by the hydroxyl oxygen atom of a water 
molecule, generating PET chains with TPA terminal of which the 
benzene ring was interacted by the benzene ring of W156 with π 
stacking interaction rather than original weaker T-stacking. 
Finally, the product was rotated and pulled away from original 
position before released. The second step was the terminal 
digestion step. PET chains with TPA terminal or HE-terminal 
continued binding to the subsite, and finally generated MHET, 
TPA and EG through the nick generation step.
In recent years, the hydrolysis of intermediates MHET 
(Figure  7A) was also well investigated. Studies indicated that 
MHETase from I. sakaiensis could hydrolyze MHET to TPA and 
EG (Y oshida et al., 2016). In addition, the MHETase showed a very 
narrow substrate specificity, which only hydrolyzed MHET, but 
could not hydrolyze BHET, PET, p-nitrophenyl aliphatic esters or 
aromatic ester compounds (Y oshida et al., 2016). Nowadays, there 
were 10 crystal structures of MHETases in the PDB database, 
mainly including crystal structure of MHETase bound to ligand, 
and MHETase at different resolutions ( Palm et  al., 2019). The 
overall structure of MHETase was similar to that of feruloyl esters 
(Palm et  al., 2019 ), with α/β hydrolase domain, lid region (a 
α-helix), and catalytic triad S225-D492-H528 (Knott et al., 2020). 
By analyzing the crystal structure of MHETase and 
nonhydrolyzable MHETA (mono-(2hydroxyethyl) 
terephthalamide), (Palm et  al., 2019) found that the substrate 
specificity of MHETase was almost completely determined by the 
lid region. Furthermore, through the combination of PETase and 
MHETase, ester bonds of PET could be completely hydrolyzed to 
produce the monomers TPA and EG, indicating a promising 
two-enzyme system for recycling of PET (Palm et al., 2019).
Sequences, structures, and properties of 
enzymes for PAEs hydrolysis
As a typical representative of plastics, the degradation of PET 
became a hot topic in recent years. However, it was easy to ignore 
that for the plastic industry, plasticizers were another kind of 
pollutants urgently needed to be treated. PAEs, the representative 
of plasticizers were di-ester chemicals formed by esterifying the 
hydroxyl group of alcohols with the carboxyl group of phthalic 
acid (Tian et al., 2019). Studies showed that the hydrolysis of the 
di-ester bonds of PAEs was step by step ( Zhang et  al., 2014). 
Meanwhile, the toxicity of PAEs also depended on the side chain 
ester bond structures, and the hydrolysis of one ester bond of 
PAEs could significantly reduce its toxicity (Jiao et al., 2013; Tian 
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 16 frontiersin.org
et al., 2019). For example, dimethyl phthalate and diethyl phthalate 
were associated with androgenic effects, and the corresponding 
phthalate mono-ester lost relevant function, meanwhile dibutyl 
phthalate and di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate caused steroid hormone 
effects, and the effects caused by related phthalate mono-esters 
were significantly reduced ( Tian et  al., 2019 ). Therefore, 
identifying PAEs side chain ester bond hydrolases could provide 
optimal enzyme resources for the reduction or elimination of 
PAEs toxicity (Tian et al., 2019).
Studies about side chain ester bond hydrolase of PAEs mainly 
included lipase, esterase, cutinase and phthalate ester hydrolase in 
recent 15 years (Table 3). These enzymes had different substrate 
specificity when hydrolyzing side chain ester bonds, and could not 
effectively hydrolyze different kinds of side chain ester bonds of 
PAEs (Table 3). According to the hydrolysis characteristics of side 
chain ester bonds, these enzymes could be  divided into three 
categories, type I, II and III. Type I enzymes hydrolyzed only one 
ester bond of PAEs. Type II enzymes hydrolyzed the only side 
chain ester bond of phthalate mono-ester, and type III enzymes 
could hydrolyze the two ester bonds of PAEs. Previous studies 
investigated the hydrolysis of the di-ester bonds of PAEs with the 
combination of type I  and II enzymes ( Huang et  al., 2019 ). 
However, compared with the combination of type I  and II 
enzymes, the type III enzymes were more economical in protein 
purification and practical application, because the expression and 
purification of type I and II enzymes brought more expenditure 
and operational complexity, and the optimal reaction conditions 
of different enzymes were also diverged. Therefore, type III 
enzymes became the preferred enzyme resource for thoroughly 
hydrolyzing the di-ester bond of PAEs. However, there were few 
type III enzymes until now, among which F. oxysporum cutinase 
were only reported with the ability to degrade di-pentyl phthalate 
(Ahn et al., 2006). The carboxylesterase from Bacillus sp. K91 only 
showed the ability to degrade di-isobutyl phthalate (Ding et al., 
2015), and two soil derived esterases also showed obvious 
substrate specificity, preferring to hydrolyze the ester bonds when 
linked with short straight chain of PAEs ( Wu et al., 2019; Qiu 
et al., 2020).
In short, type III enzymes resources were relatively scarce. So 
far, there were only four known type III enzyme sequences 
obtained from literatures, of which feruloyl esterase and phthalate 
hydrolase were identified from the metagenomic library of soil, 
and the cutinase was from F. oxysporum. The left type III enzyme 
carboxylesterase was from B. subtilis BJQ0005 by our team (Xu 
et al., 2021b) and from Bacillus sp. K91 by Ding et al. (2015), and 
these two enzymes with the sequence identity of 100%. The type 
III enzyme resources were still unable to meet the requirements 
for various PAEs treatment conditions such as food industry and 
environmental systems with varied pH, temperatures and reaction 
solvent conditions. Clarifying the corresponding sequence and 
structural characteristics, and analyzing the catalytic mechanism 
of related enzymes were the possible way to change the status in 
view of the scarcity of type III enzyme resources and their limited 
substrate spectrum. Therefore, the sequences, structural 
characteristics and catalytic mechanisms of PAEs hydrolases 
reported so far were summarized.
The sequence identities of PAEs hydrolases were quite varied. 
Results of the phylogenetic tree showed that these enzymes were 
clustered into three major categories ( Figure  8A). The first 
category was dominated by type II enzymes, and the second and 
third categories contained both type I and type III enzymes, which 
suggested that type I and type III enzymes showed a relatively 
AB
FIGURE 7
Chemical structure of PET and monomers, and PETase structure. (A) Chemical structure of PET and monomers. (B) PETase structures (PDB ID 
5XJH).
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 17 frontiersin.org
TABLE 3 A summary of enzymes for ester bond hydrolysis of phthalate esters derived from microorganisms.
Name Classificationa Substrate spectrum Species Reference
Esterase I Di-pentyl phthalate. Candida cylindracea Ahn et al. (2006)
Esterase I Di-methyl phthalate. Fusarium sp. DMT-5-3 Luo et al. (2012)
Phthalate 
hydrolase
I Di-propyl phthalate, di-butyl phthalate and di-pentyl phthalate. Metagenomic Library Jiao et al. (2013)
Phthalate 
hydrolase
I Di-methyl phthalate, di-ethyl phthalate, di-propyl phthalate, di-butyl 
phthalate, di-pentyl phthalate and di-hexyl phthalate.
Acinetobacter sp. M673 Wu et al. (2013)
Esterase I Di-ethyl phthalate, di-propyl phthalate, di-butyl phthalate, di-pentyl 
phthalate, di-hexyl phthalate and butylbenzyl phthalate.
Sulfobacillus 
acidophilus DSM10332
Zhang et al. (2014)
Esterase B and 
Esterase G
I Di-butyl phthalate. Esterase G was more efficient for di-butyl phthalate 
hydrolysis compared with that of Esterase B.
Sphingobium sp. SM42 Whangsuk et al. 
(2015)
Esterase I Di-ethyl phthalate, di-propyl phthalate, di-butyl phthalate, di-pentyl 
phthalate and di-hexyl phthalate.
Sphingomonas glacialis 
PAMC 26605
Hong et al. (2016)
Esterase I Di-butyl phthalate. Acinetobacter sp. LMB-
5
Fang et al. (2017)
Lipase I Di-methyl phthalate, di-ethyl phthalate, di-propyl phthalate, di-butyl 
phthalate, di-isobutyl phthalate, di-hexyl phthalate and di-(2-ethylhexyl) 
phthalate. The enzyme showed a relatively high efficiency for hydrolysis 
of di-propyl phthalate, di-butyl phthalate and di-hexyl phthalate.
Malbranchea 
cinnamomea CGMCC 
6022
Duan et al. (2019b)
Cutinase I Di-methyl phthalate, di-ethyl phthalate, di-propyl phthalate, di-butyl 
phthalate, di-isobutyl phthalate, di-hexyl phthalate. The enzyme showed 
a relatively high efficiency for hydrolysis of di-methyl phthalate, di-ethyl 
phthalate, di-propyl phthalate and di-butyl phthalate.
Thielavia terrestris Duan et al. (2019a)
Esterase I Di-methyl phthalate, di-ethyl phthalate, di-propyl phthalate, di-butyl 
phthalate, di-isobutyl phthalate, butylbenzyl phthalate, di-pentyl 
phthalate, di-hexyl phthalate, di-n-octyl phthalate, di-(2-ethylhexyl) 
phthalate and di-cyclohexyl phthalate. The enzyme showed a relatively 
high efficiency for hydrolysis of di-methyl phthalate, di-ethyl phthalate, 
di-propyl phthalate, di-butyl phthalate, di-isobutyl phthalate and 
butylbenzyl phthalate.
Gordonia sp. 5F Huang et al. (2019)
Carboxylesterase I Di-butyl phthalate. Sphingobium 
yanoikuyae P4
Mahajan et al. 
(2019)
Carboxylesterase I Di-methyl phthalate, di-ethyl phthalate, di-propyl phthalate and di-butyl 
phthalate. The preferred substrate was di-butyl phthalate.
Bacillus velezensis 
SYBC H47
Huang et al. (2020)
Esterase I Di-butyl phthalate. The Km and kcat values for di-butyl phthalate were 
9.60 ± 0.97 μM and (2.72 ± 0.06) × 106 s−1, respectively.
Microbacterium sp. 
PAE-1
Lu et al. (2020)
Serine hydrolase I Di-butyl phthalate, di-isobutyl phthalate, and di-(2-ethylhexyl) 
phthalate.
Bacillus subtilis 
BJQ0005
Xu et al. (2021b)
Alpha/beta fold 
hydrolase
I Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate. Bacillus subtilis 
BJQ0005
Xu et al. (2021b)
Phthalate 
hydrolase
II Mono-ethyl phthalate, mono-butyl phthalate, mono-hexyl phthalate and 
mono-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate.
Gordonia sp. P8219 Nishioka et al. 
(2006)
Phthalate 
hydrolase
II Mono-methyl phthalate. Rhodococcus jostii 
RHA1
Hara et al. (2010)
Phthalate 
hydrolase
II Mono-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate. Rhodococcus sp. EG-5 Iwata et al. (2016)
Phthalate 
hydrolase
II Mono-methyl phthalate, mono-ethyl phthalate, mono-butyl phthalate 
and mono-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate.
Gordonia alkanivorans 
YC-RL2
Nahurira et al. 
(2017)
(Continued)
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 18 frontiersin.org
closed relationship in sequence similarity, and could not be clearly 
distinguished from each other by sequence identity (Figure 8A). 
Meanwhile, S-H-D formed the catalytic triad of all the type I, II 
and III enzymes, except MpeH, a type II enzyme from the 
bacterial consortium. MpeH had a consensus motif GHML 
identified in some serine hydrolases, while the other enzymes had 
the typical G-X-S-X-G conserved sequence (Figure 8B). For type 
III enzymes, all of them had the conserved sequence G-E/D-
SAGG, except EstM2 obtained from the metagenome (Figure 8B). 
For the representative ester bond hydrolases such as lipase, 
esterase and cutinase, the structural characteristic of enzymes and 
the PAEs hydrolysis mechanism were studied (Rajagopalan et al., 
2014; Höllerer et al., 2018; Figure 9). These enzymes belonged to 
α/β hydrolase family, and generally carried a lid region composed 
of α-helices, and the α-helix connected with the core domain 
through hinge (usually a loop region). The lid region usually 
covered the catalytic active pocket, and the opening of the lid 
region allowed the substrate to enter into the substrate binding 
pocket. The catalytic triad was Ser-His-Glu (Asp), connected by 
hydrogen bonds, and histidine was polarized by the carboxyl 
group of glutamic acid (aspartic acid), and tended to receive 
protons from serine, and prompted the hydroxy oxygen atom of 
serine to nucleophilic attack the carboxyl carbon atom of the 
substrate (Rajagopalan et al., 2014; Höllerer et al., 2018). A pair of 
hydrogen atoms located in the 3 Å – 5 Å region around the serine 
hydroxyl group could be  used as hydrogen bond donors to 
stabilize the tetrahedral transition state formed in the catalytic 
process, and was called as oxygen anion hole. The cavity between 
the lid region, the oxygen anion hole and the catalytic active center 
were the substrate binding pocket ( Rajagopalan et  al., 2014 ; 
Höllerer et al., 2018).
Although the enzymatic ester bond hydrolysis processes of 
PAEs were proposed, divergences in catalytic mechanism of 
different enzymes still required in-depth investigation. For 
example, in our previous work about ester bond hydrolysis of type 
III enzyme GTW28_17760, H399 of the catalytic active site was 
found to form a hydrogen bond interaction with the carboxyl 
group of the substrate mono-butyl phthalate, thus reducing the 
hydrolysis efficiency of the enzyme catalyzing the hydrolysis of the 
following ester bonds of the substrate (Xu et al., 2021b). How to 
overcome this catalytic issue became the key point to improve the 
catalytic efficiency. In addition, there were significant divergences 
in the sequences and structures of different enzymes, such as the 
enzymes belonged to type III enzyme, which indicated that there 
might be differential hydrolysis mechanisms for them to catalyze 
the di-ester bonds of PAEs and needed to be further investigated. 
Revealing the sequence characteristics and catalytic mechanisms 
of type III enzymes were helpful to guide the directional discovery 
and rational design of related enzymes, thus enriching the 
resources of type III enzymes and providing a basis for the 
effective establishment of enzymatic treatment methods for PAEs 
required by different reaction systems and conditions.
Based on the discussions in parts 3 and 4, it could be concluded 
that many enzymes belonged to the α/β hydrolase family played a 
crucial role in synthesis and hydrolysis of these polyesters 
(Supplementary Figure S4 ). Comparative discussion on the 
mechanisms of enzymatic ester bond catalysis is helpful to deeply 
reveal the synthesis and hydrolysis process of polymers from the 
TABLE 3 (Continued)
Name Classificationa Substrate spectrum Species Reference
Phthalate 
hydrolase
II Mono-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate. Pseudomonas sp. Singh et al. (2017)
Phthalate 
hydrolase
II Mono-ethyl phthalate, mono-butyl phthalate, mono-hexyl phthalate and 
mono-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate.
Gordonia sp. YC-JH1 Fan et al. (2018)
Phthalate 
hydrolase
II Mono-methyl phthalate, mono-ethyl phthalate, mono-propyl phthalate, 
mono-butyl phthalate, mono-isobutyl phthalate, mono-amyl phthalate, 
mono-hexyl phthalate, mono-n-octyl phthalate, mono-(2-ethylhexyl) 
phthalate and mono-cyclohexyl phthalate.
Gordonia sp. 5F Huang et al. (2019)
Esterase II Mono-butyl phthalate. Microbacterium sp. 
PAE-1
Lu et al. (2020)
Cutinase III Di-pentyl phthalate. Fusarium oxysporum Ahn et al. (2006)
Carboxylesterase III Di-isobutyl phthalate. Bacillus sp. K91 Ding et al. (2015)
Feruloyl esterase III Di-methyl phthalate, di-ethyl phthalate and di-butyl phthalate. The 
preferred substrate was di-methyl phthalate.
Soil metagenomic 
library
Wu et al. (2019)
Phthalate 
hydrolase
III Di-methyl phthalate, di-ethyl phthalate, di-propyl phthalate, di-butyl 
phthalate, di-pentyl phthalate and di-hexyl phthalate.
Soil metagenomic 
library
Qiu et al. (2020)
Carboxylesterase III Di-butyl phthalate, di-isobutyl phthalate and di-(2-ethylhexyl) 
phthalate.
Bacillus subtilis 
BJQ0005
Xu et al. (2021b)
a I, Conversion of di-ester phthalate to mono-ester phthalate; II, Conversion of mono-ester phthalate to phthalic acid; III, Conversion of di-ester phthalate to phthalic acid.
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 19 frontiersin.org
AB
FIGURE 8
Sequence analysis of PAEs hydrolases. (A) The phylogenetic tree of PAEs hydrolases. (B) Sequence alignment of PAEs hydrolases, the blue line 
marks the conserved sequence of the enzyme.
AB
CD
FIGURE 9
Enzyme-catalyzed ester bond hydrolysis of PAEs. (A) When the lid region opened, PAEs entered into the substrate binding pocket to form a 
tetrahedral transition state. (B) The Ser hydroxyl oxygen atom nucleophilic attacked the carboxyl carbon atom of the substrate to form a covalent 
bond, and the covalent bond was broken between the carboxyl carbon atom and the oxygen atom of the substrate. (C) One water molecule 
entered into the substrate binding pocket to form a tetrahedron transition state. (D) The carboxyl carbon atom of the substrate formed a covalent 
bond with the oxygen atom of water, and the covalent bond was broken between Ser hydroxyl oxygen atom with the carbon atom of the 
substrate. Finally, the product escaped from the catalytic pocket to complete the ester bond hydrolysis reaction.
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 20 frontiersin.org
perspective of enzymology, so as to better improve relevant 
processes, and better recycling of bio-plastics to reduce 
environmental pressure. In fact, enzymatic ester bond synthesis and 
hydrolysis could be applied in many aspects besides plastic industry, 
such as the traditional fermented food industry. Ester bond synthesis 
or hydrolysis by enzymes played a crucial role on formation of flavor 
esters and degradation of potential harmful esters, thus greatly 
improved product quality (Xu et al., 2020, 2021a, 2023; Zhao et al., 
2023). In short, enzymatic ester bond synthesis and hydrolysis is a 
research hot topic worth continuous studies.
Bottlenecks and challenges of 
recycling plastics
Plastics were indispensable products in modern society, but 
the acquisition of plastic monomers from fossil and the generation 
of plastic waste brought a serious threat to the global climate and 
ecological environment ( Service, 2021 ). With respect to the 
treatment of plastic waste, recycling was a more promising method 
than the traditional landfill and incineration. However, only a very 
small fraction (about 9%) of plastic waste was recycled globally 
nowadays ( Geyer et  al., 2017 ). Therefore, studies developed 
strategies to manufacturing plastics more recyclable (Garcia and 
Robertson, 2017). These strategies included expanding the range 
of recyclable plastics, finding new low energy-consuming catalysts, 
and improving sorting technologies (Garcia and Robertson, 2017). 
Enzymatic biocatalysis, as an eco-friendly recycling alternative to 
conventional mechanical and chemical approaches, attracted 
widespread attention (Lu et al., 2022 ; Zhu et al., 2022 ). Recent 
studies reported that the PETase mutant called FAST-PETase could 
almost completely degrade 51 different PET products in 1 week, 
and PET was resynthesized with the recovered monomers, which 
indicated that a closed-loop PET recycling process was achieved 
and provided a feasible pathway for enzymatic recycling of PET 
plastics (Lu et al., 2022). However, the development of enzymatic 
methods in plastics recycling also faced challenges. On one hand, 
enzymes with excellent catalytic properties were insufficient. 
Although enzymes that hydrolyze ester bonds were reported, the 
enzyme resources were relatively scarce. Meanwhile, enzymes 
hydrolyzing other kinds of petro-plastics were rather scarce, such 
as PE and PS through linkage of monomer by carbon–carbon 
bonds (Lu et al., 2022). Studies demonstrated that gut microbes of 
some insect larvals could consume PE and PS by cleaving the 
carbon–carbon bonds under laboratory conditions (Stubbins et al., 
2021), but the underlying mechanism of consumption and how 
these plastics were consumed in the natural environment were still 
yet not well studied. On the other hand, wild-type enzymes usually 
had poor thermostability and low catalytic activity and were not 
suitable for industrial applications. Therefore, the mining of novel 
enzymes and the construction or design of highly active mutants 
were crucial for plastic disposal and recycling.
Omics-based discovery of enzymes was a relatively new and 
advanced approach. Studies reported that an enzyme hydrolyzing 
PET was discovered from metagenome databases through in silico 
sequence-based screening ( Danso et  al., 2018 ). Additionally, 
esterase MGS0156 and GEN0105, with hydrolytic activity toward 
PLA, PCL and poly(butylene succinate-co-adipate) were obtained 
from environmental metagenomes based on functional 
metagenomics ( Hajighasemi et  al., 2018 ). Proteomics-based 
approach was another advanced technique for mining enzymes. 
Studies showed that the esterase ALC24_4107, with significant 
hydrolytic activity against various natural and synthetic polyester, 
was uncovered from Alcanivorax sp. 24 via comparative proteomic 
approach (Zadjelovic et al., 2020). However, currently studies about 
proteomics-based discovery of enzymes still mainly focused on 
pure microbial cultures due to the extremely challenging to obtain 
enzymes from complex environmental samples via metaproteomics 
(Zhu et al., 2022). Furthermore, the acquisition of high-quality 
protein and availability of databases for downstream bioinformatics 
analysis were other barriers against the development of proteomics 
in mining enzymes. Stable-isotope probing integrated with targeted 
metagenomics were contribute to locate functional microorganisms 
and enzymes in plastic synthesis and degradation, and improved 
the efficiency of enzyme mining (Thomas et al., 2018; Sander et al., 
2019). In addition, various high-throughput or ultra-high-
throughput screening techniques were developed to identify 
enzymes more efficiently and accurately, such as cell-as-
compartment, micro- and pico-droplet based, and microchamber-
based screening methods ( Longwell et  al., 2017; Bunzel et  al., 
2018). A recent technique called fluorescence-activated droplet 
sorting pipeline, which exhibited excellent throughput, sensitivity, 
and specificity, provided a technical support for rapid access to 
novel microbial and enzymes (Qiao et al., 2022).
Natural enzymes with low activity and poor thermostability 
were unable to meet the requirements of industrial applications, 
thus protein engineering was an emerging solution. Enhancing the 
thermostability of enzymes was one of the strategies to modify 
enzymes by protein engineering. The thermal stability of enzymes 
was essential in industrial applications, particularly for plastics 
with high glass transition temperature such as PET (65°C - 70°C). 
When the reaction temperature was close to or above the glass 
transition temperature, the polymeric chains in plastics would 
be more flexible and mobile, promoting their binding to enzymes 
and thus increasing degradation efficiency (Wei and Zimmermann, 
2017). Recently, (Zhu et al., 2022) summarized various methods 
that could improve the thermal stability of plastic degradation 
enzymes, including the introduction of disulfide bonds or salt 
bridges, the formation of hydrogen bonds in the region responsible 
for stabilizing the enzyme structure, the introduction of proline 
residues, and glycan moiety. After the modifications, the Tm value 
of the enzymes increased by 3.7 °C to 10 °C. The mutation of 
T. fusca cutinase (Q132A/T101A) with larger space and higher 
hydrophobicity showed a significant increased efficiency for PET 
hydrolysis (Silva et al., 2011). Additionally, various strategies were 
also proposed to improve catalytic efficiency by promoting 
enzyme-substrate interaction, including modification of enzyme 
surface properties (e.g., electrostatic and/or hydrophobic 
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 21 frontiersin.org
properties) (Hiraishi et  al., 2010; Miyakawa et  al., 2015), and 
fusion of binding accessory to the enzyme surface (Armenta et al., 
2017). However, the current methods to design mutation sites 
were usually empirical and uncertain, and the enzyme structure–
function relationship was still not well investigated, which made 
challenges to accurately predict the potential beneficial mutations 
(Zhu et al., 2022). However, protein engineering will be greatly 
improved with the rapid development of computer-assisted 
modeling and simulation techniques. Recently, a structure-based, 
machine learning algorithm was successfully used to obtain the 
FAST-PETase, which was a mutation of PETase and exhibited 
superior PET-hydrolytic activity than wild-type and engineered 
alternatives at 30–50 °C ( Lu et  al., 2022 ). Similarly, machine 
learning methods such as AlphaFold2 ( Varadi et  al., 2022 ), 
ProBound (Rube et al., 2022), RoseTTAFold (Sala et al., 2022), 
showed great potential in deciphering structure–function 
relationship and in precisely guiding protein engineering.
Conclusion
Plastics are one of the great inventions of humans, while also 
bring great environment and health challenges. Bio-plastics are the 
mainstream of the plastic industry in the future by realizing the 
sustainable application of plastic products and avoiding the 
environmental hazards of petro-plastics. This review systematically 
summarized the materials for bio-plastics production, the 
sequences, structures and catalytic mechanisms of the related key 
functional enzymes for bio-plastics polymerization, and the studies 
about enzymatic degradation of these bio-polymers together with 
the petro-plastic PET and the plasticizer PAEs, the respective 
representative of petro-plastics and plasticizers. It is one of the key 
points to lead the development of plastic industry by establishing 
methods for efficient enzymatic ester bond synthesis or degradation 
in the future. This review provides a reference for the synthesis or 
degradation of plastic materials, and sustainable usage of bio-plastics 
from a new perspective of ester bond catalyzing enzymology.
Author contributions
JL: data curation and writing – original draft. HH: data 
curation. ML: data curation. YX: data curation, writing – original 
draft, and funding acquisition. XL: writing – review and editing. 
BS: Writing – review and editing. All authors contributed to the 
article and approved the submitted version.
Funding
This work was supported by National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (Nos. 32072165 and 31801467).
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated 
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the 
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or 
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or 
endorsed by the publisher.
Supplementary material
The Supplementary material for this article can be found online 
at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705/
full#supplementary-material
References
Adrah, K., Ananey-Obiri, D., and Tahergorabi, R. (2020). “Development of bio-
based and biodegradable plastics: novelty, advent, and alternative technology, ” in 
Handbook of Nanomaterials and Nanocomposites for Energy and Environmental 
Applications. eds.  O. V . Kharissova,  L. M. T. Martínez and B. I. Kharisov (Cham: 
Springer International Publishing), 1–25.
Agostini, D. E., Lando, J. B., and Shelton, J. R. (1971). Synthesis and 
characterization of poly-β-hydroxybutyrate. I. Synthesis of crystalline DL-poly-β-
hydroxybutyrate from DL- β-butyrolactone. J. Polym. Sci. A-1 Polym. Chem.  9, 
2775–2787. doi: 10.1002/pol.1971.150091003
Ahn, J.-Y ., Kim, Y .-H., Min, J., and Lee, J. (2006). Accelerated degradation of 
dipentyl phthalate by Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. pisi cutinase and toxicity evaluation 
of its degradation products using bioluminescent bacteria. Curr. Microbiol. 52, 
340–344. doi: 10.1007/s00284-005-0124-9
Almeida, B. C., Figueiredo, P ., and Carvalho, A. T. P . (2019). Polycaprolactone enzymatic 
hydrolysis: a mechanistic study. ACS Omega. 4, 6769–6774. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.9b00345
Armenta, S., Moreno-Mendieta, S., Sánchez-Cuapio, Z., Sánchez, S., and 
Rodríguez-Sanoja, R. (2017). Advances in molecular engineering of carbohydrate-
binding modules. Proteins 85, 1602–1617. doi: 10.1002/prot.25327
Austin, H. P ., Allen, M. D., Donohoe, B. S., Rorrer, N. A., Kearns, F . L., Silveira, R. L., 
et al. (2018). Characterization and engineering of a plastic-degrading aromatic 
polyesterase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 115, E4350–E4357. doi: 10.1073/pnas.17188041
Bai, H., Deng, S., Bai, D., Zhang, Q., and Fu, Q. (2017). Recent advances in 
processing of stereocomplex-type polylactide. Macromol. Rapid Commun.  
38:1700454. doi: 10.1002/marc.201700454
Bai, Z., Shi, K., Su, T., and Wang, Z. (2018). Correlation between the chemical 
structure and enzymatic hydrolysis of Poly(butylene succinate), Poly(butylene 
adipate), and Poly(butylene suberate). Polym. Degrad. Stab.  158, 111–118. doi: 
10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2018.10.024
Bikiaris, D. N., Papageorgiou, G. Z., Papadimitriou, S. A., Karavas, E., and 
Avgoustakis, K. (2009). Novel biodegradable polyester poly (propylene succinate): 
synthesis and application in the preparation of solid dispersions and nanoparticles 
of a water-soluble drug. AAPS PharmSciTech  10, 138–146. doi: 10.1208/
s12249-008-9184-z
Bunzel, H. A., Garrabou, X., Pott, M., and Hilvert, D. (2018). Speeding up enzyme 
discovery and engineering with ultrahigh-throughput methods. Curr. Opin. Struct. 
Biol. 48, 149–156. doi: 10.1016/j.sbi.2017.12.010
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 22 frontiersin.org
Caranton, A. R., Pinto, J. C. C., Stavale, F ., Barreto, J., and Schmal, M. (2020). 
Statistical analysis of the catalytic synthesis of Vinyl acetate over Pd-Cu/ZrO2 
nanostructured based catalysts. Catal. Today  344, 108–117. doi: 10.1016/j.
cattod.2018.10.034
Cen, X., Liu, Y ., Chen, B., Liu, D., and Chen, Z. (2020). Metabolic engineering of 
Escherichia coli for de novo production of 1, 5-pentanediol from glucose. ACS Synth. 
Biol. 10, 192–203. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.0c00567
Chamas, A., Moon, H., Zheng, J., Qiu, Y ., Tabassum, T., Jang, J. H., et al. (2020). 
Degradation rates of plastics in the environment. ACS Sust. Chem. Eng.  8, 
3494–3511. doi: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b06635
Chanfreau, S., Mena, M., Porras-Domínguez, J. R., Ramírez-Gilly, M., Gimeno, M., 
Roquero, P ., et al. (2010). Enzymatic synthesis of poly-L-lactide and poly-L-lactide-
co-glycolide in an ionic liquid. Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 33, 629–638. doi: 10.1007/
s00449-009-0388-8
Chen, J. Y ., Liu, T., Zheng, Z., Chen, J. C., and Chen, G. Q. (2006). 
Polyhydroxyalkanoate synthases PhaC1 and PhaC2 from Pseudomonas stutzeri 1317 
had different substrate specificities. FEMS Microbiol. Lett.  234, 231–237. doi: 
10.1111/j.1574-6968.2004.tb09538.x
Chen, C. H., Lu, H. Y ., Chen, M., Peng, J. S., Tsai, C. J., and Y ang, C. S. (2009). 
Synthesis and characterization of poly(ethylene succinate) and its copolyesters 
containing minor amounts of butylene succinate. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 111, 1433–1439. 
doi: 10.1002/app.29035
Chuensangjun, C., Pechyen, C., Chisti, Y ., and Sirisansaneeyakul, S. (2012). 
Lipase-catalysed polymerization of lactic acid and the properties of the 
polymer. Adv. Mater. Res.  506, 154–157. doi: 10.4028/www.scientific.net/
AMR.506.154
Collias, D. I., Harris, A. M., Nagpal, V ., Cottrell, I. W ., and Schultheis, M. W . 
(2014). Biobased terephthalic acid technologies: a literature review. Ind. Biotechnol. 
10, 91–105. doi: 10.1089/ind.2014.0002
Dalton, B., Bhagabati, P ., De Micco, J., Padamati, R. B., and O’Connor, K. (2022). 
A review on biological synthesis of the biodegradable polymers 
polyhydroxyalkanoates and the development of multiple applications. Catalysts 
12:319. doi: 10.3390/catal12030319
Danso, D., Schmeisser, C., Chow, J., Zimmermann, W ., Wei, R., Leggewie, C., et al. 
(2018). New insights into the function and global distribution of polyethylene 
terephthalate (PET)-degrading bacteria and enzymes in marine and terrestrial 
metagenomes. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  84, e02773–e02717. doi: 10.1128/
AEM.02773-17
Debuissy, T., Pollet, E., and Avérous, L. (2018). Biotic and abiotic synthesis 
of renewable aliphatic polyesters from short building blocks obtained  
from biotechnology. ChemSusChem  11, 3836–3870. doi: 10.1002/cssc.  
201801700
Dechy-Cabaret, O., Martin-Vaca, B., and Bourissou, D. (2004). Controlled ring-
opening polymerization of lactide and glycolide. Chem. Rev. 104, 6147–6176. doi: 
10.1021/cr040002s
Deng, Y ., Ma, L., and Mao, Y . (2016). Biological production of adipic acid from 
renewable substrates: current and future methods. Biochem. Eng. J. 105, 16–26. doi: 
10.1016/j.bej.2015.08.015
Ding, J., Wang, C., Xie, Z., Li, J., Y ang, Y ., Mu, Y ., et al. (2015). Properties of a 
newly identified esterase from Bacillus  sp. K91 and its novel function in 
diisobutyl phthalate degradation. PLoS One  10:e0119216. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0119216
Domínguez de María, P ., Sánchez-Montero, J. M., Sinisterra, J. V ., and 
Alcántara, A. R. (2006). Understanding Candida rugosa  lipases: an overview. 
Biotechnol. Adv. 24, 180–196. doi: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2005.09.003
Duan, X., Jiang, Z., Liu, Y ., Y an, Q., Xiang, M., and Y ang, S. (2019a). High-level 
expression of codon-optimized Thielavia terrestris  cutinase suitable for ester 
biosynthesis and biodegradation. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 135, 768–775. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2019.05.173
Duan, X., Xiang, M., Wang, L., Y an, Q., Y ang, S., and Jiang, Z. (2019b). 
Biochemical characterization of a novel lipase from Malbranchea cinnamomea 
suitable for production of lipolyzed milkfat flavor and biodegradation of phthalate 
esters. Food Chem. 297:124925. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2019.05.199
Duis, K., and Coors, A. (2016). Microplastics in the aquatic and terrestrial 
environment: sources (with a specific focus on personal care products), fate and 
effects. Environ. Sci. Eur. 28:2. doi: 10.1186/s12302-015-0069-y
Fan, S., Wang, J., Y an, Y ., Wang, J., and Jia, Y . (2018). Excellent degradation 
performance of a versatile phthalic acid esters-degrading bacterium and catalytic 
mechanism of monoalkyl phthalate hydrolase. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 19:2803. doi: 10.3390/
ijms19092803
Fang, Y ., Zhang, L., Wang, J., Zhou, Y ., and Y e, B. (2017). Biodegradation of 
phthalate esters by a newly isolated Acinetobacter sp. strain LMB-5 and 
characteristics of its esterase. Pedosphere 27, 606–615. doi: 10.1016/
S1002-0160(17)60355-2
Feng, S., Yue, Y ., Chen, J., Zhou, J., Li, Y ., and Zhang, Q. (2020). Biodegradation 
mechanism of polycaprolactone by a novel esterase MGS0156: a QM/MM approach. 
Environ. Sci.: Processes Impacts 22, 2332–2344. doi: 10.1039/D0EM00340A
Figueiredo, P . R., Almeida, B. C., Dourado, D. F ., Sousa, A. F ., Silvestre, A. J., and 
Carvalho, A. T. (2020). Enzymatic synthesis of poly (caprolactone): a QM/MM 
study. ChemCatChem 12, 4845–4852. doi: 10.1002/cctc.202000780
Gambarini, V ., Pantos, O., Kingsbury, J. M., Weaver, L., Handley, K. M., and 
Lear, G. (2022). PlasticDB: a database of microorganisms and proteins linked to 
plastic biodegradation. Database 2022:baac008. doi: 10.1093/database/baac008
Gao, R., Pan, H., and Lian, J. (2021). Recent advances in the discovery, 
characterization, and engineering of poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) hydrolases. 
Enzym. Microb. Technol. 150:109868. doi: 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2021.109868
Garcia, J. M., and Robertson, M. L. (2017). The future of plastics recycling. Science 
358, 870–872. doi: 10.1126/science.aaq0324
Geyer, R., Jambeck, J. R., and Law, K. L. (2017). Production, use, and fate of all 
plastics ever made. Sci. Adv. 3:e1700782. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.1700782
Ghorpade, C., Shetty, S., and Murthy, K. (2022). Bioplastics production and 
applications: a mini review. Int. J. Sci. Res. Dev.  1, 2321–2613. doi: 
10.1080/23311932.2015.1117749
Gorbanev, Y . Y ., Klitgaard, S. K., Woodley, J. M., Christensen, C. H., and 
Riisager, A. (2009). Gold-catalyzed aerobic oxidation of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural 
in water at ambient temperature. ChemSusChem 2, 672–675. doi: 10.1002/
cssc.200900059
Goyal, R., Singh, O., Agrawal, A., Samanta, C., and Sarkar, B. (2022). Advantages 
and limitations of catalytic oxidation with hydrogen peroxide: from bulk chemicals 
to lab scale process. Catal. Rev. 64, 229–285. doi: 10.1080/01614940.2020.1796190
Graham, P . R. (1973). Phthalate ester plasticizers--why and how they are used. 
Environ. Health Perspect. 3, 3–12. doi: 10.2307/3428023
Grigore, M. E., Grigorescu, R. M., Iancu, L., Ion, R.-M., Zaharia, C., and 
Andrei, E. R. (2019). Methods of synthesis, properties and biomedical applications 
of polyhydroxyalkanoates: a review. J. Biomater. Sci. Polym. Ed. 30, 695–712. doi: 
10.1080/09205063.2019.1605866
Guidotti, G., Gigli, M., Soccio, M., Lotti, N., Salatelli, E., Gazzano, M., et al. (2018). 
Tailoring poly (butylene 2, 5-thiophenedicarboxylate) features by the introduction 
of adipic acid co-units: biobased and biodegradable aliphatic/aromatic polyesters. 
Polymer 145, 11–20. doi: 10.1016/j.polymer.2018.04.063
Hajighasemi, M., Tchigvintsev, A., Nocek, B., Flick, R., Popovic, A., Hai, T., et al. 
(2018). Screening and characterization of novel polyesterases from environmental 
metagenomes with high hydrolytic activity against synthetic polyesters. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 52, 12388–12401. doi: 10.1021/acs.est.8b04252
Han, J., Guo, Y ., Wang, H., Zhang, K., and Y ang, D. (2021). Sustainable bioplastic 
made from biomass DNA and ionomers. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 143, 19486–19497. doi: 
10.1021/jacs.1c08888
Han, X., Liu, W ., Huang, J. W ., Ma, J., Zheng, Y ., Ko, T. P ., et al. (2017). Structural 
insight into catalytic mechanism of PET hydrolase. Nat. Commun. 8:2106. doi: 
10.1038/s41467-017-02255-z
Hara, H., Stewart, G. R., and Mohn, W . W . (2010). Involvement of a novel ABC 
transporter and monoalkyl phthalate ester hydrolase in phthalate ester catabolism 
by Rhodococcus jostii RHA1. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 76, 1516–1523. doi: 10.1128/
AEM.02621-09
Havstad, M. R. (2020). “Chapter 5 - biodegradable plastics” in Plastic Waste and 
Recycling. ed. T. M. Letcher (Cambridge, MA: Academic Press), 97–129.
Hein, S., Paletta, J., and Steinbüchel, A. (2002). Cloning, characterization and 
comparison of the Pseudomonas mendocina polyhydroxyalkanoate synthases PhaC1 
and PhaC2. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 58, 229–236. doi: 10.1007/s00253-001-0863-x
Hiraishi, T., Komiya, N., and Maeda, M. (2010). Y443F mutation in the substrate-
binding domain of extracellular PHB depolymerase enhances its PHB adsorption 
and disruption abilities. Polym. Degrad. Stab.  95, 1370–1374. doi: 10.1016/j.
polymdegradstab.2010.01.022
Hiroe, A., Ushimaru, K., and Tsuge, T. (2013). Characterization of 
polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) synthase derived from Delftia acidovorans DS-17 and 
the influence of PHA production in Escherichia coli. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 115, 633–638. 
doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2012.12.015
Hisano, T., Kasuya, K., Tezuka, Y ., Ishii, N., Kobayashi, T., Shiraki, M., et al. 
(2006). The crystal structure of polyhydroxybutyrate depolymerase from Penicillium 
funiculosum provides insights into the recognition and degradation of biopolyesters. 
J. Mol. Biol. 356, 993–1004. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2005.12.028
Höllerer, C., Becker, G., Göen, T., and Eckert, E. (2018). Regioselective ester 
cleavage of di-(2-ethylhexyl) trimellitates by porcine liver esterase. Toxicol. In Vitro 
47, 178–185. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2017.11.015
Hong, D. K., Jang, S.-H., and Lee, C. (2016). Gene cloning and characterization of 
a psychrophilic phthalate esterase with organic solvent tolerance from an Arctic 
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 23 frontiersin.org
bacterium Sphingomonas glacialis PAMC 26605. J. Mol. Catal. B Enzym. 133, S337–
S345. doi: 10.1016/j.molcatb.2017.02.004
Huang, L., Meng, D., Tian, Q., Y ang, S., Deng, H., Guan, Z., et al. (2020). 
Characterization of a novel carboxylesterase from Bacillus velezensis SYBC H47 and 
its application in degradation of phthalate esters. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 129, 588–594. doi: 
10.1016/j.jbiosc.2019.11.002
Huang, H., Zhang, X. Y ., Chen, T. L., Zhao, Y . L., Xu, D. S., and Bai, Y . P . (2019). 
Biodegradation of structurally diverse phthalate esters by a newly identified esterase 
with catalytic activity toward di(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate. J. Agric. Food Chem. 67, 
8548–8558. doi: 10.1021/acs.jafc.9b02655
Hunsen, M., Azim, A., Mang, H., Wallner, S. R., Ronkvist, A., Xie, W ., et al. (2007). 
A cutinase with polyester synthesis activity. Macromolecules 40, 148–150. doi: 
10.1021/ma062095g
Ilham, M., Nakanomori, S., Kihara, T., Hokamura, A., Matsusaki, H., Tsuge, T., 
et al. (2014). Characterization of polyhydroxyalkanoate synthases from Halomonas 
sp. O-1 and Halomonas elongata  DSM2581: site-directed mutagenesis and 
recombinant expression. Polym. Degrad. Stab.  109, 416–423. doi: 10.1016/j.
polymdegradstab.2014.04.024
Ishii, N., Mitomo, H., Kasuya, K., and Inoue, Y . (2007). Purification and 
characterization of poly(ethylene succinate) hydrolase from the mesophilic fungus 
Aspergillus clavatus NKCM1003. Macromol. Symp. 249-250, 545–550. doi: 10.1002/
masy.200750434
Iwata, M., Imaoka, T., Nishiyama, T., and Fujii, T. (2016). Re-characterization of 
mono-2-ethylhexyl phthalate hydrolase belonging to the serine hydrolase family. J. 
Biosci. Bioeng. 122, 140–145. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2016.01.008
Jem, K. J., and Tan, B. (2020). The development and challenges of poly (lactic acid) 
and poly (glycolic acid). Adv. Ind. Eng. Polym. Res.  3, 60–70. doi: 10.1016/j.
aiepr.2020.01.002
Jendrossek, D., Hermawan, S., Subedi, B., and Papageorgiou, A. C. (2013). Biochemical 
analysis and structure determination of Paucimonas lemoignei poly (3-hydroxybutyrate)
(PHB) depolymerase PhaZ 7 muteins reveal the PHB binding site and details of 
substrate-enzyme interactions. Mol. Microbiol. 90, 649–664. doi: 10.1111/mmi.12391
Jia, Y ., Kappock, T. J., Frick, T., Sinskey, A. J., and Stubbe, J. (2000). Lipases provide 
a new mechanistic model for polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) synthases: characterization 
of the functional residues in Chromatium vinosum PHB synthase. Biochemistry 39, 
3927–3936. doi: 10.1021/bi9928086
Jiang, Y ., Woortman, A. J., van Ekenstein, G. O. A., and Loos, K. (2015). A 
biocatalytic approach towards sustainable furanic–aliphatic polyesters. Polym. 
Chem. 6, 5198–5211. doi: 10.1039/C5PY00629E
Jiao, Y ., Chen, X., Wang, X., Liao, X., Xiao, L., Miao, A., et al. (2013). Identification 
and characterization of a cold-active phthalate esters hydrolase by screening a 
metagenomic library derived from biofilms of a wastewater treatment plant. PLoS 
One 8:e75977. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075977
Joo, S., Cho, I. J., Seo, H., Son, H. F ., Sagong, H. Y ., Shin, T. J., et al. (2018). 
Structural insight into molecular mechanism of poly(ethylene terephthalate) 
degradation. Nat. Commun. 9:382. doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-02881-1
Jung, H. W ., Y ang, M. K., and Su, R. C. (2018). Purification, characterization, and gene 
cloning of an Aspergillus fumigatus polyhydroxybutyrate depolymerase used for 
degradation of polyhydroxybutyrate, polyethylene succinate, and polybutylene succinate. 
Polym. Degrad. Stab. 154, 186–194. doi: 10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2018.06.002
Karayannidis, G. P ., Roupakias, C. P ., Bikiaris, D. N., and Achilias, D. S. (2003). 
Study of various catalysts in the synthesis of poly (propylene terephthalate) and 
mathematical modeling of the esterification reaction. Polymer 44, 931–942. doi: 
10.1016/S0032-3861(02)00875-3
Kasuya, K., Takano, T., Tezuka, Y ., Hsieh, W . C., Mitomo, H., and Doi, Y . (2003). 
Cloning, expression and characterization of a poly (3-hydroxybutyrate) 
depolymerase from Marinobacter sp. NK-1. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 33, 221–226. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2003.08.006
Katsikantami, I., Sifakis, S., Tzatzarakis, M. N., Vakonaki, E., Kalantzi, O. I., 
Tsatsakis, A. M., et al. (2016). A global assessment of phthalates burden and 
related links to health effects. Environ. Int.  97, 212–236. doi: 10.1016/j.
envint.2016.09.013
Kawai, F ., Kawabata, T., and Oda, M. (2020). Current state and perspectives 
related to the polyethylene terephthalate hydrolases available for biorecycling. ACS 
Sustain. Chem. Eng. 8, 8894–8908. doi: 10.1021/acssuschemeng.0c01638
Kemme, M., Prokesch, I., and Heinzel-Wieland, R. (2011). Comparative study on 
the enzymatic degradation of poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) by hydrolytic enzymes 
based on the colorimetric quantification of glycolic acid. Polym. Test. 30, 743–748. 
doi: 10.1016/j.polymertesting.2011.06.009
Kim, J., Kim, Y . J., Choi, S. Y ., Lee, S. Y ., and Kim, K. J. (2017). Crystal 
structure of Ralstonia eutropha  polyhydroxyalkanoate synthase C-terminal 
domain and reaction mechanisms. Biotechnol. J.  12:1600648. doi: 10.1002/
biot.201600648
Knott, B. C., Erickson, E., Allen, M. D., Gado, J. E., Graham, R., Kearns, F . L., et al. 
(2020). Characterization and engineering of a two-enzyme system for plastics 
depolymerization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.  117, 25476–25485. doi: 10.1073/
pnas.2006753117
Kobayashi, S. (2006). Enzymatic ring-opening polymerization of lactones by 
lipase catalyst: mechanistic aspects. Macromol. Symp. 240, 178–185. doi: 10.1002/
masy.200650822
Kobayashi, S. (2009). Recent developments in lipase-catalyzed synthesis of 
polyesters. Macromol. Rapid Commun. 30, 237–266. doi: 10.1002/marc.200800690
Kold, D., Dauter, Z., Laustsen, A. K., Brzozowski, A. M., Turkenburg, J. P ., 
Nielsen, A. D., et al. (2014). Thermodynamic and structural investigation of the 
specific SDS binding of Humicola insolens cutinase. Protein Sci. 23, 1023–1035. doi: 
10.1002/pro.2489
Kraus, G. A. (2008). Synthetic methods for the preparation of 1,3-propanediol. 
Clean Soil Air Water. 36, 648–651. doi: 10.1002/clen.200800084
Kumar, A., Kalra, B., Dekhterman, A., and Gross, R. A. (2000). Efficient ring-
opening polymerization and copolymerization of ε-caprolactone and 
ω-pentadecalactone catalyzed by Candida antartica lipase B. Macromolecules 33, 
6303–6309. doi: 10.1021/ma000344+
Labet, M., and Thielemans, W . (2009). Synthesis of polycaprolactone: a review. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 38, 3484–3504. doi: 10.1039/B820162P
Lama, S., Seol, E., and Park, S. (2020). Development of Klebsiella pneumoniae J2B 
as microbial cell factory for the production of 1,3-propanediol from glucose. Metab. 
Eng. 62, 116–125. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2020.09.001
Lambert, S., and Wagner, M. (2017). Environmental performance of bio-based 
and biodegradable plastics: the road ahead. Chem. Soc. Rev. 46, 6855–6871. doi: 
10.1039/C7CS00149E
Lan, Y ., Feng, J., Guo, X., Fu, H., and Wang, J. (2021). Isolation and characterization 
of a newly identified Clostridium butyricum strain SCUT343-4 for 1,3-propanediol 
production. Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 44, 2375–2385. doi: 10.1007/s00449-021-02610-x
Lang, M., and Li, H. (2022). Sustainable routes for the synthesis of renewable 
adipic acid from biomass derivatives. ChemSusChem 15:e202101531. doi: 10.1002/
cssc.202101531
Lee, E. J., Lee, J. W ., Lee, J., Min, H. K., Yi, J., Song, I. K., et al. (2018). Ag-
(Mo-W)/ZrO 2 catalysts for the production of propylene oxide: Effect of pH in 
the preparation of ZrO 2 support. Catal. Commun.  111, 80–83. doi: 10.1016/j.
catcom.2018.04.005
Lee, J. H., Lama, S., Kim, J. R., and Park, S. H. (2018). Production of 
1,3-propanediol from glucose by recombinant Escherichia coli  BL21(DE3). 
Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng. 23, 250–258. doi: 10.1007/s12257-018-0017-y
Li, Q., Li, G., Yu, S., Zhang, Z., Ma, F ., and Feng, Y . (2011). Ring-opening 
polymerization of ɛ-caprolactone catalyzed by a novel thermophilic lipase from 
Fervidobacterium nodosum . Process Biochem.  46, 253–257. doi: 10.1016/j.
procbio.2010.08.019
Li, X., Meng, L., Zhang, Y ., Qin, Z., Meng, L., Li, C., et al. (2022). Research and 
application of polypropylene carbonate composite materials: a review. Polymers 
14:2159. doi: 10.3390/polym14112159
Li, K., Sun, W ., Meng, W ., Y an, J., Zhang, Y ., Guo, S., et al. (2021). Production of 
ethylene glycol from glycerol using an in vitro enzymatic cascade. Catalysts 11:214. 
doi: 10.3390/catal11020214
Longwell, C. K., Labanieh, L., and Cochran, J. R. (2017). High-throughput 
screening technologies for enzyme engineering. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 48, 196–202. 
doi: 10.1016/j.copbio.2017.05.012
Loos, K., Zhang, R., Pereira, I., Agostinho, B., Hu, H., Maniar, D., et al. (2020). A 
perspective on PEF synthesis, properties, and end-life. Front. Chem. 8:585. doi: 
10.3389/fchem.2020.00585
Lu, H., Diaz, D. J., Czarnecki, N. J., Zhu, C., Kim, W ., Shroff, R., et al. (2022). 
Machine learning-aided engineering of hydrolases for PET depolymerization. 
Nature 604, 662–667. doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04599-z
Lu, M., Jiang, W ., Gao, Q., Zhang, M., and Hong, Q. (2020). Degradation of dibutyl 
phthalate (DBP) by a bacterial consortium and characterization of two novel 
esterases capable of hydrolyzing PAEs sequentially. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf.  
195:110517. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2020.110517
Lu, J., Li, Z., Zhou, L., Wu, L., and Li, B.-G. (2019). Biobased 1,5-pentanediol 
derived aliphatic-aromatic copolyesters: synthesis and thermo-mechanical 
properties of poly (pentylene succinate- co-terephthalate) s and poly (pentylene 
adipate-co-terephthalate)s. Polym. Degrad. Stab.  163, 68–75. doi: 10.1016/j.
polymdegradstab.2019.02.010
Luo, Z.-H., Wu, Y .-R., Chow, R. K. K., Luo, J.-J., Gu, J.-D., and Vrijmoed, L. L. P . 
(2012). Purification and characterization of an intracellular esterase from a fusarium 
species capable of degrading dimethyl terephthalate. Process Biochem. 47, 687–693. 
doi: 10.1016/j.procbio.2012.01.015
Ma, T. T., Christie, P ., Luo, Y . M., and Teng, Y . (2013). Phthalate esters 
contamination in soil and plants on agricultural land near an electronic waste 
recycling site. Environ. Geochem. Health  35, 465–476. doi: 10.1007/
s10653-012-9508-5
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 24 frontiersin.org
Ma, J., Li, Q., Song, B., Liu, D., Zheng, B., Zhang, Z., et al. (2009). Ring-opening 
polymerization of ɛ-caprolactone catalyzed by a novel thermophilic esterase from 
the archaeon Archaeoglobus fulgidus. J. Mol. Catal. B Enzym.  56, 151–157. doi: 
10.1016/j.molcatb.2008.03.012
Maeda, H., Y amagata, Y ., Abe, K., Hasegawa, F ., Machida, M., Ishioka, R., et al. 
(2005). Purification and characterization of a biodegradable plastic-degrading 
enzyme from Aspergillus oryzae. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 67, 778–788. doi: 
10.1007/s00253-004-1853-6
Mahajan, R., Verma, S., Kushwaha, M., Singh, D., Akhter, Y ., and Chatterjee, S. 
(2019). Biodegradation of di- n-butyl phthalate by psychrotolerant Sphingobium 
yanoikuyae strain P4 and protein structural analysis of carboxylesterase involved in 
the pathway. Int. J. Biol. Macromol.  122, 806–816. doi: 10.1016/j.
ijbiomac.2018.10.225
Maihom, T., Namuangruk, S., Nanok, T., and Limtrakul, J. (2008). Theoretical 
study on structures and reaction mechanisms of ethylene oxide hydration over 
H-ZSM-5: ethylene glycol formation. J. Phys. Chem. C  112, 12914–12920. doi: 
10.1021/jp8034677
Matsumoto, K., and Taguchi, S. (2010). Enzymatic and whole-cell synthesis of 
lactate-containing polyesters: toward the complete biological production of 
polylactate. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.  85, 921–932. doi: 10.1007/
s00253-009-2374-0
Matsumura, S., Suzuki, Y ., Tsukada, K., Toshima, K., Doi, Y ., and Kasuya, K. 
(1998). Lipase-catalyzed ring-opening polymerization of β-butyrolactone to the 
cyclic and linear poly(3-hydroxybutyrate). Macromolecules 31, 6444–6449. doi: 
10.1021/ma971894j
Matsusaki, H., Manji, S., Taguchi, K., Kato, M., Fukui, T., and Doi, Y . (1998). 
Cloning and molecular analysis of the poly(3-hydroxybutyrate) and poly(3-
hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyalkanoate) biosynthesis genes in Pseudomonas sp. 
strain 61-3. J. Bacteriol. 180, 6459–6467. doi: 10.1128/JB.180.24.6459-6467.1998
McCool, G. J., and Cannon, M. C. (2001). PhaC and PhaR are required for 
polyhydroxyalkanoic acid synthase activity in Bacillus megaterium. J. Bacteriol. 183, 
4235–4243. doi: 10.1128/JB.183.14.4235-4243.2001
Miyakawa, T., Mizushima, H., Ohtsuka, J., Oda, M., Kawai, F ., and Tanokura, M. 
(2015). Structural basis for the Ca2+-enhanced thermostability and activity of PET-
degrading cutinase-like enzyme from Saccharomonospora viridis AHK190. Appl. 
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 99, 4297–4307. doi: 10.1007/s00253-014-6272-8
Morales-Huerta, J. C., de Ilarduya, A. M., and Muñoz-Guerra, S. (2016). Poly 
(alkylene 2,5-furandicarboxylate)s (PEF and PBF) by ring opening polymerization. 
Polymer 87, 148–158. doi: 10.1016/j.polymer.2016.02.003
Morales-Huerta, J. C., de Ilarduya, A. M., and Muñoz-Guerra, S. (2017). A green 
strategy for the synthesis of poly(ethylene succinate) and its copolyesters via 
enzymatic ring opening polymerization. Eur. Polym. J. 95, 514–519. doi: 10.1016/j.
eurpolymj.2017.08.043
Morgan, J. A., Lu, Z., and Clark, D. S. (2002). Toward the development of a 
biocatalytic system for oxidation of p-xylene to terephthalic acid: oxidation of 1, 
4-benzenedimethanol. J. Mol. Catal. B Enzym.  18, 147–154. doi: 10.1016/
S1381-1177(02)00079-6
Müller, R. J., Schrader, H., Profe, J., Dresler, K., and Deckwer, W . D. (2005). 
Enzymatic degradation of poly(ethylene terephthalate): rapid hydrolyse using a 
hydrolase from T. fusca. Macromol. Rapid Commun. 26, 1400–1405. doi: 10.1002/
marc.200500410
Nahurira, R., Ren, L., Song, J., Jia, Y ., Wang, J., Fan, S., et al. (2017). Degradation 
of di (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate by a novel Gordonia alkanivorans strain YC-RL2. Curr. 
Microbiol. 74, 309–319. doi: 10.1007/s00284-016-1159-9
Narayanan, N., Roychoudhury, P . K., and Srivastava, A. (2004). L(+)lactic acid 
fermentation and its product polymerization. Electron. J. Biotechnol. 7, 167–178. doi: 
10.2225/vol7-issue2-fulltext-7
Nasr, K., Favrelle-Huret, A., Mincheva, R., Stoclet, G., Bria, M., Raquez, J.-M., 
et al. (2022). The impact of diethyl furan-2, 5-dicarboxylate as an aromatic biobased 
monomer toward lipase-catalyzed synthesis of semiaromatic copolyesters. ACS Appl. 
Polym. Mater. 4, 1387–1400. doi: 10.1021/acsapm.1c01777
Neoh, S. Z., Fey Chek, M., Tiang Tan, H., Linares-Pastén, J. A., Nandakumar, A., 
Hakoshima, T., et al. (2022). Polyhydroxyalkanoate synthase (PhaC): the key enzyme 
for biopolyester synthesis. Curr. Res. Biotechnol.  4, 87–101. doi: 10.1016/j.
crbiot.2022.01.002
Net, S., Delmont, A., Sempéré, R., Paluselli, A., and Ouddane, B. (2015). Reliable 
quantification of phthalates in environmental matrices (air, water, sludge, sediment 
and soil): a review. Sci. Total Environ.  515-516, 162–180. doi: 10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2015.02.013
Nishioka, T., Iwata, M., Imaoka, T., Mutoh, M., Egashira, Y ., Nishiyama, T., et al. 
(2006). A mono-2-ethylhexyl phthalate hydrolase from a Gordonia sp. that is able 
to dissimilate di-2-ethylhexyl phthalate. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72, 2394–2399. 
doi: 10.1128/AEM.72.4.2394-2399.2006
Omay, D., and Guvenilir, Y . (2013). Synthesis and characterization of poly(d,l-
lactic acid) via enzymatic ring opening polymerization by using free and 
immobilized lipase. Biocatal. Biotransformation  31, 132–140. doi: 
10.3109/10242422.2013.795148
Othman, S. H. (2014). Bio-nanocomposite materials for food packaging 
applications: types of biopolymer and nano-sized filler. Agric. Agric. Sci. Proc. 2, 
296–303. doi: 10.1016/j.aaspro.2014.11.042
Palm, G. J., Reisky, L., Böttcher, D., Müller, H., Michels, E. A. P ., 
Walczak, M. C., et al. (2019). Structure of the plastic-degrading Ideonella 
sakaiensis  MHETase bound to a substrate. Nat. Commun. 10:1717. doi: 10.1038/
s41467-019-09326-3
Pang, J., Zheng, M., Sun, R., Wang, A., Wang, X., and Zhang, T. (2016). Synthesis 
of ethylene glycol and terephthalic acid from biomass for producing PET. Green 
Chem. 18, 342–359. doi: 10.1039/C5GC01771H
Pellis, A., Haernvall, K., Pichler, C. M., Ghazaryan, G., Breinbauer, R., and 
Guebitz, G. M. (2016). Enzymatic hydrolysis of poly(ethylene furanoate). J. 
Biotechnol. 235, 47–53. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2016.02.006
Peñas, M. I., Pérez-Camargo, R. A., Hernández, R., and Müller, A. J. (2022). A 
review on current strategies for the modulation of thermomechanical, barrier, and 
biodegradation properties of poly (butylene succinate) (PBS) and its random 
copolymers. Polymers 14:1025. doi: 10.3390/polym14051025
Pivsa-Art, W ., Pavasupree, S., Narongchai, O., Insuan, U., Jailak, P ., and 
Pivsa-Art, S. (2011). Preparation of polymer blends between poly (l-lactic acid), poly 
(butylene succinate-co-adipate) and poly (butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) for 
blow film industrial application. Energy Proced.  9, 581–588. doi: 10.1016/j.
egypro.2011.09.068
Pyo, S.-H., Park, J. H., Srebny, V ., and Hatti-Kaul, R. (2020). A sustainable 
synthetic route for biobased 6-hydroxyhexanoic acid, adipic acid and ε-caprolactone 
by integrating bio-and chemical catalysis. Green Chem. 22, 4450–4455. doi: 10.1039/
D0GC01454K
Qiao, Y ., Hu, R., Chen, D., Wang, L., Wang, Z., Yu, H., et al. (2022). Fluorescence-
activated droplet sorting of PET degrading microorganisms. J. Hazard. Mater. 
424:127417. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2021.127417
Qin, M., Chen, C., Song, B., Shen, M., Cao, W ., Y ang, H., et al. (2021). A 
review of biodegradable plastics to biodegradable microplastics: another 
ecological threat to soil environments? J. Clean. Prod.  312:127816. doi: 10.1016/j.
jclepro.2021.127816
Qiu, J., Zhang, Y ., Shi, Y ., Jiang, J., Wu, S., Li, L., et al. (2020). Identification and 
characterization of a novel phthalate-degrading hydrolase from a soil metagenomic 
library. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 190:110148. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2019.110148
Ragaert, K., Delva, L., and Van Geem, K. (2017). Mechanical and chemical 
recycling of solid plastic waste. Waste Manag.  69, 24–58. doi: 10.1016/j.
wasman.2017.07.044
Rahmayetty, W ., Whulanza, Y ., Sukirno, , Rahman, S. F ., Suyono, E. A., Y ohda, M., 
et al. (2018). Use of Candida rugosa lipase as a biocatalyst for L-lactide ring-opening 
polymerization and polylactic acid production. Biocatal. Agric. Biotechnol.  16, 
683–691. doi: 10.1016/j.bcab.2018.09.015
Rajagopalan, S., Wang, C., Yu, K., Kuzin, A. P ., Richter, F ., Lew, S., et al. (2014). 
Design of activated serine–containing catalytic triads with atomic-level accuracy. 
Nat. Chem. Biol. 10, 386–391. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.1498
Redondo-Hasselerharm, P . E., Gort, G., Peeters, E., and Koelmans, A. A. (2020). 
Nano-and microplastics affect the composition of freshwater benthic communities 
in the long term. Sci. Adv. 6:eaay4054. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aay4054
Rehm, B. H. A. (2003). Polyester synthases: natural catalysts for plastics. Biochem. 
J. 376, 15–33. doi: 10.1042/bj20031254
Ren, L., Wang, Y ., Ge, J., Lu, D., and Liu, Z. (2015). Enzymatic synthesis of high-
molecular-weight poly(butylene succinate) and its copolymers. Macromol. Chem. 
Phys. 216, 636–640. doi: 10.1002/macp.201400550
Rosato, A., Romano, A., Totaro, G., Celli, A., Fava, F ., Zanaroli, G., et al. (2022). 
Enzymatic degradation of the most common aliphatic bio-polyesters and evaluation 
of the mechanisms involved: an extended study. Polymers 14:1850. doi: 10.3390/
polym14091850
Rosli, N. A., Karamanlioglu, M., Kargarzadeh, H., and Ahmad, I. (2021). 
Comprehensive exploration of natural degradation of poly (lactic acid) blends in 
various degradation media: a review. Int. J. Biol. Macromol.  187, 732–741. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.07.196
Rube, H. T., Rastogi, C., Feng, S., Kribelbauer, J. F ., Li, A., Becerra, B., et al. (2022). 
Prediction of protein–ligand binding affinity from sequencing data with 
interpretable machine learning. Nat. Biotechnol. 40, 1520–1527. doi: 10.1038/
s41587-022-01307-0
Sagong, H. Y ., Son, H. F ., Choi, S. Y ., Lee, S. Y ., and Kim, K. J. (2018). Structural 
insights into polyhydroxyalkanoates biosynthesis. Trends Biochem. Sci. 43, 790–805. 
doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2018.08.005
Sala, D., Del Alamo, D., Mchaourab, H. S., and Meiler, J. (2022). Modeling of 
protein conformational changes with Rosetta guided by limited experimental data. 
Structure 30, 1157–1168.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.str.2022.04.013
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 25 frontiersin.org
Sander, M., Kohler, H. P . E., and McNeill, K. (2019). Assessing the environmental 
transformation of nanoplastic through 13C-labelled polymers. Nat. Nanotechnol. 14, 
301–303. doi: 10.1038/s41565-019-0420-3
Scherer, T. M., Fuller, R. C., Goodwin, S., and Lenz, R. W . (2000). Enzymatic 
hydrolysis of oligomeric models of poly-3-hydroxybutyrate. Biomacromolecules 1, 
577–583. doi: 10.1021/bm000012c
Scherer, T. M., Fuller, R. C., Lenz, R. W ., and Goodwin, S. (1999). Production, 
purification and activity of an extracellular depolymerase from Aspergillus 
fumigatus. J. Environ. Polym. Degrad. 7, 117–125. doi: 10.1023/A:1022881204565
Service, R. F . (2021). Hunt for renewable plastics clears a hurdle. Science 371:873. 
doi: 10.1126/science.371.6532.873
Shinomiya, M., Iwata, T., Kasuya, K., and Doi, Y . (1997). Cloning of the gene for 
poly (3-hydroxybutyric acid) depolymerase of Comamonas testosteroni  and 
functional analysis of its substrate-binding domain. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 154, 
89–94. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.1997.tb12628.x
Shinozaki, Y ., Morita, T., Cao, X., Y oshida, S., Koitabashi, M., Watanabe, T., et al. 
(2013). Biodegradable plastic-degrading enzyme from Pseudozyma antarctica: 
cloning, sequencing, and characterization. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.  97, 
2951–2959. doi: 10.1007/s00253-012-4188-8
Silva, C., Da, S., Silva, N., Matamá, T., Araújo, R., Martins, M., et al. (2011). 
Engineered Thermobifida fusca  cutinase with increased activity on polyester 
substrates. Biotechnol. J. 6, 1230–1239. doi: 10.1002/biot.201000391
Singh, N., Dalal, V ., Mahto, J. K., and Kumar, P . (2017). Biodegradation of phthalic 
acid esters (PAEs) and in silico structural characterization of mono-2-ethylhexyl 
phthalate (MEHP) hydrolase on the basis of close structural homolog. J. Hazard. 
Mater. 338, 11–22. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2017.04.055
Song, Y ., Matsumoto, K., Y amada, M., Gohda, A., Brigham, C. J., Sinskey, A. J., 
et al. (2012). Engineered Corynebacterium glutamicum  as an endotoxin-free 
platform strain for lactate-based polyester production. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
93, 1917–1925. doi: 10.1007/s00253-011-3718-0
Stubbe, J., and Tian, J. (2003). Polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) homeostasis: the role 
of the PHA synthase. Nat. Prod. Rep. 20, 445–457. doi: 10.1039/B209687K
Stubbins, A., Law, K. L., Muñoz, S. E., Bianchi, T. S., and Zhu, L. (2021). Plastics 
in the earth system. Science 373, 51–55. doi: 10.1126/science.abb0354
Sugihara, S., Toshima, K., and Matsumura, S. (2006). New strategy for enzymatic 
synthesis of high-molecular-weight poly(butylene succinate) via cyclic oligomers. 
Macromol. Rapid Commun. 27, 203–207. doi: 10.1002/marc.200500723
Sun, J., Wu, X., and Gan, J. (2015). Uptake and metabolism of phthalate esters 
by edible plants. Environ. Sci. Technol.  49, 8471–8478. doi: 10.1021/acs.
est.5b01233
Suzuki, Y ., Ohura, T., Kasuya, K., Toshima, K., Doi, Y ., and Matsumura, S. (2000). 
Enzyme-catalyzed ring-opening polymerization of β-butyrolactone using PHB 
depolymerase. Chem. Lett. 29, 318–319. doi: 10.1246/cl.2000.318
Takaku, H., Kimoto, A., Kodaira, S., Nashimoto, M., and Takagi, M. (2006). 
Isolation of a gram-positive poly (3-hydroxybutyrate)(PHB)-degrading bacterium 
from compost, and cloning and characterization of a gene encoding PHB 
depolymerase of Bacillus megaterium  N-18-25-9. FEMS Microbiol. Lett.  264, 
152–159. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2006.00448.x
Tang, X. Z., Kumar, P ., Alavi, S., and Sandeep, K. P . (2012). Recent advances in 
biopolymers and biopolymer-based nanocomposites for food packaging materials. 
Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 52, 426–442. doi: 10.1080/10408398.2010.500508
Tarazona, N. A., Machatschek, R., and Lendlein, A. (2020). Influence of 
depolymerases and lipases on the degradation of polyhydroxyalkanoates determined 
in langmuir degradation studies. Adv. Mater. Interfaces 7:2000872. doi: 10.1002/
admi.202000872
Tawiah, B., Yu, B., and Fei, B. (2018). Advances in flame retardant poly (lactic 
acid). Polymers 10:876. doi: 10.3390/polym10080876
Thomas, Z. M., Arno, S., Frederick, N. T., Rebekka, B., Dagmar, W ., Michael, W ., 
et al. (2018). Biodegradation of synthetic polymers in soils: tracking carbon into CO2 
and microbial biomass. Sci. Adv. 4:eaas9024. doi: 10.1126/sciadv.aas902
Tian, J., Sinskey, A. J., and Stubbe, J. (2005). Detection of intermediates from the 
polymerization reaction catalyzed by a D302A mutant of class III polyhydroxyalkanoate 
(PHA) synthase. Biochemistry 44, 1495–1503. doi: 10.1021/bi047734z
Tian, M., Zhang, X., Liu, L., Martin, F . L., Wang, H., Zhang, J., et al. (2019). 
Phthalate side-chain structures and hydrolysis metabolism associated with 
steroidogenic effects in MLTC-1 Leydig cells. Toxicol. Lett. 308, 56–64. doi: 
10.1016/j.toxlet.2019.03.013
Tong, X., Ma, Y ., and Li, Y . (2010). Biomass into chemicals: conversion of sugars 
to furan derivatives by catalytic processes. Appl. Catal. A. 385, 1–13. doi: 10.1016/j.
apcata.2010.06.049
Tsuge, T., Hyakutake, M., and Mizuno, K. (2015). Class IV polyhydroxyalkanoate 
(PHA) synthases and PHA-producing Bacillus. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 99, 
6231–6240. doi: 10.1007/s00253-015-6777-9
Uppenberg, J., Hansen, M. T., Patkar, S., and Jones, T. A. (1994). The sequence, 
crystal structure determination and refinement of two crystal forms of lipase B from 
Candida antarctica. Structure 2, 293–308. doi: 10.1016/S0969-2126(00)00031-9
Uyama, H., and Kobayashi, S. (1993). Enzymatic ring-opening polymerization of 
lactones catalyzed by lipase. Chem. Lett. 22, 1149–1150. doi: 10.1246/cl.1993.1149
Varadi, M., Anyango, S., Deshpande, M., Nair, S., Natassia, C., Y ordanova, G., et al. 
(2022). AlphaFold protein structure database: massively expanding the structural 
coverage of protein-sequence space with high-accuracy models. Nucleic Acids Res. 
50, D439–D444. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkab1061
Verschoor, J. A., Kusumawardhani, H., Ram, A. F . J., and de Winde, J. H. (2022). 
Toward microbial recycling and upcycling of plastics: prospects and challenges. 
Front. Microbiol. 13:821629. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2022.821629
Viljakainen, V . R., and Hug, L. A. (2021). New approaches for the characterization 
of plastic-associated microbial communities and the discovery of plastic-degrading 
microorganisms and enzymes. Comput. Struct. Biotechnol. J. 19, 6191–6200. doi: 
10.1016/j.csbj.2021.11.023
Vroman, I., and Tighzert, L. (2009). Biodegradable polymers. Materials 2, 
307–344. doi: 10.3390/ma2020307
Wang, G., Dong, Y ., Hao, X., Zhang, L., and Sun, R. (2022). Bio-based poly 
(butylene furandicarboxylate-co-butylene 2, 5-thiophenedicarboxylate): synthesis, 
thermal properties, crystallization properties and mechanical properties. Polym. 
Bull., 1–23. doi: 10.1007/s00289-022-04330-y
Wang, G., Jiang, M., Zhang, Q., Wang, R., Liang, Q., and Zhou, G. (2019). New 
bio-based copolyesters derived from 1, 4-butanediol, terephthalic acid and 
2,5-thiophenedicarboxylic acid: synthesis, crystallization behavior, thermal and 
mechanical properties. Polym. Test.  75, 213–219. doi: 10.1016/j.
polymertesting.2019.02.020
Webb, H. K., Arnott, J., Crawford, R. J., and Ivanova, E. P . (2012). Plastic 
degradation and its environmental implications with special reference to 
poly(ethylene terephthalate). Polymers 5, 1–18. doi: 10.3390/polym5010001
Wei, R., and Zimmermann, W . (2017). Microbial enzymes for the recycling of 
recalcitrant petroleum-based plastics: how far are we? Microb. Biotechnol. 10, 
1308–1322. doi: 10.1111/1751-7915.12710
Weinberger, S., Canadell, J., Quartinello, F ., Y eniad, B., Arias, A., Pellis, A., et al. 
(2017). Enzymatic degradation of poly(ethylene 2,5-furanoate) powders and 
amorphous films. Catalysts 7:318. doi: 10.3390/catal7110318
Whangsuk, W ., Sungkeeree, P ., Nakasiri, M., Thiengmag, S., Mongkolsuk, S., and 
Loprasert, S. (2015). Two endocrine disrupting dibutyl phthalate degrading esterases 
and their compensatory gene expression in Sphingobium sp. SM42. Int. Biodeterior. 
Biodegrad. 99, 45–54. doi: 10.1016/j.ibiod.2014.12.006
Wijaya, H. W ., Kojima, T., Hara, T., Ichikuni, N., and Shimazu, S. (2017). Synthesis 
of 1,5-pentanediol by hydrogenolysis of furfuryl alcohol over Ni-Y2O3 composite 
catalyst. ChemCatChem 9, 2869–2874. doi: 10.1002/cctc.201700066
Williams, D. F . (1981). Enzymic hydrolysis of polylactic acid. Eng. Med. 10, 5–7. 
doi: 10.1243/EMED_JOUR_1981_010_00
Wu, J., Liao, X., Yu, F ., Wei, Z., and Y ang, L. (2013). Cloning of a dibutyl phthalate 
hydrolase gene from Acinetobacter sp. strain M673 and functional analysis of its 
expression product in Escherichia coli. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 97, 2483–2491. 
doi: 10.1007/s00253-012-4232-8
Wu, S., Liu, Q., Tan, H., Zhang, F ., and Yin, H. (2020). A novel 
2,5-furandicarboxylic acid biosynthesis route from biomass-derived 
5-hydroxymethylfurfural based on the consecutive enzyme reactions. Appl. 
Biochem. Biotechnol. 191, 1470–1482. doi: 10.1007/s12010-020-03290-1
Wu, S., Nan, F ., Jiang, J., Qiu, J., Zhang, Y ., Qiao, B., et al. (2019). Molecular 
cloning, expression and characterization of a novel feruloyl esterase from a soil 
metagenomic library with phthalate-degrading activity. Biotechnol. Lett.  41, 
995–1006. doi: 10.1007/s10529-019-02693-3
Xiang, Q., Ren, Y ., and Wang, X. (2017). New advances in the biodegradation of 
poly(lactic) acid. Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad.  117, 215–223. doi: 10.1016/j.
ibiod.2017.01.010
Xie, W ., Li, J., Chen, D., and Wang, P . G. (1997). Ring-opening polymerization of 
β-butyrolactone by thermophilic lipases. Macromolecules 30, 6997–6998. doi: 
10.1021/ma970722j
Xu, J., and Guo, B.-H. (2010). Poly (butylene succinate) and its copolymers: 
research, development and industrialization. Biotechnol. J. 5, 1149–1163. doi: 
10.1002/biot.201000136
Xu, Y ., Huang, H., Lu, H., Wu, M., Lin, M., Zhang, C., et al. (2021a). Characterization 
of an Aspergillus niger for efficient fatty acid ethyl ester synthesis in aqueous phase and 
the molecular mechanism. Front. Microbiol. 12:820380. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.820380
Xu, Y ., Liu, X., Zhao, J., Huang, H., Wu, M., Li, X., et al. (2021b). An efficient 
phthalate ester-degrading Bacillus subtilis: degradation kinetics, metabolic pathway, 
and catalytic mechanism of the key enzyme. Environ. Pollut. 273:116461. doi: 
10.1016/j.envpol.2021.116461
Lai et al. 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1113705
Frontiers in Microbiology 26 frontiersin.org
Xu, Y ., Minhazul, K. A., Wang, X., Liu, X., Li, X., Meng, Q., et al. (2020). 
Biodegradation of phthalate esters by Paracoccus kondratievae  BJQ0001 isolated 
from Jiuqu (Baijiu fermentation starter) and identification of the ester bond 
hydrolysis enzyme. Environ. Pollut.  263:114506. doi: 10.1016/j.
envpol.2020.114506
Xu, Y ., W u, M., Niu, J., Lin, M., Zhu, H., W ang, K., et al. (2023). Characteristics 
and correlation of the microbial communities and flavor compounds during the first 
three rounds of fermentation in Chinese sauce-flavor Baijiu. Foods 12:207. doi: 
10.3390/foods12010207
Y adav, N., Nain, L., and Khare, S. K. (2021). Studies on the degradation and 
characterization of a novel metal-free polylactic acid synthesized via lipase-catalyzed 
polymerization: a step towards curing the environmental plastic issue. Environ. 
Technol. Innovat. 24:101845. doi: 10.1016/j.eti.2021.101845
Y oshida, S., Hiraga, K., Takehana, T., Taniguchi, I., Y amaji, H., Maeda, Y ., et al. 
(2016). A bacterium that degrades and assimilates poly(ethylene terephthalate). 
Science 351, 1196–1199. doi: 10.1126/science.aad6359
Yu, S. S., Yu, S. C., Han, W ., Wang, H., Zheng, B., and Feng, Y . (2010). A novel 
thermophilic lipase from Fervidobacterium nodosum Rt17-B1 representing a new 
subfamily of bacterial lipases. J. Mol. Catal. B Enzym.  66, 81–89. doi: 10.1016/j.
molcatb.2010.03.007
Zaaba, N. F ., and Jaafar, M. (2020). A review on degradation mechanisms of 
polylactic acid: hydrolytic, photodegradative, microbial, and enzymatic degradation. 
Polym. Eng. Sci. 60, 2061–2075. doi: 10.1002/pen.25511
Zadjelovic, V ., Chhun, A., Quareshy, M., Silvano, E., Hernandez-Fernaud, J. R., 
Aguilo-Ferretjans, M. M., et al. (2020). Beyond oil degradation: enzymatic potential 
of Alcanivorax to degrade natural and synthetic polyesters. Environ. Microbiol. 22, 
1356–1369. doi: 10.1111/1462-2920.14947
Zhang, Q., Nurhayati, C. C. L., Nagarajan, D., Chang, J. S., Hu, J., et al. (2017). 
Carbon capture and utilization of fermentation CO2: Integrated ethanol 
fermentation and succinic acid production as an efficient platform. Appl. Energy 206, 
364–371. doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.08.193
Zhang, X. Y ., Fan, X., Qiu, Y . J., Li, C. Y ., Xing, S., Zheng, Y . T., et al. (2014). Newly 
identified thermostable esterase from Sulfobacillus acidophilus: properties and 
performance in phthalate ester degradation. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.  80, 
6870–6878. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02072-14
Zhao, J., Xu, Y ., Lu, H., Zhao, D., Zheng, J., Lin, M., et al. (2023). Molecular 
mechanism of LIP05 derived from Monascus purpureus YJX-8 for synthesizing fatty 
acid ethyl esters under aqueous phase. Front. Microbiol. 14:1107104. doi: 10.3389/
fmicb.2022.1107104
Zheng, C., Zhu, G., Shi, Y ., Liu, L.-Z., Ren, M., Zhang, W ., et al.  
(2021). Crystallization, structures and properties of biodegradable poly 
(butylene succinate-co-butylene terephthalate) with a symmetric composition. 
Mater. Chem. Phys.  260:124183. doi: 10.1016/j.matchemphys.2020.  
124183
Zhu, B., Wang, D., and Wei, N. (2022). Enzyme discovery and engineering for sustainable 
plastic recycling. Trends Biotechnol. 40, 22–37. doi: 10.1016/j.tibtech.2021.02.008