Citation: Barclay, A.; Acharya, K.R.
Engineering Plastic Eating Enzymes
Using Structural Biology. Biomolecules
2023, 13, 1407. https://doi.org/
10.3390/biom13091407
Academic Editors: C. Martin
Lawrence and Steven R. Van Doren
Received: 1 September 2023
Revised: 14 September 2023
Accepted: 15 September 2023
Published: 19 September 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
biomolecules
Review
Engineering Plastic Eating Enzymes Using Structural Biology
Amelia Barclay
 and K. Ravi Acharya *
Department of Life Sciences, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath BA2 7AY, UK;
ameliabarclay26@gmail.com
* Correspondence: bsskra@bath.ac.uk; Tel.: +44-1225-386238
Abstract: Plastic pollution has emerged as a signiﬁcant environmental concern in recent years and
has prompted the exploration of innovative biotechnological solutions to mitigate plastic’s negative
impact. The discovery of enzymes capable of degrading speciﬁc types of plastics holds promise
as a potential solution. However, challenges with efﬁciency, industrial scalability, and the diverse
range of the plastic waste in question, have hindered their widespread application. Structural biology
provides valuable insights into the intricate interactions between enzymes and plastic materials
at an atomic level, and a deeper understanding of their underlying mechanisms is essential to
harness their potential to address the mounting plastic waste crisis. This review article examines the
current biochemical and biophysical methods that may facilitate the development of enzymes capable
of degrading polyethylene terephthalate (PET), one of the most extensively used plastics. It also
discusses the challenges that must be addressed before substantial advancements can be achieved in
using these enzymes as a solution to the plastic pollution problem.
Keywords: plastics; polyethylene terephthalate (PET); PETase; protein engineering; structural biology;
hydrophobicity; crystallinity; thermostability; industrial challenges
1. Introduction
Plastics have become an integral part of modern life due to their versatility and low
production costs. Conventional plastics are non-biodegradable which makes them a useful,
durable material; however, in recent years the amount of plastic waste has become a
mounting environmental concern. Their prolonged existence in the environment, notably
marine ecosystems, is disrupting the delicate balance of the natural world and more recently
the potential threat of microplastics to human health has been identiﬁed [1].
Plastics are polymers composed of repeating units of small organic molecules with
the majority manufactured from non-renewable fossil fuels. Their persistence within
the environment is primarily attributed to their hydrophobic properties and the absence
of hydrolysable functional groups in numerous plastics, including polyethylene (PE),
polystyrene (PS) and polyvinyl chloride (PVC). The polymer polyethylene terephthalate
(PET) is one of the most prevalent plastics and has become a major contributor to plastic
pollution; however, it has a susceptibility to degradation as it contains hydrolysable ester
bonds [2].
Evidence that enzymes can degrade polyesters dates back more than four decades [3].
Since then, researchers have identiﬁed various organisms including bacteria, fungi, and
insects capable of degrading speciﬁc plastics. Esterases have emerged as promising candi-
dates for plastic degradation. Among these, cutinases stand out as a subtype of esterase
capable of cleaving the ester bonds within the cutin polymer, a constituent of plant waxy
cuticles. Cutin is a complex polyester composed of ester bonds formed between hydroxy
and hydroxyepoxy fatty acids which give it a signiﬁcant hydrophobic nature [4]. Conse-
quently, it is not surprising that cutinases are often recognised as the most efﬁcient for
plastic degradation, possessing a natural afﬁnity for hydrophobic plastics and an ability
to hydrolyse the ester bonds found in PET. Through detailed structural investigations, it
Biomolecules 2023, 13, 1407. https://doi.org/10.3390/biom13091407 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/biomolecules
Biomolecules 2023, 13, 1407 2 of 11
is understood that cutinases belong to the α/β hydrolases superfamily and possess the
Ser-Asp-His catalytic triad. The potential interactions between the enzymes and plastic
substrates have also been identiﬁed and this knowledge leveraged to engineer improved
variants of cutinases with enhanced plastic degradation capabilities [5]. However, these
enzymes still face challenges in terms of efﬁciency, largely attributed to the presence of
repeating aromatic terephthalate units that elevate the crystallinity of PET. As a result, the
degradation process by these enzymes is slow and often incomplete.
In 2016, a research team isolated the bacterium Ideonella sakaiensis from a recycling
plant which secretes two enzymes capable of degrading PET [6]. The ﬁrst enzyme, called
PETase, breaks down PET into mono (2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalic acid (MHET). This is
then broken down further by MHETase, which produces terephthalate (TPA) and ethylene
glycol (EG) and these byproducts can then be metabolised by other bacteria as a carbon
source (Figure 1). This discovery yielded much excitement due to the fact this enzyme could
survive on only PET as a food source indicating the bacterium has speciﬁcally evolved to
the breakdown PET rather than just re-directing its existing cutinise activity.
Biomolecules 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 11 
 
ability to hydrolyse the ester bonds found in  PET. Through detailed structural investiga-
tions, it is understood that cutinases belong to the α/β hydrolases superfamily and possess 
the Ser-Asp-His catalytic triad. The potential interactions between the enzymes and plas-
tic substrates have also been identi ﬁed and this knowledge leveraged to engineer im-
proved variants of cutinases with enhanced plastic degradation capabilities [5]. However, 
these enzymes still face challenges in terms of eﬃciency, largely attributed to the presence 
of repeating aromatic terephthalate units that elevate the crystallinity of PET. As a result, 
the degradation process by these enzymes is slow and often incomplete. 
In 2016, a research team isolated the bacterium Ideonella sakaiensis from a recycling 
plant which secretes two enzymes capable of degrading PET [6]. The ﬁrst enzyme, called 
PETase, breaks down PET into mono (2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalic acid (MHET). This is 
then broken down further by MHETase, which produces terephthalate (TPA) and ethylene 
glycol (EG) and these byproducts can then be  metabolised by other bacteria as a carbon 
source (Figure 1). This discovery yielded much excitement due to the fact this enzyme 
could survive on only PET as a food source indicating the bacterium has speci ﬁcally 
evolved to the breakdown PET rather than just re-directing its existing cutinise activity. 
 
Figure 1. Sequential action of PETase and MHETase, isolated from I. sakaiensis, that degrade PET 
into products for metabolism. PET (polyethylene terephthalate), MHET (mono (2-hydroxyethyl) ter-
ephthalic acid), terephthalate (TPA) and EG (ethylene glycol). Own ﬁgure created using Bioren-
der.com (accessed 18 April 2023) and 3D Protein Imaging software [7] (accessed 20 April 2023) using 
input from the Protein Data Bank (PDB). The PDB codes used are: (6EQD—PETase) and (6QZ1—
MHETase). 
The excitement surrounding the degradation of PET through the subsequent actions 
of PETase and MHETase has resulted in a su rge of research publications detailing the 
three-dimensional crystal structures of these enzymes, oﬀering valuable insights into their 
catalytic mechanisms. Similar to the cutinases, PETase employs a tunnel-shaped active site 
capable of accommodating PET. The catalytic triad of the enzyme has been identiﬁed [8], 
prompting further investigations into enhancing its catalytic e ﬃciency [9] and thermal 
stability [10] using rational design and directed evolution. The structural knowledge 
gained from these studies has guided the sele ction of mutations aimed at improving en-
zyme-substrate interactions thereby leading to enhanced PET degradation capabilities. 
MHETase, the second enzyme in the pair responsible for PET degradation in I. sa-
kaiensis, shares an α/β-hydrolase fold with PETase. However, crystal structures of 
MHETase bound to a non-hydrolysable substrate have revealed an additional lid domain 
that confers substrate speciﬁcity, reminiscent of a feruloyl esterase. Despite this, no resi-
dues within the binding pocket are conserv ed with feruloyl esterases, resulting in 
MHETase possessing a distinctive binding pocket tailored to accommodate the MHET 
Figure 1. Sequential action of PETase and MHETase, isolated from I. sakaiensis, that degrade PET
into products for metabolism. PET (polyethylene terephthalate), MHET (mono (2-hydroxyethyl)
terephthalic acid), terephthalate (TPA) and EG (ethylene glycol). Own ﬁgure created using Biorender.
com (accessed 18 April 2023) and 3D Protein Imaging software [7] (accessed 20 April 2023) using input
from the Protein Data Bank (PDB). The PDB codes used are: (6EQD—PETase) and (6QZ1—MHETase).
The excitement surrounding the degradation of PET through the subsequent actions
of PETase and MHETase has resulted in a surge of research publications detailing the
three-dimensional crystal structures of these enzymes, offering valuable insights into their
catalytic mechanisms. Similar to the cutinases, PETase employs a tunnel-shaped active site
capable of accommodating PET. The catalytic triad of the enzyme has been identiﬁed [8],
prompting further investigations into enhancing its catalytic efﬁciency [ 9] and thermal
stability [10] using rational design and directed evolution. The structural knowledge
gained from these studies has guided the selection of mutations aimed at improving
enzyme-substrate interactions thereby leading to enhanced PET degradation capabilities.
MHETase, the second enzyme in the pair responsible for PET degradation in I. sakaien-
sis, shares an α/β-hydrolase fold with PETase. However, crystal structures of MHETase
bound to a non-hydrolysable substrate have revealed an additional lid domain that confers
substrate speciﬁcity, reminiscent of a feruloyl esterase. Despite this, no residues within the
binding pocket are conserved with feruloyl esterases, resulting in MHETase possessing
a distinctive binding pocket tailored to accommodate the MHET substrate [ 11]. There
is strong anticipation that guided structural modiﬁcations to MHETase will complement
PETase, culminating in the creation of a deployable plastic-degrading production line.
Biomolecules 2023, 13, 1407 3 of 11
The escalating issue of plastic waste has reached a magnitude where traditional
methods of plastic waste management, including incineration and landﬁlling, can no longer
effectively address the problem. The concept of a circular economy has been perpetuated
by governments and campaigners which has motivated scientists to innovate sustainable
solutions to plastic management. Among these, enzyme-enabled approaches provide
a promising, more sustainable avenue by breaking down plastics into their constituent
molecules, which can then be recycled or degraded further through natural processes.
This review will focus on the structural understanding of PETase and how this has led to
advancements in engineering this enzyme to enhance its catalytic activity, speciﬁcity, and
stability.
2. Molecular Features of Plastic-Degrading Enzymes
2.1. The PETase Catalytic Mechanism
2.1.1. Comparison of PETase with the Homologous Cutinases
Extensive research has been conducted to investigate the molecular mechanisms of
these enzymes from I. sakaiensis. One study reported a crystal structure of PETase at an
unprecedented high resolution of 0.92 Å which allowed for extensive detailed structural
comparisons between PETase and the cutinases which share considerable sequence ho-
mology [8]. PETase retains the α/β-hydrolase structural fold present in many hydrolase
enzymes, consisting of eight β-strands and six α helices. Like cutinases, PETase has a
long substrate binding cleft (~40 Å) that is mainly hydrophobic to accommodate the PET
polymer. However, a key difference is the notable widening of the substrate binding cleft in
PETase compared to cutinases (Figure 2). Austin et al. [8] hypothesized that this widening
was an evolutionary adaptation of PETase to accommodate the semi-aromatic and more
crystalline PET substrate. To test this hypothesis, a Ser238Phe mutant of PETase was cre-
ated which surprisingly increased the activity of the enzyme despite the mutant crystal
structure reverting back to having a narrower substrate binding cleft. This research ﬁrstly
highlighted the limitations to our knowledge on how structure corresponds to activity.
Secondly, it suggested that additional protein engineering may be able to further increase
PETase activity for optimal degradation of plastic waste.
Biomolecules 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 11 
 
substrate [11]. There is strong antici pation that guided structural modi ﬁcations to 
MHETase will complement PETase, culminatin g in the creation of a deployable plastic-
degrading production line. 
The escalating issue of plastic waste ha s reached a magnitude where traditional 
methods of plastic waste management , including incineration and land ﬁlling, can no 
longer eﬀectively address the problem. The concept of a circular economy has been per-
petuated by governments and campaigners whic h has motivated scientists to innovate 
sustainable solutions to plastic management. Among these, enzyme-enabled approaches 
provide a promising, more sustainable avenue by breaking down plastics into their con-
stituent molecules, which can then be recy cled or degraded further through natural pro-
cesses. This review will focus on the structural understanding of PETase and how this has 
led to advancements in engineering this enzyme to enhance its catalytic activity, speciﬁc-
ity, and stability. 
2. Molecular Features of Plastic-Degrading Enzymes 
2.1. The PETase Catalytic Mechanism 
2.1.1. Comparison of PETase with the Homologous Cutinases 
Extensive research has been conducted to investigate the molecular mechanisms of 
these enzymes from I. sakaiensis. One study reported a crystal structure of PETase at an 
unprecedented high resolution of 0.92 Å whic h allowed for extensive detailed structural 
comparisons between PETase and the cutinase s which share considerable sequence ho-
mology [8]. PETase retains the α/β-hydrolase structural fold present in many hydrolase 
enzymes, consisting of eight β-strands and six α helices. Like cutinases, PETase has a long 
substrate binding cleft (~40 Å) that is mainly hydrophobic to accommodate the PET poly-
mer. However, a key di ﬀerence is the notable widening of the substrate binding cleft in 
PETase compared to cutinases (Figure 2). Austin et al. [8] hypothesized that this widening 
was an evolutionary adaptation of PETase to accommodate the semi-aromatic and more 
crystalline PET substrate. To test this hypothesis, a Ser238Phe mutant of PETase was cre-
ated which surprisingly increased the activity  of the enzyme despite  the mutant crystal 
structure reverting back to having a narrower substrate binding cleft. This research ﬁrstly 
highlighted the limitations to our knowledge on how structure corresponds to activity. 
Secondly, it suggested that additional protein engineering may be able to further increase 
PETase activity for optimal degradation of plastic waste. 
 
Figure 2. Comparison of substrate binding cleft between  Cutinase (orange) and PET ase (blue) in 
relation to overall structure which contains the α/β-hydrolase structural fold. * Marks Ser238Phe 
Figure 2. Comparison of substrate binding cleft between Cutinase (orange) and PETase (blue) in
relation to overall structure which contains the α/β-hydrolase structural fold. * Marks Ser238Phe
mutation that caused narrowing of channel in PETase yet did not decrease enzyme activity. Figure
adapted from Austin et al. [8]. Figure created using PyMol. PDB codes used: (PETase: 6EQD, where
ﬁrst residue M is position 2 throughout the review) and (Cutinase: 4CG1).
Biomolecules 2023, 13, 1407 4 of 11
2.1.2. Efforts to Understand the Enzyme-Substrate Complex
Despite the technological advancements in structural biology over the last ﬁfty years,
capturing an enzyme-substrate complex, useful for analysing the catalytic mechanism,
is still challenging. Due to the rapid hydrolysis by PETase, many groups attempted
co-crystallization of PETase with various non-hydrolysable analogue of PET without
success [8,12] Others created PETase-trapping mutants [13] or inactive mutants [10], yet this
can disturb the delicate network of chemical and physical forces that create the enzyme’s
activity, thus hindering our understanding of true mechanistic features.
At the same time, the 21st century has witnessed the increasing application of compu-
tation in various scientiﬁc disciplines, including structural biology. While the emergence
of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) prediction tools, such as Alphafold2 and RoseTTAfold, has
been met with both anticipation and criticism for their accuracy [14], computation is widely
utilised in other areas, such as molecular docking which can model atomic-level interac-
tions between molecules. Important to note is that these simulations are based on rich
information obtained from experimentally determined structures in the world repository
of protein structures, the Protein Data Bank (PDB), which serves as the foundation for these
AI models.
To elucidate the catalytic mechanism of the PETase, a recent study performed molecular
docking simulations between the PETase and 2-HE(MHET)4, a molecule consisting of four
MHET units that represent PET [12]. The simulations identiﬁed two subsites for ligand
binding: Subsite I and Subsite II. Subsite I contain a catalytic triad consisting of Ser160,
His237, and Asp206, which is typical of a hydrolase reaction, also shared by cutinases,
where Ser160 serves as the nucleophilic residue that attacks the carbonyl carbon in the
PET ester bond. Surrounding this site is an oxyanion hole created by two nitrogen atoms
of residues Tyr87 and Met160, which stabilizes the tetrahedral intermediate. Subsite II is
responsible for binding the three MHET-repeats mainly through hydrophobic interactions
(Figure 3).
Biomolecules 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 11 
 
mutation that caused narrowing of channel in PETase yet did not decrease enzyme activity. Figure 
adapted from Austin et al. [8]. Figure created using PyMol. PDB codes used: (PETase: 6EQD, where 
ﬁrst residue M is position 2 throughout the review) and (Cutinase: 4CG1). 
2.1.2. Eﬀorts to Understand the Enzyme-Substrate Complex 
Despite the technological advancements in structural biology over the last ﬁfty years, 
capturing an enzyme-substrate complex, useful for analysing the catalytic mechanism, is 
still challenging. Due to the rapid hydrolysis by PETase, many groups attempted co-crys-
tallization of PETase with various non-hydrolysable analogue of PET without success 
[8,12] Others created PETase-trapping mutants [13] or inactive mutants [10], yet this can 
disturb the delicate network of chemical and ph ysical forces that create the enzyme’s ac-
tivity, thus hindering our understanding of true mechanistic features. 
At the same time, the 21st century has witnessed the increasing application of com-
putation in various scienti ﬁc disciplines, including structural biology. While the emer-
gence of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) prediction tools, such as Alphafold2 and RoseTTAfold, 
has been met with both anticipation and crit icism for their accuracy [14], computation is 
widely utilised in other areas, such as molecular docking which can model atomic-level 
interactions between molecules. Important to note is that these simulations are based on 
rich information obtained from experimentally determined structures in the world repos-
itory of protein structures, th e Protein Data Bank (PDB), wh ich serves as the foundation 
for these AI models. 
To elucidate the catalytic mechanism of the PETase, a recent study performed molec-
ular docking simulations between the PETase and 2-HE(MHET)4, a molecule consisting 
of four MHET units that represent PET [12]. The simulations identi ﬁed two subsites for 
ligand binding: Subsite I and Subsite II. Subsite I contain a catalytic triad consisting of 
Ser160, His237, and Asp206, which is typical of a hydrolase reaction, also shared by cu-
tinases, where Ser160 serves as the nucleophilic residue that a ttacks the carbonyl carbon 
in the PET ester bond. Surrounding this site is an oxyanion hole created by two nitrogen 
atoms of residues Tyr87 and Met160, which stabilizes the tetrahedral intermediate. Subsite 
II is responsible for binding the three MHET-repeats mainly through hydrophobic inter-
actions (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Summary of structural knowledge gleaned from X-ray crystallography and molecular 
docking simulations on the PETase, shown as grey in ﬁgure. Subsites I and Subsite II identi ﬁed by 
Joo et al. [12] are labelled in Red and Blue, respectively. Identi ﬁcation of Catalytic triad (pink), the 
Figure 3. Summary of structural knowledge gleaned from X-ray crystallography and molecular
docking simulations on the PETase, shown as grey in ﬁgure. Subsites I and Subsite II identiﬁed by
Joo et al. [12] are labelled in Red and Blue, respectively. Identiﬁcation of Catalytic triad (pink), the
oxyanion hole (cyan) and the wobbling W156 permitted by the S185 mutation (orange) identiﬁed
in the PETase. Different structural conformations of W156 were taken from Han et al. [13]. Figure
created using PyMol (PDB: 6EQD).
Biomolecules 2023, 13, 1407 5 of 11
2.1.3. Identiﬁcation of Unique Enzyme Feature—Wobbling Trp
A Trp185 residue can be located from the PETase crystal structure in Subsite I, proximal
to the catalytic triad [13]. This was expected as this Trp185 residue is strictly conserved
amongst homologous enzymes. However, in the PETase crystal structure, the researchers
found that Trp185 was not well ﬁxed within the structure, instead showing three dis-
tinct conformations (Figure 3). Comparison with several available homologous structures
showed that the Trp residue usually adopts a single conformation as a C conformer [15];
therefore, the multiple conformations of Trp185 within PETase may be a feature unique
to this enzyme. It is hypothesised that this “wobbling” of Trp185 may accommodate the
bulkier PET substrate, providing π-stacking forces to stabilize the semi-aromatic PET sub-
strate. Ser214 was identiﬁed as a unique residue in PETase, distinct from other homologous
structures which possess a histidine in an equivalent position. This indicates that Ser214 is
responsible for accommodating the range of conformations of Trp185, which the larger His
residue would not permit [16]. To test this, a Ser214His mutant was created, which consid-
erably reduced the activity of PETase but did not completely abrogate it. This suggests that
Trp185 “wobbling” is necessary for PET hydrolysis, but other factors within the enzyme
must also contribute, warranting further investigation.
2.2. Engineering the Enzyme to Enhance Efﬁciency
The structural investigations on PETase summarised above provide a comprehensive
understanding of how these newly discovered enzymes may break down PET. However,
in 2018, the United Nations estimated that annual global plastic production exceeded
400 million tonnes, with approximately 85% ending up in the landﬁll or unmanaged,
meaning that it was left as uncollected litter or disregarded in unregulated sites on land
or in water [17]. PETase represents the best-studied case of enzymatic degradation, yet
can this structural knowledge be used to deploy this and other enzymes to deal with the
ever-growing plastic waste that is accumulated each year?
2.2.1. Developing a Thermostable Enzyme to Enhance Efﬁciency
The application and scaling up of these enzymes have presented challenges due to
their relatively slow reaction rates compared to the large amounts of plastic that need to be
degraded on an industrial scale. However, it has been extensively documented that raising
the temperature to the PET glass transition temperature (>65 ◦C) reduces the crystallinity
of PET, allowing the enzymatic targeting of amorphous PET and thereby enhancing the
rate of the hydrolysis process [18]. Since PETase currently operates within a narrow pH
range [19] and is not optimal at the glass transition temperature [10], signiﬁcant research
efforts are currently focused on the formidable task of developing a highly thermally stable
PETase.
Rational engineering of these PET-degrading enzymes is being pursued with guidance
from their three-dimensional molecular structures. It has been established previously that
divalent ions have the capacity to increase the thermal stability of some hydrolases [ 20].
A comprehensive study identiﬁed a thermophilic cutinase from a leaf branch compost
metagenome, referred to as LCC, which outperformed other PET-degrading enzymes,
including PETase, with an optimal temperature of 65 ◦C. This presented an excellent
foundation for the study which went on to enhance the thermostability even further.
They identiﬁed a divalent metal binding site within the LCC and demonstrated that the
addition of calcium ions can stabilize the protein [10]. However, adding ions to reactions can
complicate puriﬁcation at an industrial scale. To avoid this issue, the divalent metal binding
site was replaced with a disulphide bridge by creating an Asp238Cys/Ser283Cys mutant.
This increased the thermal stability of the enzymes a Tm of 72 ◦C without depending on
the addition of calcium but resulted in a 28% decrease in activity. To address this reduction
in activity, molecular docking simulations were performed to identify sites for targeted
mutagenesis. Combinations of these mutations were experimentally validated, and the
resulting Phe243Ile/Asp238Cys/Ser283Cys (ICC) mutant was shown to restore catalytic
Biomolecules 2023, 13, 1407 6 of 11
activity to 122% of wild-type activity. A crystal structure of the ICC mutant reveals that
Ile243 is located near the substrate-binding tunnel. This suggests that the mutant’s increased
activity is due to an increased PET binding capacity [16]. The ICC PETase mutant is now
being used as a starting point for further studies aimed at generating higher thermostable
variants through directed evolution [ 21]. This raises an important point about how far
conscious structure-guided enzyme design can take us before we accept that directed
evolution may be a more cost-effective way to produce better PETase variants.
One exciting research effort is the discovery of new enzymes, particularly sourced for
naturally thermotolerant organisms. These enzymes not only further our understanding of
how to create thermostable variants but also provide a better starting point before making
structure-guided changes. In one study a total of 37 enzymes, originating from diverse phy-
logenetic groups, were identiﬁed [22]. These enzymes exhibited the capability to degrade
amorphous PET ﬁlm under conditions ranging from pH 4.5–9.0 and temperatures of up to
70 ◦C. Versatility within the enzymes may also prove useful as there are many different
industrial conditions for plastic management and environments with different pH condi-
tions. Discoveries of novel enzymes can now be deposited in the Plastics Biodegradation
Database established in 2022 which currently details over 200 enzymes with known ability
to the breakdown plastics [23].
2.2.2. Industrial Applications and Challenges
Enzymes are widely used in a range of other industrial applications, yet due to
the recalcitrant nature of plastics, the development here has been limited. However,
the improvement could have substantial applications in various sectors as incorporating
enzymes into plastic degradation processes makes the process more sustainable and energy
efﬁcient compared to conventional mechanical recycling. This method of recycling applies
force to break down plastic polymer length, compromising the polymer’s properties and
restricting its potential applications. This practice, often termed ‘downcycling’, does
not constitute true recycling, yielding products with limited utility in each iteration [24].
However, innovation is being driven by start-up enterprises like Carbios who are committed
to testing a potentially ground-breaking technology aimed at establishing the world’s ﬁrst
plastics recycling facility that relies entirely on enzymatic recycling. This technology could
revolutionize plastic waste facilities, yet several challenges must be addressed before this
becomes a cost-effective process.
One major challenge is the need to engineer enzymes that can efﬁciently degrade a
wide range of plastics beyond PET. Different plastic polymers possess distinct chemical
structures and require speciﬁc enzymatic activities for degradation, yet a sample of plastic
waste can contain a whole range of polymers. Therefore, efforts are underway to identify
organisms and enzymes capable of targeting plastics other than PET, such as PS [ 25],
PVC [26] and PE [27] yet the research effort is considerably lower than that of PET.
Another challenge lies in the scaling and cost-effectiveness of enzyme production.
The industrial-scale production of enzymes requires the optimization of fermentation
processes and the development of robust enzyme expression systems. Additionally, the
cost of enzyme production must be competitive with traditional plastic waste management
methods to enable signiﬁcant adoption. Furthermore, the compatibility of plastic-degrading
enzymes with existing plastic recycling infrastructure needs to be considered. Enzymes
should not interfere with the quality of recycled plastic materials or introduce undesirable
contaminants. Ensuring compatibility between enzyme-based degradation processes and
existing recycling technologies is vital for the integration of enzymes into the plastic
recycling process.
If scientists and enterprises like Carbios can create a successful technology the potential
could herald a revolutionary step towards the development of a circular economy. However,
policymakers will require cost-effective methods before the widespread implementation of
plastic-degrading enzymes.
Biomolecules 2023, 13, 1407 7 of 11
2.2.3. Increase Efﬁciency under Environmental Conditions
The problem of plastic waste is growing, and sadly, a signiﬁcant proportion of the
environmental burden arises not only from plastics that are properly recycled but from
those that ﬁnd their way into natural ecosystems. Raising the temperature in situ is,
therefore, not a practical solution for tackling plastics outside of specialist facilities, despite
the clear advantage that it increases the proportion of amorphous PET. Moreover, ﬁnding
alternative methods to high temperatures used in industrial processes would decrease
operational expenses and offer a more environmentally friendly solution to recycling as
well.
There are ongoing investigations into mesophilic organisms for their ability to operate
optimally at lower temperatures [28]. However, these studies seem to focus on plastics
other than PET, such as PBAT, which has lower strength and is more amorphous, making it
easier to degrade at lower temperatures. More research would be needed here to address
the more crystalline plastics.
In a study conducted in 2022, the objective was to engineer the hydrolytic activity
of PETase at moderate temperatures, offering an alternative approach to developing a
thermally stable enzyme [9]. They achieved this by developing a neural network to conduct
a comprehensive in silico mutagenesis followed by extensive experimental validation and
characterization. Five mutations (S132E, D186H, R224Q, N233K and R280A) were identiﬁed
that not only showed improved kinetics but were highly functional at 50 ◦C. The resulting
enzymes with these ﬁve mutations, known as FAST-PETase, exhibited a 29-fold increase in
hydrolysis of amorphous PET at 40 ◦C compared to the wild-type PET enzyme. Analysis
of crystal structures of FAST-PETase at a resolution of 1.44 Å allowed elucidation of the
effect of these mutations on enhancing thermostability. For instance, the replacement of
Asp with a positively charged Lys at position 233 facilitates the formation of a salt bridge
with glutamate at position 204. Additionally, R224Q and S132E were observed to promote
increased hydrogen bonding within the FAST-PETase. This study illustrates how large
amounts of data can undergo computational analysis to identify where alternative bonds
can be created. This allows the increase in thermostability, as seen in FAST-PETase, that
would be difﬁcult to achieve through experimental testing alone.
However, a signiﬁcant challenge when researching and engineering these enzymes for
industrial or environmental use lies in the extensive range of crystallinity present in plastic
waste. Current experimental set ups in the existing literature often use standardized PET
with speciﬁc crystallinity levels that are lower than the diverse crystallinity found in real-
world plastic waste. Many studies initially validate their ﬁndings using only amorphous
PET, which is not representative of the plastic problem, thus limiting the applicability of
the results to real-world scenarios.
When assessing these engineered enzymes, it is crucial to test them on samples in-
tended for recycling. The study investigating FAST-PETase used a variety of post-consumer
plastic waste samples with controlled variations in crystallinity and compared the results
with other thermotolerant PETase mutants in addition to the wild-type [ 9]. Their study
revealed that FAST-PETase exhibited the highest efﬁciency at 50 ◦C across the range of
samples but at temperatures above 60 ◦C, the more thermally stable mutant PETases per-
formed better. None of the enzymes, however, were able to completely degrade the plastic
sample with the highest crystallinity (>25% crystallinity) even though the researchers have
clearly improved the FAST-PETase rate of PET degradation rate at 50◦C. The potential of
deployment of these enzymes environmentally is, therefore, unlikely until the inability to
degrade the crystalline polymer is addressed. Further research showed that when PET
underwent a thermal pre-treatment method, the FAST-PETase could completely degrade
the plastic regardless of the initial crystallinity. This shows how PET and other plastic
degrading enzymes could be highly useful within industrial recycling plants but not in the
broader environment.
Biomolecules 2023, 13, 1407 8 of 11
2.2.4. Overcoming the Hydrophobicity of Plastics and PET to Increase Efﬁciency
The recalcitrant nature of many plastics can be attributed to their hydrophobicity and
insolubility which heavily reduces their biodegradability. Considerations to reduce the
impact of this in waste management include Ultraviolet irradiation to increase the number
of hydroxyl groups thus improving the surface properties for bio degradation [ 2]. For
other enzymes, the initial adsorption is presumably mediated by interactions with the
hydrophobic regions surrounding the active site. An esterase reported to hydrolyse PBAT
was engineered to increase the rate of degradation through deletion of the N-terminus [29].
This exposed a hydrophobic patch on the enzyme that was proposed to increase the
attraction of the secreted enzyme to the PBAT and could be implemented to other enzymes
(Figure 4A).
Biomolecules 2023, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 11 
 
other plastic degrading enzymes could be highly useful within industrial recycling plants 
but not in the broader environment. 
2.2.4. Overcoming the Hydrophobicity of Plastics and PET to Increase Eﬃciency. 
The recalcitrant nature of many plastics can be attributed to their hydrophobicity and 
insolubility which heavily reduces their biodegradability. Considerations to reduce the 
impact of this in waste management include Ultraviolet irradiation to increase the number 
of hydroxyl groups thus improving the surf ace properties for bio degradation [2]. For 
other enzymes, the initial adsorption is presumably mediated by interactions with the hy-
drophobic regions surrounding the active site . An esterase reported to hydrolyse PBAT 
was engineered to increase the rate of degradation through deletion of the N-terminus 
[29]. This exposed a hydrophobic patch on the enzyme that was proposed to increase the 
attraction of the secreted enzyme to the PBAT and could be implemented to other enzymes 
(Figure 4A).  
An alternative approach under consideration is from the cellulase research commu-
nity where the multi-modular architecture of cellulases, consisting of both a catalytic mod-
ule and a carbohydrate-binding module, is well established. This modular design creates 
a synergy that signi ﬁcantly increases the catalytic e ﬃciency of these enzymes
 [30]. This 
has highlighted a potential avenue for engineering higher-aﬃnity accessory modules for 
PETases, which could increase their local co ncentration at the PET surface and thereby 
enhance their eﬃciency (Figure 4B). Designing a PET-binding module de novo remains a 
signiﬁcant challenge due to the limitations of predicting how protein sequences govern 
function [31]. A better approach may be to look to nature, which is regarded as the world’s 
‘best protein engineer’, and identify a protein with a natural aﬃnity for PET.  
 
Figure 4. Methods under investigation to increase PET degradation e ﬃciency and reduce PET hy-
drophobicity. (A) An exposed hydrophobic patch on the enzyme N-terminus which may increase 
the attraction of the enzyme to PET, (B) the possibility of creating a PET-binding accessory domain, 
marked by (?), for PET which could increase lo cal concentration at the PET surface and thereby 
enhance their eﬃciency, and (C) chimeric PET-MHET dual enzyme. Illustration was created using 
3D Protein Imaging software [7] (accessed: 20 July 2023) PDB: (6EQD—PETase) and (6QZ1—
MHETase). 
A 
B 
C 
Figure 4. Methods under investigation to increase PET degradation efﬁciency and reduce PET
hydrophobicity. (A) An exposed hydrophobic patch on the enzyme N-terminus which may increase
the attraction of the enzyme to PET, (B) the possibility of creating a PET-binding accessory domain,
marked by (?), for PET which could increase local concentration at the PET surface and thereby
enhance their efﬁciency, and (C) chimeric PET-MHET dual enzyme. Illustration was created using 3D
Protein Imaging software [7] (accessed: 20 July 2023) PDB: (6EQD—PETase) and (6QZ1—MHETase).
An alternative approach under consideration is from the cellulase research community
where the multi-modular architecture of cellulases, consisting of both a catalytic module
and a carbohydrate-binding module, is well established. This modular design creates a
synergy that signiﬁcantly increases the catalytic efﬁciency of these enzymes [ 30]. This
has highlighted a potential avenue for engineering higher-afﬁnity accessory modules for
PETases, which could increase their local concentration at the PET surface and thereby
enhance their efﬁciency (Figure 4B). Designing a PET-binding module de novo remains a
signiﬁcant challenge due to the limitations of predicting how protein sequences govern
function [31]. A better approach may be to look to nature, which is regarded as the world’s
‘best protein engineer’, and identify a protein with a natural afﬁnity for PET.
Other multi-modular systems are also being investigated. It has been demonstrated
that MHETase, the second of the pair of PET-degrading enzymes from I. sakaiensis, shares a
Biomolecules 2023, 13, 1407 9 of 11
similar structure with PETase. As expected, the degradation of plastic using both enzymes
was faster compared to PETase alone and no activity was observed for MHETase alone.
Excitingly, the researchers went on to create a chimeric PET-MHET dual enzyme, which
improved the hydrolysis rate by more than threefold [32]. This suggests a synergistic effect
resulting from the proximity of these consecutive enzymes (Figure 4C).
Interestingly, the cellulase research community is conducting extensive research on the
cellulosome, an extracellular multi-enzyme complex that signiﬁcantly enhances cellulose
degradation [33]. This research holds promise for enhancing industrial processes involving
many enzymes. Therefore, parallels can also be drawn with the synergistic effect of the
PET-MHET dual enzymes and may be a useful concept for rate improvement and future
application of plastic-degrading enzymes.
2.2.5. A More Collaborative Global Approach for the Future Plastic Management
The concept of a circular closed economy is often discussed as the objective to work
towards the future. Governments and advocates have perpetuated the idea of a circular
economy, inspiring scientists to develop sustainable solutions for plastic management. Start-
ups like Carbios are making paths for technological development but other organizations
are looking to collaborate with the global picture in mind. Revolution Plastics, based at the
University of Portsmouth (UK) [34], is an organization looking to make a global impact.
This pioneering initiative serves as a platform to unite teams of researchers, business
leaders, campaigners and citizens, all working towards advancing the shift to a more
circular economic model. Noteworthy components within Revolution Plastics encompass
a Microplastics Research Group, an Advanced Materials and Manufacturing Research
Group, and a Centre for Enzyme Evolution. Importantly the various research groups are
interconnected through a global plastics policy centre, ensuring the conversion of research
into beneﬁcial outcomes to the society.
A groundbreaking announcement was made in May 2023 by the Intergovernmental
Negotiating Committee, revealing plans for an innovative plastics treaty set to be enforced
by 2025 [35]. This represents a pivotal advancement, yet its success will depend on exten-
sive collaboration among researchers, policymakers, industry leaders and environmental
organizations. Initiatives of this calibre provide a glimmer of hope for a future where
plastics can be utilized sustainably, without causing harm to the environment.
3. Future Directions and Conclusions
In this review. we began by assessing our current understanding of how PETase func-
tions and we found ourselves both surprised and perplexed by the apparent evolutionary
deviations that have set these enzymes apart from their cutinase counterparts. PETase has
clearly retained the overall α/β hydrolases structure yet subtle adjustments, like the ‘wob-
bling’ Trp residue, have occurred to accommodate the PET substrates. However, multiple
studies show that this can be pushed further to create faster variants than the wild type
and as our grasp of how altering PETase potentially improves the rate, we could apply this
to tackle a spectrum of enzymes. The rise of computation and AI models may also help us
uncover the patterns that nature seems to follow yet improvements may rely on directed
evolution to truly enhance these enzymes’ efﬁciency.
Over the past decade, efforts to create an enzyme with the capacity to degrade crys-
talline PET without the need for additional pre-treatment and temperature increase have
proven futile. While this may be of lesser concern within industrial applications, the ques-
tion arises: Can an enzyme be effectively deployed in natural ecosystems to counter the
growing impact of microplastics? A clearer approach may involve establishing proper
tracing and accountability mechanisms for plastic production while simultaneously racing
to discover more effective enzymatic solutions within industrial waste management. The
success of such methods would alleviate not only environmental pollution but also the
potential unintended consequences and ethical assessments necessary before using these
enzymes in natural ecosystems.
Biomolecules 2023, 13, 1407 10 of 11
However, effectively addressing plastic waste comprehensively demands the explo-
ration of various enzymes for the biodegradation of other synthetic polyesters like nylon
and PVC. Understanding the molecular intricacies of the PETases has been a ﬁrst step
in harnessing the potential enzymes for plastic degradation yet other more hydrophobic
plastics may provide a greater challenge. Combining PETase with other plastic-binding
domains or even creating multi-enzyme complexes could alleviate some of the pressure on
solely enhancing the PETase itself to increase the degradation rate. Instead, these methods
could focus on enhancing the degradation processes, alternatively to just the PETase mech-
anism. Drawing inspiration from other ﬁelds where nature has developed techniques to
break down resilient polymers, such as cellulose, might provide valuable insights. Given
that plastics are relatively new materials, having been mass manufactured only in the past
century, natural evolution has not had sufﬁcient time to develop its own solutions for their
decomposition. Intervening and utilizing existing mechanisms could potentially offer the
necessary solution to address this challenge.
A profound level of collaboration involving researchers, policymakers and environ-
mental organizations will play a pivotal role in guaranteeing the allocation of funding for
pertinent research and facilitating innovation in this domain. The prospect of engineering
enzymes to address our waste presents an alluring opportunity that could signiﬁcantly
contribute to safeguarding our planet. However, the obstacles of efﬁciency, scalability and
versatility remain unresolved challenges that must be overcome before the issue escalates
to an irreversible place.
Author Contributions: A.B. performed the detailed analysis of literature and structures from the
PDB reported in this review, wrote the initial manuscript and edited the manuscript. K.R.A. analysed
the literature and structures from the PDB reported in this review and edited the manuscript. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interest.
References
1. Danopoulos, E.; Twiddy, M.; West, R.; Rotchell, J.M. A rapid review and meta-regression analyses of the toxicological impacts of
microplastic exposure in human cells. J. Hazard. Mater. 2022, 427, 127861. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Wei, R.; Zimmermann, W. Microbial enzymes for the recycling of recalcitrant petroleum-based plastics: How far are we? Microb.
Biotechnol. 2017, 10, 1308–1322. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Tokiwa, Y.; Suzuki, T. Hydrolysis of polyesters by lipases. Nature 1977, 270, 76–78. [CrossRef]
4. Mart ínez, A.; Maicas, S. Cutinases: Characteristics and insights in industrial production. Catalysts 2021, 11, 1194. [CrossRef]
5. Gomes, D.; Matamá, T.; Cavaco-Paulo, A.; Takaki, G.; Salgueiro, A. Production of heterologous cutinases byE. coli and improved
enzyme formulation for application on plastic degradation. Electron. J. Biotechnol. 2013, 16, 3. [CrossRef]
6. Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Takehana, T.; Taniguchi, I.; Yamaji, H.; Maeda, Y.; Toyohara, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Kimura, Y.; Oda, K. A
bacterium that degrades and assimilates poly(ethylene terephthalate). Science 2016, 351, 1196–1199. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Tomasello, G.; Armenia, I.; Molla, G. The Protein Imager: A full-featured online molecular viewer interface with server-side
HQ-rendering capabilities. Bioinformatics 2020, 36, 2909–2911. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Austin, H.P .; Allen, M.D.; Donohoe, B.S.; Rorrer, N.A.; Kearns, F.L.; Silveira, R.L.; Pollard, B.C.; Dominick, G.; Duman, R.; El
Omari, K.; et al. Characterization and engineering of a plastic-degrading aromatic polyesterase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2018,
115, E4350–E4357. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Lu, H.; Diaz, D.J.; Czarnecki, N.J.; Zhu, C.; Kim, W.; Shroff, R.; Acosta, D.J.; Alexander, B.R.; Cole, H.O.; Zhang, Y.; et al. Machine
learning-aided engineering of hydrolases for PET depolymerization. Nature 2022, 604, 662–667. [CrossRef]
10. Tournier, V .; Topham, C.M.; Gilles, A.; David, B.; Folgoas, C.; Moya-Leclair, E.; Kamionka, E.; Desrousseaux, M.-L.; Texier,
H.; Gavalda, S.; et al. An engineered pet depolymerase to break down and recycle plastic bottles. Nature 2020, 580, 216–219.
[CrossRef]
11. Palm, G.J.; Reisky, L.; Böttcher, D.; Müller, H.; Michels, E.A.; Walczak, M.C.; Berndt, L.; Weiss, M.S.; Bornscheuer, U.T.; Weber, G.
Structure of the plastic-degrading Ideonella sakaiensis MHETase bound to a substrate. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 1717. [CrossRef]
12. Joo, S.; Cho, I.J.; Seo, H.; Son, H.F.; Sagong, H.-Y.; Shin, T.J.; Choi, S.Y.; Lee, S.Y.; Kim, K.-J. Structural insight into molecular
mechanism of poly(ethylene terephthalate) degradation. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 382. [CrossRef]
13. Han, X.; Liu, W.; Huang, J.-W.; Ma, J.; Zheng, Y.; Ko, T.-P .; Xu, L.; Cheng, Y.-S.; Chen, C.-C.; Guo, R.-T. Structural insight into
catalytic mechanism of pet hydrolase. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 2106. [CrossRef]
Biomolecules 2023, 13, 1407 11 of 11
14. Jumper, J.; Evans, R.; Pritzel, A.; Green, T.; Figurnov, M.; Ronneberger, O.; Tunyasuvunakool, K.; Bates, R.; Žídek, A.; Potapenko,
A.; et al. Highly accurate protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature 2021, 596, 583–589. [CrossRef]
15. Fecker, T.; Galaz-Davison, P .; Engelberger, F.; Narui, Y.; Sotomayor, M.; Parra, L.P .; Ramírez-Sarmiento, C.A. Active site ﬂexibility
as a hallmark for efﬁcient pet degradation by I. sakaiensis petase. Biophys. J. 2018, 114, 1302–1312. [CrossRef]
16. Zeng, W.; Li, X.; Yang, Y.; Min, J.; Huang, J.-W.; Liu, W.; Niu, D.; Yang, X.; Han, X.; Zhang, L.; et al. Substrate-binding mode of
a thermophilic pet hydrolase and engineering the enzyme to enhance the hydrolytic efﬁcacy. ACS Catal. 2022, 12, 3033–3040.
[CrossRef]
17. Visual Feature: Beat Plastic Pollution. Available online: https://www.unep.org/interactives/beat-plastic-pollution/ (accessed
on 25 August 2023).
18. Maurya, A.; Bhattacharya, A.; Khare, S.K. Enzymatic remediation of polyethylene terephthalate (PET)–based polymers for
effective management of plastic wastes: An overview. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2020, 8, 602325. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Liu, C.; Shi, C.; Zhu, S.; Wei, R.; Yin, C.-C. Structural and functional characterization of polyethylene terephthalate hydrolase
from Ideonella sakaiensis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2019, 508, 289–294. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Barth, M.; Oeser, T.; Wei, R.; Then, J.; Schmidt, J.; Zimmermann, W. Effect of hydrolysis products on the enzymatic degradation of
polyethylene terephthalate nanoparticles by a polyester hydrolase from Thermobiﬁda fusca. Biochem. Eng. J. 2015, 93, 222–228.
[CrossRef]
21. Bell, E.; Smithson, R.; Kilbride, S.; Foster, J.; Hardy, F.; Ramachandran, S.; Tedstone, A.; Haigh, S.; Garforth, A.; Day, P .; et al.
Directed evolution of an efﬁcient and thermostable PET depolymerase. Nat. Catal. 2022, 5, 673–681.
22. Erickson, E.; Gado, J.E.; Avilán, L.; Bratti, F.; Brizendine, R.K.; Cox, P .A.; Gill, R.; Graham, R.; Kim, D.-J.; König, G.; et al. Sourcing
thermotolerant poly(ethylene terephthalate) hydrolase scaffolds from natural diversity. Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 7850. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
23. Gambarini, V .; Pantos, O.; Kingsbury, J.M.; Weaver, L.; Handley, K.M.; Lear, G. PlasticDB: A database of microorganisms and
proteins linked to plastic biodegradation. Database 2022, 2022, baac008. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Kwon, D. Three ways to solve the plastics pollution crisis. Nature 2023, 616, 234–237. [CrossRef]
25. Peng, B.-Y.; Su, Y.; Chen, Z.; Chen, J.; Zhou, X.; Benbow, M.E.; Criddle, C.S.; Wu, W.-M.; Zhang, Y. Biodegradation of polystyrene
by dark (tenebrio obscurus) and yellow (tenebrio molitor) mealworms (Coleoptera: Tenebrionidae). Environ. Sci. Technol. 2019, 53,
5256–5265. [CrossRef]
26. Zhang, Z.; Peng, H.; Yang, D.; Zhang, G.; Zhang, J.; Ju, F. Polyvinyl chloride degradation by a bacterium isolated from the gut of
insect larvae. Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 5360. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Ru, J.; Huo, Y.; Yang, Y. Microbial degradation and valorization of plastic wastes. Front. Microbiol. 2020, 11, 442. [CrossRef]
28. Meyer-Cifuentes, I.E.; Öztürk, B. MLE046 is a marine mesophilic mhetase-like enzyme. Front. Microbiol. 2021, 12, 693985.
[CrossRef]
29. Biundo, A.; Ribitsch, D.; Steinkellner, G.; Gruber, K.; Guebitz, G.M. Polyester hydrolysis is enhanced by a truncated esterase: Less
is more. Biotechnol. J. 2017, 12. [CrossRef]
30. Payne, C.M.; Knott, B.C.; Mayes, H.B.; Hansson, H.; Himmel, M.E.; Sandgren, M.; Ståhlberg, J.; Beckham, G.T. Fungal cellulases.
Chem. Rev. 2015, 115, 1308–1448. [CrossRef]
31. Pan, X.; Kortemme, T. Recent advances in de Novo Protein Design: Principles, methods, and applications. J. Biol. Chem. 2021, 296,
100558. [CrossRef]
32. Knott, B.C.; Erickson, E.; Allen, M.D.; Gado, J.E.; Graham, R.; Kearns, F.L.; Pardo, I.; Topuzlu, E.; Anderson, J.J.; Austin, H.P .; et al.
Characterization and engineering of a two-enzyme system for plastics depolymerization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2020, 117,
25476–25485. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Artzi, L.; Bayer, E.A.; Moraïs, S. Cellulosomes: Bacterial nanomachines for dismantling plant polysaccharides. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
2016, 15, 83–95. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Revolution Plastics. Available online: https://www.port.ac.uk/research/themes/sustainability-and-the-environment/
revolution-plastics (accessed on 23 August 2023).
35. Earth Negotiations Bulletin. Summary Report 29 May–2 June 2023. Available online: https://enb.iisd.org/plastic-pollution-
marine-environment-negotiating-committee-inc2-summary (accessed on 25 August 2023).
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.