Unraveling the Interplay between Stability and Flexibility in the
Design of Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) Hydrolases
Shiqinrui Xu, Chengze Huo, and Xiakun Chu*
Cite This: J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
 Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
 Article Recommendations *
sı Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: The accumulation of polyethylene terephthalate
(PET), a widely used polyester plastic in packaging and textiles,
has led to a global environmental crisis. Biodegradation presents a
promising strategy for PET recycling, with PET hydrolases
(PETase) undertaking the task at the molecular level. Unfortu-
nately, PETase operates only at ambient temperatures with low
efficiency, limiting its industrial application. Current engineering
efforts focus on enhancing the thermostability of PETase, but
increased stability can reduce the structural dynamics needed for
substrate binding, potentially slowing enzymatic activity. To
elucidate the balance between stability and flexibility in optimizing
PETase catalytic activity, we performed theoretical investigations
on both wild-type PETase (WT-PETase) and a thermophilic variant (Thermo-PETase) using molecular dynamics simulations and
frustration analysis. Despite being initially designed to stabilize the native structure of the enzyme, our findings reveal that Thermo-
PETase exhibits an unprecedented increase in structural flexibility at the PET-binding and catalytic sites, beneficial for substrate
recruitment and product release, compared to WT-PETase. Upon PET binding, we observed that the structural dynamics of
Thermo-PETase is largely quenched, favoring the proximity between the catalytic residues and the carbonyl of the PET substrate.
This may potentially contribute to a higher probability of a catalytic reaction occurring in Thermo-PETase compared to WT-
PETase. We suggest that Thermo-PETase can exhibit higher PET-degradation performance than WT-PETase across a broad
temperature range by leveraging stability and flexibility at high and low temperatures, respectively. Our findings provide valuable
insights into how PETase optimizes its enzymatic performance by balancing stability and flexibility, which may contribute to future
PETase design strategies.
■
INTRODUCTION
Plastics play a vital role in all aspects of everyday life, offering
numerous benefits for the development of modern society.
However, due to the ultralong lifetimes of most synthetic
plastics, plastic waste accumulation has now become one of the
most globally challenging environmental crises, profoundly
impacting the ecosystems and posing great health risks to both
wildlife and humans.
1−3
Among the various types of plastics,
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is the most abundant
thermoplastic polyester manufactured in the world, primarily
because of its widespread usage in the packaging market and
the textile industry.
4,5
Despite its prevalence, PET exhibits high
resistance to degradation, leading to the accumulation of PET
plastic waste after use and contributing significantly to the solid
waste problem worldwide.
6,7
Great efforts have been made toward PET biodegradation,
which is an environmentally friendly and efficient technology,
ideal for the closed-loop recycling of PET plastics.
8
Enzymes
that exhibit PET-degradation activity are known as PET
hydrolases, and they are capable of breaking down the long-
chain PET molecules into their building blocks.
9−11
Over
recent decades, several PET hydrolases have been identified
and studied, including cutinases, lipases, and esterases.
12,13
Among these, PET-degrading cutinases from thermophilic
micro-organisms have shown remarkable PET-degradation
efficiency at high temperatures, near the glass transition
temperature of PET, where the PET crystalline structure starts
to melt toward the amorphous polymer chains.
13−17
In 2016,
Yoshida et al. made a breakthrough discovery of a cutinase-like
PET hydrolase, named PETase, in the bacterium Ideonella
sakaiensis, which can degrade and assimilate PET as its source
of carbon and energy.
18
PETase is a naturally evolved PET
hydrolase exhibiting high PET depolymerization activity at
ambient temperatures. Consequently, this unique property of
PETase has distinguished it from PET-degrading cutinases.
11
However, PETase showed very low degradation efficiency for
Received: May 20, 2024
Revised: July 22, 2024
Accepted: September 4, 2024
Published: September 13, 2024
Articlepubs.acs.org/jcim
© 2024 The Authors. Published by
American Chemical Society
7576
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
This article is licensed under CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0

highly crystallized PET and rapidly lost its enzymatic activity
with increasing temperature.
19
These features impede the
practical applications of PETase in the plastics degradation
industry.
To increase the thermostability of PETase and further
improve the PET-degradation performance, various engineer-
ing strategies have been devised.
20−31
Son et al. discovered that
PETase with only three-residue substitution (S121E/D186H/
R280A) remarkably enhanced the PET depolymerization
activity across different temperatures, compared to wild-type
PETase (WT-PETase).
21
This new variant, named Thermo-
PETase, derived from a structure-based protein engineering
strategy, was primarily designed to stabilize the flexible loop,
which exhibited high B-factor values in the crystal structure.
The mutations proposed for Thermo-PETase established the
newly formed interactions in the native structure of PETase,
thus increasing the melting temperature by 8.8K compared to
WT-PETase.
21
Similar strategies focusing on mutations of
residues to stabilize the most flexible loop in PETase, have
been recently developed to successfully achieve increased
thermostability.
32,33
Moving forward, a deep learning method
was employed to introduce two additional mutations to
Thermo-PETase, giving rise to FAST-PETase.
25
FAST-
PETase, which demonstrated much higher PET-degradation
activity than many other PETase variants, exhibited an increase
in melting temperature by 9 K over its scaffold Thermo-
PETase. Structural analysis reveals that the increased thermo-
stability of FAST-PETase can be largely attributed to the
formation of favorable salt bridges and hydrogen bonds in the
native structure. Recently, directed evolution methods have
been applied to PETase design, resulting in successful variants
capable of operating at the glass transition temperature of PET,
presenting a significant step toward complete PET depolyme-
rization.
26,29
Despite significant achievements made in the discovery of
highly thermostable PETase variants,
34−36
progress toward
finding PETase capable of operating efficiently at ambient
temperatures has been proceeding slowly. This is largely due to
the fact that our understanding of the structure−function
relationship in PETase remains elusive.
19,37−39
It has been
recognized that, unlike other thermophilic cutinases, the
unique property of PET-degradation activity at ambient
temperatures for PETase is attributed to its open and flexible
substrate-binding cleft.
40
Increasing evidence has revealed that
modulating the opening of the binding cleft in thermophilic
cutinases can enhance their catalytic efficiency on PET
degradation,
41,42
highlighting the importance of structural
flexibility at the substrate-binding site of PET hydrolases in
facilitating enzymatic activity. However, by narrowing down
the binding cleft on the surface of WT-PETase through
mutations, Austin et al. observed increased hydrolytic activity
on PET,
38
leading to the seemingly conflicting effects of
structural dynamics in PETase on exerting its catalytic
function. Furthermore, increasing the thermostability of
PETase is generally achieved by introducing newly formed
interactions to stabilize the native structure.
43,44
Thus,
reducing the structural flexibility in the native state of PETase,
a common strategy for improving stability in PETase design,
may be disadvantageous to substrate binding and product
release, potentially slowing the catalytic activity. Understanding
the interplay between stability and flexibility in PETase is
fundamental and crucial for further engineering efficient PET
hydrolase operating at ambient temperature, but it presents
great challenges.
In this work, we performed molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations along with frustration analysis on WT-PETase and
one prototypical thermophilic PET variant, Thermo-PETase,
which was observed to exhibit an overall enhanced PET
hydrolytic activity over WT-PETase across a wide range of
temperatures.
21,25
Consistent with experimental findings, our
simulations show that Thermo-PETase unfolds more slowly
than WT-PETase at high temperatures,
21
thus allowing
Thermo-PETase to maintain its functional activity for a longer
duration at elevated temperatures. Interestingly, despite the
increase in global stability led by mutations, we observed that
Thermo-PETase possesses more significant structural flexibility
than WT-PETase at ambient temperatures. Our detailed
analyses unveil that the structural dynamics at the PET-
binding site and catalytic triad in Thermo-PETase are more
pronounced, potentially facilitating substrate recruitment and
product release compared to WT-PETase. Additionally,
frustration results indicate that there are large-scale arrange-
ments of frustrated contacts in Thermo-PETase upon
mutations, leading to an increased degree of frustration at
the local binding site while maintaining global scales
unchanged. Moreover, we found that the structural dynamics
of Thermo-PETase within the substrate−enzyme complex are
largely quenched by the interactions formed with PET,
resulting in a stable bound complex state primed for
subsequent highly efficient chemical reactions. Our results
provide valuable insights into the future rational design of
PETase and other PET hydrolases toward PET degradation at
ambient temperature by balancing global stability and local
flexibility.
■
MATERIALS AND METHODS
MD Simulations of apo PETase. We performed all-atom
MD simulations using Gromacs-2023.2 software
45
with Amber
ff14SB force field.
46
Simulations were initialized from the
native structures for WT- and Thermo-PETase (PDB: 5XJH
19
and 6IJ6
21
), respectively. Given the complex environmental
conditions under which PETase may function, all amino acids
in the enzyme are modeled at their standard protonated states
at pH 7. The native structures of WT- and Thermo-PETase
were individually placed in a cubic box with margins of 1.0 nm.
The protein systems were then solvated with the TIP3P water
model and the salt concentration was set to 100 mM to mimic
the in vivo environment. For WT-PETase, the box length was
7.50 nm, including 25 NA
+
ions, 30 CL
−
ions, 12 385 water
molecules, and a total of 40 928 atoms. For Thermo-PETase,
the box length was 7.47 nm including 25 NA
+
ions, 31 CL
−
ions, 12369 water molecules, and a total of 40 930 atoms. A
short energy minimization step was performed for each system
using the steepest descent algorithm, with a maximum of
50000 steps and a maximum force threshold of 1000 kJ/mol/
nm. After energy minimization, systems were equilibrated in
the NVT phase using the V-rescale thermostat for 100 ps, with
temperature coupling time constant τ
t
= 0.1 ps. Subsequently,
the NPT equilibration simulations were conducted using the
Parrinello−Rahman barostat for 100 ps with the relaxation
time constant τ
p
= 4.0 ps and the reference pressure of 1.0
bar.
47
During MD simulations, the LINCS algorithm was used
to constrain all hydrogen bonds,
48
allowing for a time step of 2
fs. The particle-mesh Ewald (PME) method was employed to
compute the long-range electrostatic interactions
49
and all the
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling pubs.acs.org/jcim Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
7577
nonbonded interactions were cut off at 1.0 nm. Periodic
conditions were applied in all three directions. Temperature
coupling was applied separately to protein and nonprotein
groups. Isotropic pressure coupling was used to ensure uniform
scaling of the box vectors. Production simulations were run in
the NPT phase for 10 μs at the ambient temperatures (298 and
308 K) and for 1 μs at an elevated temperature of 450 K. For
each PETase system, two trajectories were performed at both
298 and 308 K, and five trajectories were performed at 450 K.
Molecular Docking. We constructed the complex
structure of PETase with a PET tetramer (4PET) by molecular
docking. The initial coordinates of PETase were chosen from
the Protein Data Bank (PDB: 5XJH
19
). PETase was selected as
the receptor in AutoDockTools
50
and converted to PDBQT
format, which is similar to the PDB format but specifically
designed to contain the information required by AutoDock
software. We used 2-hydroxyethyl-(monohydroxyethyl tereph-
thalate)
4
(2-HE(MHET)
4
) as the PET tetramer ligand. The
PET tetramer was constructed by combining two PET dimers
and carefully adding one ethylene glycol moiety to its
terephthalate terminal using Avogadro software.
51,52
All
hydrogen atoms were added to both protein and ligand
using AutoDockTools prior to docking.
50
Molecular docking
was carried out between the WT-PETase structure and 2-
HE(MHET)
4
using AutoDock Vina (version 1.1.2).
53
During
docking, the ligand was set to be flexible, while the protein was
kept rigid. To prevent the collapse of the PET chain, the three
bonds within the O−C−C−O group connecting the second
and third benzene rings and the central C−C bond connecting
the first and second benzene rings of the PET ligand were
constrained from rotating. The top five docking structural
models were analyzed to examine hydrogen bonds and π−π
interactions between PETase and 4PET. The docking model,
which is the most consistent with those from previous
studies,
19,54
was selected and further evaluation of the structure
model was done by MD simulations.
MD Simulations of PETase:4PET Binary Complex. MD
simulations of the PETase:4PET complex, starting from the
docking model were performed using Gromacs-2023.2
software,
45
following the same protocols as those used for
simulations of the apo state of PETase. The PET ligand,
consisting of 98 atoms, was parametrized with the general
Amber force field (GAFF2)
55
and the topology files of 4PET
for Gromacs simulations were prepared using ACPYPE
software.
56
To model the complex structure of Thermo-
PETase with 4PET, we directly introduced three mutations
into WT-PETase using PyMOL software.
57
The simulation
box was set to be cubic, with a length of 7.43 nm. The system
was solvated with 12 330 and 12 338 TIP3P water molecules
for WT- and Thermo-PETase, respectively. To realize the
electrostatically neutral environment with the salt concen-
tration of 100 mM, we added 25 NA+ and 31 Cl− ions for the
WT-PETase system and 25 NA+ and 30 Cl− ions for the
Thermo-PETase system, resulting in a total of 40 938 and
40 956 atoms, respectively. For each PETase system, two
trajectories each with a length of 1 μs were generated at both
298 and 308 K without implementing any restraints on the
enzyme and substrate, following previous studies.
40,51,58,59
We
found that 4PET maintained binding interactions with both
WT- and Thermo-PETase throughout the 1 μs MD
simulations.
Computational Analysis. We used the built-in modules of
Gromacs to calculate root-mean-square deviation (RMSD),
root-mean-square fluctuation (RMSF), residue distances, and
to conduct principal component analysis (PCA), while the
MDAnalysis software was employed for calculating the contact
map.
60
All of the analyses were performed after the removal of
the translation and rotation of the protein in the simulation
system during the trajectories. The RMSF value for each
residue was calculated by averaging the RMSF of atoms
belonging to that residue. For contact probability calculations,
contacts between any heavy atoms of one residue pair were
included with the cutoff distance set at 0.5 nm. The results
were normalized to obtain the residue-level contact probability.
The two-dimensional (2D) free energy landscapes (FELs)
were constructed using the formula: −kT lnP(x, y), where P(x,
y) is the probability distribution of the protein configuration at
the selected reaction coordinates x and y obtained from the
simulations. All trajectories at ambient temperatures (298 and
308 K) were combined together for calculating P(x, y).
PCA transforms a number of correlated variables into a
number of uncorrelated variables called principal components
(PCs), while retaining those characteristics of the data set that
contribute most to its variance.
61
The PCA results show the
directionality and amplitude of protein motions with the first
several PCs correlated with large conformational changes. PCA
was performed on the trajectories of 298 and 308 K,
respectively. At each temperature, two trajectories were
combined together and the Cartesian coordinates of C
α
atoms of residues were chosen to calculate the covariance
matrix C. The elements of covariance matrix C were calculated
by
=
 =
r r r rC
 N
1
( )( )
ij
 k
N
i
k
i j
k
j
 1
where N is the total number of simulation frames, r
i
k
is the
Cartesian coordinate of C
α
atom of residue i at the simulation
frame k and ⟨r
i
⟩ denotes the average over the entire trajectory.
The eigenvalues and eigenvectors were calculated by diagonal-
izing covariance matrix C. Each eigenvalue represents the mean
displacement along the corresponding eigenvectors. The two
eigenvectors associated with the two highest eigenvalues
account for the two largest percentages of the total
fluctuations, corresponding to PC1 and PC2, respectively.
The trajectories were finally projected onto PC1 and PC2 for
further analysis.
Frustration results were obtained by using the Frustra-
tometer online server.
62
The PDB files of WT- and Thermo-
PETase (5XJH
19
and 6IJ6
21
) were uploaded to the server with
electrostatic interactions considered during the calculation.
The frustration index (FruInd) measures how favorable a
native contact is relative to the set of all possible contacts by
mutation of the residues in that location, normalized using the
variance of the energy distribution. In practice, we used
“configurational frustration” to obtain FruInd, as this option
takes into account residue changes in both identity and
location. A contact is defined as “minimally frustrated” if
FruInd is higher than 0.78, indicating that its native energy is at
the lower end of the energy distribution. Conversely, a contact
is defined as “highly frustrated” if FruInd is lower than −1,
indicating that its native energy is at the higher end of the
energy distribution.
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling pubs.acs.org/jcim Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
7578
■
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Structural Dynamics of PETase in the Native State.
We performed microsecond-long MD simulations initialized
from the native structures of WT- and Thermo-PETase to
investigate the temperature-dependent structural dynamics of
PETase. MD simulations were carried out at two ambient
temperatures (298 and 308 K) and one elevated temperature
(450 K), which is much higher than the melting temperatures
of WT- and Thermo-PETase measured by experiments (321.8
and 330.6 K).
21
RMSD relative to the respective native
structures was then calculated for each simulation. We
observed that Thermo-PETase consistently exhibits lower
RMSD values than WT-PETase at all three temperatures, in
particular, at the high temperature of 450 K (Figures 1A−C,
S2). These results suggest that Thermo-PETase possesses
enhanced thermodynamic stability upon the mutations,
consistent with experimental observations.
21
Additionally, the
consistently lower RMSD values of Thermo-PETase compared
to WT-PETase at both 298 and 308 K imply an overall
reduction in the structural dynamics of Thermo-PETase
relative to WT-PETase.
To quantitatively assess the structural dynamics of PETase
at the residue level, we calculated RMSF by collecting all the
simulation trajectories each at 298 and 308 K (Figure 1D and
E). The RMSF profiles and residue-level contact probability
maps of WT- and Thermo-PETase show substantial overlap at
both corresponding temperatures, with notable differences
primarily observed in the region involving Trp185 (within the
W-loop, Ala180−Pro197), and the region involving Asp206
(within the D-loop, Glu204−Ser213) and His237 of the
catalytic triad (Figure S3). As the temperature increases, the
structural flexibility of these two catalytic residues (Asp206 and
His237) in both WT- and Thermo-PETase appears to be
significantly enhanced (Figure 1F). Interestingly, although the
overall structural dynamics of WT-PETase is more significant
than those of Thermo-PETase, as indicated by RMSD (Figure
Figure 1. Structural stability and flexibility of WT- and Thermo-PETase revealed by MD simulations. RMSD relative to the corresponding native
structures of WT- and Thermo-PETase (PDB: 5XJH
19
and 6IJ6
21
) at (A) 298 K, (B) 308 K, and (C) 450 K, respectively. RMSF of WT- and
Thermo-PETase at (D) 298 K and (E) 308 K. (F) RMSF differences between 298 and 308 K for WT- and Thermo-PETase. RMSF differences
between WT- and Thermo-PETase (RMSF
Thermo
− RMSF
WT
) at (G) 298 K and (H) 308 K. The purple, orange, and red vertical lines in (D−H)
indicate the catalytic triad Ser160, Asp206, and His237, respectively. (I) RMSF values at 298 and 308 K for WT- and Thermo-PETase projected
onto the corresponding native structures. The thickness and color of the tubes illustrated on the PETase structures denote the magnitudes of
RMSF. The blue dashed region in (I) illustrates the PET-binding site on the surface of PETase. The PET-binding site is determined by the docking
of one PET tetramer to WT-PETase, as described in Figure S1. The three mutations (S121E/D186H/R280A) in Thermo-PETase with respect to
WT-PETase are indicated in (I).
21
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling pubs.acs.org/jcim Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
7579
1A), Thermo-PETase exhibits more flexibility in regions
involving two catalytic residues at 298 K (Figure 1G). Upon
increasing the temperature to 308 K, the D-loop in Thermo-
PETase appears to be more stable than it in WT-PETase, while
the flexibility of the region close to His237 in Thermo-PETase
is still more pronounced than that in WT-PETase, as
demonstrated by RMSF (Figure 1H) and the contact
probability map (Figure S3). The W-loop, which was identified
as one of the most flexible regions in WT-PETase, has negative
effects on its overall thermostability.
32,63
Mutation on the
residues within the W-loop (e.g., Asp186) in order to form
stable electrostatic interactions or hydrogen bonds has been
demonstrated as a practice strategy for enhancing the
thermostability of PETase.
21,33
Our simulations reveal that
mutations in Thermo-PETase stabilize the W-loop by reducing
the structural flexibility, potentially contributing to increased
stability. On the other hand, the W-loop in Thermo-PETase
remains consistently more stable than it is in WT-PETase
across different temperatures. This observation is reminiscent
of the findings from a recent study, which has underlined the
advantageous role of a rigid, correctly oriented Trp185 in
stabilizing the binding interactions with the substrate.
33
To better illustrate the structural flexibility of PETase and its
changes with increasing temperature, we mapped the RMSF
values onto the native structures of WT- and Thermo-PETase
(Figure 1I). Noteworthy, the RMSD between the PDB
structures of WT- and Thermo-PETase is only 0.02 nm,
indicating that these two PETases share a high degree of
similarity in the static native structure. However, notable
differences in structural dynamics are evident, particularly in
regions close to the PET-binding site. Furthermore, at the low
temperature of 298 K, the D- and W-loops in WT-PETase
exhibit certain degrees of flexibility, while most regions in WT-
PETase are relatively static, including the PET-binding site. As
the temperature increases to 308 K, the binding site of WT-
PETase becomes dynamic. The flexible binding site in PETase
may potentially facilitate substrate binding, contributing to the
increased PET-degradation efficiency.
40
In contrast, despite
having a more rigid W-loop, Thermo-PETase at 298 K exhibits
excessive structural flexibility at the binding site, which
becomes even more dynamic as the temperature increases to
308 K. These distinct observations of structural dynamics
between WT- and Thermo-PETase may influence substrate
Figure 2. PCA projected on the native dynamics of WT- and Thermo-PETase. (A, B) FELs of WT- and Thermo-PETase at 298 K, projected onto
PC1 and PC2. The weights of PC1 and PC2 are 20.89 and 15.35%, respectively. (C, D) FELs of WT- and Thermo-PETase at 308 K, projected
onto PC1 and PC2. The weights of PC1 and PC2 are 29.19 and 12.18%, respectively. Representative structures of PETase extracted from the
simulation trajectories at 298 K projected onto (E) PC1 and (F) PC2, respectively. Representative structures of PETase extracted from the
simulation trajectories at 308 K projected onto (G) PC1 and (H) PC2, respectively. In each panel of panels (E−H), 10 representative structures
ranging from the lowest to the highest PC values are shown, with arrows indicating the structural motions along the corresponding PC. (I−L) Local
PETase structural illustrations focusing on the PET-binding site for different (meta)stable states indicated in (A−D). The PDB structure of WT-
PETase (gray, representing state 1) is aligned with the (I) states 3 (green) and 4 (red), (J) state 5 (blue), (K) state 6 (cyan), and (L) state 7
(yellow). In (E−H), the residues at the PET-binding site are colored dark green. In (E−L), the three catalytic residues (Ser160, Asp206, and
His237) are colored in orange. State 2 is structurally similar to state 1 (native structure); thus, it is not shown. Full PETase structural illustrations
are shown in Figure S4.
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling pubs.acs.org/jcim Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
7580
binding, thus, further making distinct contributions to the
catalytic activity of PETase.
FELs of PETase in the Native State. In order to capture
the essential structural dynamics of PETase at the native states,
we collected the simulation trajectories of WT- and Thermo-
PETase at the same ambient temperatures (298 and 308 K),
where both PETases remained folded, and subsequently
performed PCA. At 298 K, the FELs projected onto the PC1
and PC2 reveal that WT-PETase explores a notably smaller
conformational space compared to Thermo-PETase, indicating
significant structural flexibility in Thermo-PETase at low
temperatures (Figure 2A and B). At 308 K, although the area
of FELs is comparable for WT- and Thermo-PETase, the
conformational spaces explored by these two PETases are
significantly different, leading to distinct structural dynamics
(Figure 2C and D).
Further projections of simulation trajectories onto the PCs
with structural illustrations showcase the key motions in
PETase (Figure 2E−H). We observed that the most dominant
structural dynamics in these two PETases at both temperatures
are related to the collective motions led by the PET-binding
site and catalytic site. Specifically, at 298 K, the D-loop exhibits
a twisting motion along PC1, whereas it swings in the opposite
direction from the loop hosting His237 along PC2. This
Figure 3. FELs projected onto the distances between every pair of the catalytic triad of Ser160, Asp206, and His237. FELs at 298 K for (A−C)
WT-PETase and (D−F) Thermo-PETase. FELs at 308 K for (G−I) WT-PETase and (J−L) Thermo-PETase. Typical structures of PETase
focusing on the catalytic triad in different (meta)stable states are shown. The (meta)stable states are numbered in the same manner as they are in
Figure 2. Colored triangles depict the geometries of the catalytic sites of PETase at different (meta)stable states, while the gray triangle depicts the
geometry of the catalytic site in the native structure of WT-PETase (state 1). The pairwise distances of the catalytic residues in state 6 are similar to
those in state 1 (native structure), thus the structural illustration of state 6 is not shown.
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling pubs.acs.org/jcim Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
7581
motion along PC2 may correspond to a conventional “open-to-
close” conformational transition in PETase,
38,64
potentially in
favor of accommodating PET-binding. Furthermore, the FEL
of WT-PETase features a single, wide basin, which includes the
native state (denoted as state 1) and native-like state 2. In
contrast, the FEL of Thermo-PETase displays three widely
distributed energy basins, with the most probable one
corresponding to the native state. Thermo-PETase within the
right-most basin (denoted as state 4) and the intermediate
basin (denoted as state 3) both show a more elongated D-loop
(Figure 2I), which may facilitate PET binding.
65
The collective motion patterns in PETase vary significantly
as the temperature changes. When the temperature increases to
308 K, the structural dynamics of PETase along PC1 and PC2
predominantly concentrate on the PET-binding site and are
strongly related to the “open-to-close” transition (Figure 2G
and H). In this respect, state 5, which was found to be highly
populated in both WT- and Thermo-PETase, exhibits an open-
binding site (Figure 2J), serving as a binding-competent state.
In addition, distinct structural dynamic behaviors were
observed for these two PETase, as evidenced by the more
widely distributed FEL of WT- and Thermo-PETase focusing
along PC2 and PC1, respectively. It is worth noting that the
collective motion of PETase along PC2 involves a twisting
mode, which may lead to an incomplete opening of the binding
site for PET. Careful analysis on the structures of PETase in
states 6 and 7 (Figure 2K and L), which are respectively
populated by WT- and Thermo-PETase, reveals no clear
expansion in the binding cleft; thus, their roles in PET binding
remain elusive.
To elucidate the structural dynamics of PETase at the
catalytic site, we projected the FELs onto the spatial distances
between every pair of residues in the catalytic triad Ser160,
Asp206, and His237 (Figure 3). At 298 K (Figure 3A−F),
WT-PETase explores a much narrower conformational space
than that of Thermo-PETase, with two (meta)stable states
observed (states 1 and 2). Noteworthy, while WT-PETase in
state 2 is overall structurally similar to the native structure
shown in Figure 2, it possesses a slightly opened catalytic triad,
compared to that in state 1. The existence of state 2 for WT-
PETase may facilitate this enzyme to bind and consequently
degrade PET at room temperature.
40
On the other hand,
Thermo-PETase in states 3 and 4 exhibits similarly increased
pairwise distances among these three catalytic residues
compared to WT-PETase. This indicates that the structural
flexibility of Thermo-PETase at the catalytic site is significantly
enhanced by the mutations, thus promoting the binding of
PET.
At 308 K (Figure 3G−L), although WT- and Thermo-
PETase display comparable overall areas of FELs, they are
populated at different (meta)stable states. Apart from the
shared states 1 and 5, where PETase exhibits the cleft-open,
binding-competent structure, WT- and Thermo-PETase were
also found to be populated at states 6 and 7, respectively.
Detailed analysis reveals that WT-PETase maintains structural
similarity at the catalytic site between states 1 and 6, indicating
that WT-PETase in state 6 may not be advantageous for PET
binding. On the other hand, Thermo-PETase in state 7
features an open-binding cleft with the elongated pairs of
Ser160−His237 and Asp206−His237, thus rendering it a
binding-competent state for promoting PET binding. In
addition, it is evident that Thermo-PETase can explore more
conformational space at large distance values of Asp206−
His237. It is worth noting that the Asp206−His237 bridge
serves as a critical structural scaffold for substrate accom-
modation and directly interacts with PET molecules (Figures
Figure 4. Local frustrations in WT- and Thermo-PETase. (A) Distribution of the FruInd for contacts involving all residues, with a dashed gray line
indicating the most probable value. Visualization of total minimally and highly frustrated contacts on the native structures of (B) WT- and (C)
Thermo-PETase, respectively. (D−F) Same as (A−C), but specifically for contacts involving residues within the binding site. In (B), (C), (E), and
(F), green lines represent the minimally frustrated contacts, while red lines represent the highly frustrated contacts.
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling pubs.acs.org/jcim Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
7582
1I and S1). In this respect, the extended and flexible Asp206−
His237 pair possessed by Thermo-PETase may assist PET
binding through excessive structural fluctuations.
Frustrations in the Native Structure of PETase. A
naturally evolved, well-folded protein adheres to the “principle
of minimal frustration”,
66
which typically results in a funneled
energy landscape. However, conflicting inter-residue inter-
actions, known as frustrated contacts, are frequently observed
in the native structures of proteins. Although these interactions
generally weaken the stability of native structures, they can
promote specific structural dynamics that may be related to
functional purposes.
67
To assess the presence of frustrated
contacts in WT- and Thermo-PETase, we quantified
frustrations in the native structures of these two PETases
using the method introduced by Ferreiro et al.
68
In brief, this
method compares the energetic contribution to the additional
stabilization provided to a pair of residues in the native
structure with the statistical distribution of energies that would
result from placing different residues in the same position. A
native pair is deemed a highly frustrated contact if it induces
significant destabilization compared with other possibilities. In
other words, the native energy of a highly frustrated pair
should be at the high end of the distribution. Conversely, for a
minimally frustrated contact, its native energy should occupy
the lower end of the energy distribution. This indicates that the
minimally frustrated contact is relatively stable in the native
structure, while any mutation affecting this contact will likely
increase the energy, leading to structural destabilization. To
measure the level of frustration, a quantity called the
frustration index (FruInd) was introduced.
68
FruInd is
calculated as the ratio of the additional stabilization energy
for an individual native pair to the typical fluctuation in the
energy distribution. Thus, a high (low) value of FruInd
indicates a low (high) degree of frustration for the contact.
The threshold of FruInd for determining whether a contact is
highly or minimally frustrated was taken from Ferreiro et al.
68
We observed wide distributions of FruInd for both WT- and
Thermo-PETase, with highly frustrated contacts being only
weakly populated (Figure 4A−C and Table S1). Additionally,
the distributions of FruInd for WT- and Thermo-PETase
largely overlap, suggesting that the three mutations in Thermo-
PETase may not lead to significant changes in the frustrations
of the native structures. These results imply that both PETase
and its variant have largely eliminated the highly frustrated
interactions in their native states, resulting in stable structures
as robust scaffolds for function. Focusing on the PET-binding
site, we observed that the distributions of FruInd for WT- and
Thermo-PETase slightly shift to the left, indicating an
accumulation of highly frustrated contacts at the binding site
(Figure 4D). This suggests that the binding site of PETase is
fragile and prone to deformation.
69
Furthermore, notable
differences in frustration were observed between WT- and
Thermo-PETase (Figure 4E and F). Detailed comparisons at
the binding site reveal that Thermo-PETase exhibits lower
values in the FruInd distribution and possesses more highly
frustrated contacts than does WT-PETase. These findings
together suggest that WT- and Thermo-PETase may share
globally similar structural dynamics, with discrepancies
primarily observed locally at the binding site, where Thermo-
PETase displays more significant structural flexibility than WT-
PETase.
Dynamics of PETase upon PET Binding. Structural
flexibility of enzymes at catalytic sites can be advantageous for
substrate recruitment and product release,
70,71
however
excessive structural dynamics at catalytic sites may induce
large catalytic distances, thereby impeding chemical reactions.
In order to see how PET binding impacts the structural
dynamics of PETase and subsequent catalysis, we performed
Figure 5. Structural Dynamics of PETase upon substrate binding. RMSF of WT- and Thermo-PETase binding with the substrate at (A) 298 K and
(B) 308 K. RMSF differences of PETase between the apo state and the binary substrate−complex state for WT- and Thermo-PETase at (C) 298 K
and (D) 308 K. Normalized frequency distribution of spatial distance d
OC
between the oxygen O
γ
and the carbonyl carbon C of the substrate and
population distribution of the potentially catalytically competent (“PotCal”) state and precatalytically competent (“PreCal”) state during MD
simulations performed at (E) 298 K and (F) 308 K. The “PotCal” state and “PreCal” state are defined by a threshold of d
OC
of 0.4 nm.
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling pubs.acs.org/jcim Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
7583
molecular docking of a 4PET with PETase (Figure S1). The
complex structure of PET:PETase obtained through docking is
consistent with those from the previous studies,
19,54
and
subsequently was used as the initial structure for the MD
simulations at ambient temperatures (298 and 308 K).
It has been proposed that the nucleophilic attack carried out
by Ser160 to the carbonyl group of the benzene ring of the
substrate PET molecules is essential for initializing the
hydrolysis of PET polymer by PETase.
37,58,59
In this regard,
we calculated the distance (d
OC
) between the oxygen O
γ
of the
catalytic Ser160 and the carbonyl carbon C of the substrate
during MD simulations (Figure S6), considering that a
chemical reaction occurs only when the involving atoms are
spatially close. At 298 K, both WT- and Thermo-PETase keep
the distance d
OC
at relatively low values, which is optimal for
the subsequent catalytic reaction. When the temperature
increases to 308 K, the distance d
OC
during the simulations
largely remained at small values. We note that large
fluctuations in d
OC
were observed occasionally (d
OC
> 0.6
nm) at both temperatures, leading to substrate drifting away
from the binding site. Due to the inherent flexible character-
istics of the polymer, the enzyme−substrate bound state was
observed to be flexible in our simulations, consistent with
previous studies.
54,72
In PET, the backbone adopts two
different conformations, trans and gauche, which can have
different impacts on the degradation efficiency of PETase.
64
To explore the main conformation of 4PET when bound with
PETase, we performed analysis on the O−C−C−O torsion
angle in the ethylene glycol (EG) units of the 4PET substrate
(Figure S6). We found that the gauche conformation comprises
about 90% of the PET conformational ensembles at both 298
and 308 K, similar to previous observations for amorphous
PET film.
39
These results further suggest that the binding
modes in our study resemble the binding of a low-crystallinity
PET film with PETase.
In order to assess the structural dynamics of PETase upon
substrate binding, we extracted the trajectories when 4PET is
bound with PETase and calculated the RMSF of PETase
(Figures 5A,B and S7). Interestingly, we found that the RMSF
profiles of WT- and Thermo-PETase in the PET-bound binary
complexes are very similar. This is different from PETase at the
apo state, where arresting discrepancies were found upon
mutations (Figure 1). Detailed comparisons of RMSF profiles
between WT- and Thermo-PETase indicate that Thermo-
PETase has overall smaller RMSF values than WT-PETase, in
particular at the catalytic residues of Asp206 and His237.
Further structural analysis reveals that the catalytic triad of
PETase in the bound complex is very similar for both WT- and
Thermo-PETase (Figure S8), resembling that in the native
structure of PETase in its apo state. Our findings indicate that
WT- and Thermo-PETase share similar structures and
dynamics when they are bound with the substrate.
We observed extensive quenching of structural dynamics in
PETase bound with 4PET (Figure 5C and D). In detail, the
most significant dynamics quenching effects for WT-PETase
occurred within the W-loop. The side chain of Trp185 has
been found to adopt three conformations in the native
structure of WT-PETase.
37,38
Quenching the structural
dynamics of Trp185 and adapting its structure toward the
one in the PET-binding state are crucial steps in realizing the
catalysis of PETase, leading to the major difference between
mesophilic and thermophilic PET hydrolases. On the other
hand, 4PET significantly stabilizes the catalytic residues
Asp206 and His237 in Thermo-PETase, and thus, the
dynamics of the catalytic triad observed in the apo state has
been largely quenched. As the stable catalytic sites and spatially
closed catalytic distances are prerequisites for catalysis, 4PET
binding stabilizes structures of Thermo-PETase more than
those of WT-PETase, possibly due to the fact that the
interactions formed between substrate and enzyme are
stronger and more widely distributed in Thermo-PETase
than WT-PETase (Figure S9).
By analyzing the d
OC
distribution, we found that Thermo-
PETase exhibits a higher population at smaller d
OC
values
when bound with 4PET (Figure 5E and F). A smaller distance
between the catalytic serine of the enzyme and the labile
carbonyl of the substrate often suggests a higher probability for
the hydrolytic reaction to take place.
73
Here, we chose 0.4 nm
as the threshold for defining the state with a small d
OC
, which is
potentially competent to trigger catalysis (referred to as the
“PotCat state”), and the state with too large d
OC
to trigger
catalysis (referred to as the “PreCat state”). The higher
population of the “PotCat” state for Thermo-PETase than that
for WT-PETase implies that Thermo-PETase may more
readily trigger the subsequent catalytic reaction, potentially
contributing to its enhanced efficiency. As the temperature
increased from 298 to 308 K, we observed a decreasing
population of the “PotCat” state for Thermo-PETase, while
WT-PETase maintained similar distributions of the “PotCat”
and “PreCat” states. Our results suggest that the catalytic sites
of Thermo-PETase, compared with those of WT-PETase, are
more sensitive to external stimuli such as substrate binding and
temperature changes.
■
CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we used MD simulations and local frustration
analysis to investigate how the three mutations (S121E,
D186H, and R280A) contribute to the enhanced PET-
degradation efficiency of Thermo-PETase. Experiments have
demonstrated that Thermo-PETase exhibits enhanced PET-
degradation activity compared to WT-PETase, even at low
temperatures,
21,25
where both PETases remain well-folded.
Previous studies have revealed that, unlike thermophilic PET
hydrolases, which have rigid, closed active sites and show no
PET-degradation activity at moderate (mesophilic) temper-
atures, the active-site flexibility in PETase is crucial for efficient
PET degradation.
40
Although the initial design objective for
Thermo-PETase was to increase the thermostability of the
enzyme by introducing additional stabilizing interactions,
21
we
observed significant enhancements in structural flexibility at
the PET-binding sites. The open and dynamic nature of the
active-site cleft has been recognized as a critical factor enabling
PETase to function at ambient temperatures, providing a
distinct catalytic advantage over thermophilic hydrolases.
38
Our results align with these findings, showing that Thermo-
PETase has increased both global thermostability and local
flexibility, potentially contributing to the overall enhancement
of PET degradation observed in the experiments. The high
similarity between the native structures of WT- and Thermo-
PETase has resulted in a similar overall pattern of frustrated
contact. However, a detailed analysis of the local regions shows
distinct frustration levels between these two PETases. The
introduction of the three mutations in Thermo-PETase
increases the degree of frustration at the local PET-binding
sites, making Thermo-PETase more prone to deformation in
favor of accommodating the substrate during binding
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling pubs.acs.org/jcim Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
7584
compared to WT-PETase. Notably, our results from both MD
simulations and frustration analysis on the apo form of PETase
reveal the dynamic picture of PETase when recruiting the PET
substrate, reminiscent of recently proposed conformational
selection for the PETase:PET complex initiation.
64
Interest-
ingly, we found that substrate binding significantly reduces the
structural dynamics of Thermo-PETase induced by the
mutations, resulting in a stable catalytic triad similar to that
of WT-PETase. Furthermore, we observed increases in
substrate−enzyme interchain contacts in Thermo-PETase,
leading to more populated catalytically competent states for
chemical reactions compared to WT-PETase. Collectively, we
propose that the effects of mutations in Thermo-PETase on
improving the PET-degradation performance may be multi-
faceted: (1) enhancing the overall stability of the enzyme for
increasing its tolerance to environmental changes; (2)
increasing the local structural flexibility at the binding site,
which is advantageous for substrate recruitment and product
release; and (3) quenching the structural dynamics of the
enzyme at catalytic sites upon substrate binding, a prerequisite
for chemical reactions.
Substrate-binding residues are important for enzymatic
activity. Previous studies identified a unique conformationally
dynamical equilibrium of the Trp185 side chain wobbling
between conformers A, B, and C in PETase.
37,38
This has made
PETase distinguishable from other homologous enzymes such
as thermophilic PET hydrolases, where the equivalent
conserved Trp adopts conformer C (Figure S10). Structural
analysis indicates that the substrate can only bind to PETase
with Trp185 in conformer B by forming stacked interactions
with one of the rings in PET molecules, while other
conformers of Trp185 would clash with the substrate, thus
hindering the binding.
37
Recent experiments and simulations
have underlined the importance of the unique amino acids
Ser214 and ILe218 of WT-PETase in triggering the high
mobility of Trp185, thereby proposing a general mechanism
for improving the catalytic activity of thermophilic PET
hydrolases through the permission of the “wobbling” dynamics
of Trp185.
63,74
Interestingly, our simulation results reveal that
the conformational dynamics of Trp185 in Thermo-PETase
have vanished, associated with a stabilized W-loop, compared
to WT-PETase. Detailed structural analysis shows that Trp185
in Thermo-PETase is already in conformer B (Figure S10),
thus facilitating the subsequent substrate binding. It is worth
noting that great efforts have been made recently on mutating
residues in the W-loop, aiming at fixing Trp185 in conformer B
while simultaneously enhancing the overall stability.
26,32,33
Consequently, the mutations in Thermo-PETase have
effectively stabilized both the local structure at Trp185 toward
the substrate-binding conformation and the global structure by
introducing a hydrogen bond (S121E/D186H) at the W-loop,
which is one of the most flexible regions in WT-PETase.
21,75
Conventionally, the practical design of WT-PETase aims to
improve thermostability by reducing the structural flexibil-
ity,
21,24−27,29,30,32,33,76
as stability and flexibility are usually
considered to be coupled in proteins. For instance, the residues
within the highly flexible W-loop of WT-PETase have been
targeted as hot spots for engineering. Through the
substitutions of Asp186 with polar or nonpolar residues in
the W-loop,
21,32,33
most PETase variants exhibited increased
melting temperatures along with enhanced catalytic activity,
compared to WT-PETase. From the energy landscape
perspective, the stability of a protein can be determined by
the funnel-like topography of its folding energy landscape.
77,78
In this regard, mutations aiming at introducing stabilized
interactions in the native state, which corresponds to the
bottom of the funnel, will deepen the energy landscape, thus
leading to increased thermostability (Figure 6). Interestingly,
our simulations reveal that the improvements in the catalytic
activity of Thermo-PETase can be partially attributed to the
enhanced structural flexibility of the enzyme in its native state.
In other words, in addition to increasing the depth of the
funnel, mutations in Thermo-PETase have unprecedented
effects on modulating the shape of the energy landscape at the
bottom of the funnel. At low temperature, Thermo-PETase can
explore a wider range of conformational space than WT-
Figure 6. Energy landscapes and FELs of WT- and Thermo-PETase. The funneled energy landscapes of WT- and Thermo-PETase show arresting
differences in the depth of funnels (upper center), suggesting increased stability for Thermo-PETase upon triple mutations. With close examination
at the bottom of the funnel, WT- and Thermo-PETase exhibit distinct free energy profiles (left and right), each showcasing unique temperature
responses. Orange arrows denote the transitions between states near the native state with arrow thickness representing the ease of these transitions.
Upon PET binding (lower center), these two PETases have the same catalytically competent native structure with PET being more loosely bound
with WT-PETase than Thermo-PETase.
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling pubs.acs.org/jcim Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
7585
PETase. Mutations enable Thermo-PETase to switch between
the native structure resembling WT-PETase and the PET
binding-competent structure with the open and flexible active
cleft, which promotes substrate binding. This binding-
competent structure can be highly populated for WT-PETase
only at elevated temperatures, where Thermo-PETase becomes
more flexible in rendering multiple binding-competent
structures. However, WT-PETase is heat-labile and prone to
denaturation, slowing down its catalytic activity at high
temperatures. Upon PET binding, the extensive structural
dynamics of Thermo-PETase are largely quenched by PET,
leading to a stable catalytically competent native structure, the
same as WT-PETase. Furthermore, we found that the complex
formed by WT-PETase and PET switch between two states
(“PotCat” and “PreCat” states), supported by the NMR
experiments, where PET in the binding cleft of PETase was
found to be highly dynamic.
39,79
Compared to WT-PETase,
Thermo-PETase, which forms more extensive contacts with
PET and is dynamically quenched, exhibits closer distances for
nucleophilic attack, thus leading to higher chances for PET
hydrolytic reactions to take place. In conclusion, mutations in
Thermo-PETase have decoupled the interplay between global
stability and local flexibility of the enzyme, thus improving the
catalytic performance of Thermo-PETase over WT-PETase
across a wide range of temperatures.
21
The PET-degradation process is complex, involving both the
adsorption of PETase to the PET polymeric chain and the
chemical reaction that breaks down the PET polymer into its
constituting monomers. Unlike thermophilic PET-degrading
enzymes, PETase can depolymerize PET at moderate temper-
atures.
18
This unique functionality of PETase is largely due to
its structural characteristics, particularly its open active-site
cleft, which provides high accessibility for substrate binding,
38
thereby enhancing PET-degradation activity at moderate
temperatures. In this study, we focused on characterizing the
structural dynamics of PETase and its variant, aiming to
elucidate the roles of mutations in Thermo-PETase in
facilitating substrate binding and stabilizing the initial
PETase:PET complex. However, our study, which does not
explore the chemical reaction, has limitations in fully
understanding the PET-degradation process. Recently, Gar-
ci
́
a-Meseguer et al. used hybrid quantum mechanics/molecular
mechanics (QM/MM) MD simulations to characterize the
catalytic mechanisms of FAST-PETase compared to WT-
PETase.
58
They found that although all five mutations in
FAST-PETase are far from the active site, they play important
roles in stabilizing the transition state by indirectly impacting
the catalytic triad, leading to lowering of the free energy
barriers during the chemical reaction. This study, along with
our work, suggests that the mutations in Thermo- and FAST-
PETase, initially designed to improve thermostability, may also
enhance substrate binding and catalysis, ultimately accelerating
PET depolymerization.
In summary, our results reveal that the stability and
flexibility of enzymes are not necessarily correlated, in
contradiction to the convention that high (low) stability
usually leads to a rigid (flexible) protein structure.
80
It is worth
noting that recent work has observed a decoupling interplay
between the stability and flexibility in a computationally
designed hydrolase Turbo-PETase, which has demonstrated
superior performance compared to other PET hydrolases to
date.
30
The high PET depolymerization efficiency of Turbo-
PETase was attributed to the mutations that have resulted in
both increases in thermostability at the global scale and
structural flexibility at the PET-binding site, exhibiting elevated
melting temperature and simultaneously enabling the pro-
miscuous attack to different PET surface structures.
30
This
significant achievement made by Turbo-PETase has paved a
promising way for future PETase design, focusing on
enhancing both thermostability and flexibility. Recently, AI-
aided protein design has become increasingly popular and
efficient, particularly for structural design and functional
optimization.
81
Various deep-learning protein sequence
engineering methods can be applied to create enzymes with
enhanced catalytic efficiency.
82−84
A notable success in this
field is FAST-PETase, which exhibits significantly improved
catalytic activity over a wide range of temperatures compared
to WT-PETase and Thermo-PETase.
25
FAST-PETase utilizes
deep learning techniques to predict optimal amino acids in the
local structural environments of WT-PETase, based on training
with over 19,000 protein structures from the PDB. Our study
shows that both global stability and local flexibility of PETase
are crucial for achieving highly efficient PET-degradation
activity. This underscores the necessity for AI tools to manage
the delicate balance between stability and flexibility in PETase
design, with the goal of optimizing PET degradation at
ambient temperatures. Although a full mechanistic under-
standing of achieving optimal stability−flexibility balance in
PETase for maximizing PET-degradation efficiency remains
elusive, our findings suggest that future mutations aimed at
enhancing PETase enzymatic activity should carefully consider
the trade-off between stability and flexibility. Our study offers
valuable insights into the rational design strategy to improve
the PET-degradation performance of PETase, where both the
structure and dynamics of the enzyme should be simulta-
neously considered.
■
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
Data Availability Statement
The necessary files for setting up Gromacs simulations and
molecular docking, as well as the frustration analysis results are
publicly available at https://osf.io/9yzjf/. Additional data can
be found in Supporting Information.
*
sı
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877.
Details about the frustration analysis are organized in a
table; graphs illustrating structures in greater detail,
additional MD simulation trajectories, contact maps, and
distributions of pairwise distances for the three residues
of the catalytic triad in WT- and Thermo-PETase at
different temperatures, with and without substrate
binding (PDF)
■
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
Xiakun Chu − Advanced Materials Thrust, Function Hub, The
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou), Guangzhou, Guangdong 511400, China;
Guangzhou Municipal Key Laboratory of Materials
Informatics, The Hong Kong University of Science and
Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou, Guangdong 511400,
China; Division of Life Science, The Hong Kong University of
Science and Technology, Hong Kong SAR 999077, China;
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling pubs.acs.org/jcim Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
7586
orcid.org/0000-0003-3166-7070; Email: xiakunchu@
hkust-gz.edu.cn
Authors
Shiqinrui Xu − Advanced Materials Thrust, Function Hub,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou), Guangzhou, Guangdong 511400, China;
orcid.org/0009-0000-5480-546X
Chengze Huo − Advanced Materials Thrust, Function Hub,
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
(Guangzhou), Guangzhou, Guangdong 511400, China;
orcid.org/0009-0005-9550-7123
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
■
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The project was supported by the National Key R&D Program
of China (No. 2023YFC3905000) and the Guangdong
Scientific Research Platform and Projects for Higher-educa-
tional Institutions from the Department of Education of
Guangdong Province (Grant No. 2023KTSCX169). X.C. was
also partly supported by the Municipal Key Laboratory
Construction program of the Guangzhou Municipal Science
and Technology Project (Grant No. 2023A03J0003). The
authors acknowledge the Green e Materials (GeM) Laboratory
and HPC+AI Intelligence Computing Center at the Hong
Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) for
providing computational support.
■
REFERENCES
(1) Moharir, R. V.; Kumar, S. Challenges Associated with Plastic
Waste Disposal and Allied Microbial Routes for Its Effective
Degradation: A Comprehensive Review. J. Cleaner Prod. 2019, 208,
65−76.
(2) Awoyera, P. O.; Adesina, A. Plastic Wastes to Construction
Products: Status, Limitations and Future Perspective. Case Stud.
Constr. Mater. 2020, 12, e00330.
(3) Ali, S. S.; Elsamahy, T.; Koutra, E.; Kornaros, M.; El-Sheekh, M.;
Abdelkarim, E. A.; Zhu, D.; Sun, J. Degradation of Conventional
Plastic Wastes in the Environment: A Review on Current Status of
Knowledge and Future Perspectives of Disposal. Sci. Total Environ.
2021, 771, 144719.
(4) Jambeck, J. R.; Geyer, R.; Wilcox, C.; Siegler, T. R.; Perryman,
M.; Andrady, A.; Narayan, R.; Law, K. L. Plastic waste inputs from
land into the ocean. Science 2015, 347, 768−771.
(5) Geyer, R.; Jambeck, J. R.; Law, K. L. Production, use, and fate of
all plastics ever made. Sci. Adv. 2017, 3, e1700782.
(6) Sinha, V.; Patel, M. R.; Patel, J. V. PET waste management by
chemical recycling: a review. J. Polym. Environ. 2010, 18, 8−25.
(7) Law, K. L.; Starr, N.; Siegler, T. R.; Jambeck, J. R.; Mallos, N. J.;
Leonard, G. H. The United States’ Contribution of Plastic Waste to
Land and Ocean. Sci. Adv. 2020, 6, eabd0288.
(8) Wei, R.; Zimmermann, W. Biocatalysis as a green route for
recycling the recalcitrant plastic polyethylene terephthalate. Microb.
Biotechnol. 2017, 10, 1302.
(9) Papadopoulou, A.; Hecht, K.; Buller, R. Enzymatic PET
degradation. Chimia 2019, 73, 743.
(10) Taniguchi, I.; Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Kimura,
Y.; Oda, K. Biodegradation of PET: current status and application
aspects. ACS Catal. 2019, 9, 4089−4105.
(11) Kawai, F.; Kawabata, T.; Oda, M. Current knowledge on
enzymatic PET degradation and its possible application to waste
stream management and other fields. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2019,
103, 4253−4268.
(12) Wei, Y.; Swenson, L.; Castro, C.; Derewenda, U.; Minor, W.;
Arai, H.; Aoki, J.; Inoue, K.; Servin-Gonzalez, L.; Derewenda, Z. S.
Structure of a microbial homologue of mammalian platelet-activating
factor acetylhydrolases: Streptomyces exfoliatus lipase at 1.9 Å
resolution. Structure 1998, 6, 511−519.
(13) Mu ̈ ller, R.; Schrader, H.; Profe, J.; Dresler, K.; Deckwer, W.-D.
Enzymatic Degradation of Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate): Rapid
Hydrolyse Using a Hydrolase from T. Fusca. Macromol. Rapid
Commun. 2005, 26, 1400−1405.
(14) Ronkvist, Å. M.; Xie, W.; Lu, W.; Gross, R. A. Cutinase-
catalyzed hydrolysis of poly (ethylene terephthalate). Macromolecules
2009, 42, 5128−5138.
(15) Sulaiman, S.; Yamato, S.; Kanaya, E.; Kim, J.-J.; Koga, Y.;
Takano, K.; Kanaya, S. Isolation of a novel cutinase homolog with
polyethylene terephthalate-degrading activity from leaf-branch com-
post by using a metagenomic approach. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.
2012, 78, 1556−1562.
(16) Wei, R.; Breite, D.; Song, C.; Gräsing, D.; Ploss, T.; Hille, P.;
Schwerdtfeger, R.; Matysik, J.; Schulze, A.; Zimmermann, W.
Biocatalytic degradation efficiency of postconsumer polyethylene
terephthalate packaging determined by their polymer microstructures.
Adv. Sci. 2019, 6, 1900491.
(17) Tournier, V.; Topham, C. M.; Gilles, A.; et al. An engineered
PET depolymerase to break down and recycle plastic bottles. Nature
2020, 580, 216−219.
(18) Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Takehana, T.; Taniguchi, I.; Yamaji, H.;
Maeda, Y.; Toyohara, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Kimura, Y.; Oda, K. A
Bacterium That Degrades and Assimilates Poly(Ethylene Tereph-
thalate). Science 2016, 351, 1196−1199.
(19) Joo, S.; Cho, I. J.; Seo, H.; Son, H. F.; Sagong, H.-Y.; Shin, T. J.;
Choi, S. Y.; Lee, S. Y.; Kim, K.-J. Structural Insight into Molecular
Mechanism of Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) Degradation. Nat.
Commun. 2018, 9, No. 382.
(20) Erickson, E.; Shakespeare, T. J.; Bratti, F.; Buss, B. L.; Graham,
R.; Hawkins, M. A.; König, G.; Michener, W. E.; Miscall, J.; Ramirez,
K. J.; Rorrer, N. A.; Zahn, M.; Pickford, A. R.; McGeehan, J. E.;
Beckham, G. T. Comparative performance of PETase as a function of
reaction conditions, substrate properties, and product accumulation.
ChemSusChem 2022, 15, e202101932.
(21) Son, H. F.; Cho, I. J.; Joo, S.; Seo, H.; Sagong, H.-Y.; Choi, S.
Y.; Lee, S. Y.; Kim, K.-J. Rational Protein Engineering of Thermo-
Stable PETase from Ideonella Sakaiensis for Highly Efficient PET
Degradation. ACS Catal. 2019, 9, 3519−3526.
(22) Meng, X.; Yang, L.; Liu, H.; Li, Q.; Xu, G.; Zhang, Y.; Guan, F.;
Zhang, Y.; Zhang, W.; Wu, J. T. Ningfeng Protein engineering of
stable IsPETase for PET plastic degradation by Premuse. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 2021, 180, 667−676.
(23) Liu, Y.; Liu, Z.; Guo, Z.; Yan, T.; Jin, C.; Wu, J. Enhancement
of the Degradation Capacity of IsPETase for PET Plastic Degradation
by Protein Engineering. Sci. Total Environ. 2022, 834, 154947.
(24) Cui, Y.; Chen, Y.; Liu, X.; et al. Computational Redesign of a
PETase for Plastic Biodegradation under Ambient Condition by the
GRAPE Strategy. ACS Catal. 2021, 11, 1340−1350.
(25) Lu, H.; Diaz, D. J.; Czarnecki, N. J.; Zhu, C.; Kim, W.; Shroff,
R.; Acosta, D. J.; Alexander, B. R.; Cole, H. O.; Zhang, Y.; Lynd, N.
A.; Ellington, A. D.; Alper, H. S. Machine Learning-Aided Engineering
of Hydrolases for PET Depolymerization. Nature 2022, 604, 662−
667.
(26) Bell, E. L.; Smithson, R.; Kilbride, S.; Foster, J.; Hardy, F. J.;
Ramachandran, S.; Tedstone, A. A.; Haigh, S. J.; Garforth, A. A.; Day,
P. J. R.; Levy, C.; Shaver, M. P.; Green, A. P. Directed evolution of an
efficient and thermostable PET depolymerase. Nat. Catal. 2022, 5,
673−681.
(27) Brott, S.; Pfaff, L.; Schuricht, J.; Schwarz, J.-N.; Böttcher, D.;
Badenhorst, C. P.; Wei, R.; Bornscheuer, U. T. Engineering and
evaluation of thermostable IsPETase variants for PET degradation.
Eng. Life Sci. 2022, 22, 192−203.
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling pubs.acs.org/jcim Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
7587
(28) Lee, S. H.; Seo, H.; Hong, H.; Park, J.; Ki, D.; Kim, M.; Kim,
H.-J.; Kim, K.-J. Three-directional engineering of IsPETase with
enhanced protein yield, activity, and durability. J. Hazard. Mater.
2023, 459, 132297.
(29) Shi, L.; Liu, P.; Tan, Z.; Zhao, W.; Gao, J.; Gu, Q.; Ma, H.; Liu,
H.; Zhu, L. Complete depolymerization of PET wastes by an evolved
PET hydrolase from directed evolution. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2023,
62, e202218390.
(30) Cui, Y.; Chen, Y.; Sun, J.; Zhu, T.; Pang, H.; Li, C.; Geng, W.-
C.; Wu, B. Computational Redesign of a Hydrolase for Nearly
Complete PET Depolymerization at Industrially Relevant High-Solids
Loading. Nat. Commun. 2024, 15, No. 1417.
(31) Joho, Y.; Royan, S.; Caputo, A.; Newton, S.; Peat, T.; Newman,
J.; Jackson, C.; Ardevol, A. Enhancing PET Degrading Enzymes: A
Combinatory Approach. ChemBioChem 2024, 25, e202400084.
(32) Yin, Q.; You, S.; Zhang, J.; Qi, W.; Su, R. Enhancement of the
polyethylene terephthalate and mono-(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalate
degradation activity of Ideonella sakaiensis PETase by an electrostatic
interaction-based strategy. Bioresour. Technol. 2022, 364, 128026.
(33) Yin, Q.; Zhang, J.; Ma, S.; Gu, T.; Wang, M.; You, S.; Ye, S.; Su,
R.; Wang, Y.; Qi, W. Efficient polyethylene terephthalate
biodegradation by an engineered Ideonella sakaiensis PETase with a
fixed substrate-binding W156 residue. Green Chem. 2024, 26, 2560−
2570.
(34) Wei, R.; von Haugwitz, G.; Pfaff, L.; Mican, J.; Badenhorst, C.
P. S.; Liu, W.; Weber, G.; Austin, H. P.; Bednar, D.; Damborsky, J.;
Bornscheuer, U. T. Mechanism-based design of efficient PET
hydrolases. ACS Catal. 2022, 12, 3382−3396.
(35) Amalia, L.; Chang, C.-Y.; Wang, S. S.; Yeh, Y.-C.; Tsai, S.-L.
Recent advances in the biological depolymerization and upcycling of
polyethylene terephthalate. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2024, 85, 103053.
(36) Shi, L.; Zhu, L. Recent Advances and Challenges in Enzymatic
Depolymerization and Recycling of PET Wastes. ChemBioChem 2024,
25, e202300578.
(37) Han, X.; Liu, W.; Huang, J.-W.; Ma, J.; Zheng, Y.; Ko, T.-P.;
Xu, L.; Cheng, Y.-S.; Chen, C.-C.; Guo, R.-T. Structural insight into
catalytic mechanism of PET hydrolase. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8,
No. 2106.
(38) Austin, H. P.; Allen, M. D.; Donohoe, B. S.; et al.
Characterization and engineering of a plastic-degrading aromatic
polyesterase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2018, 115, E4350−E4357.
(39) Wei, R.; Song, C.; Gräsing, D.; Schneider, T.; Bielytskyi, P.;
Böttcher, D.; Matysik, J.; Bornscheuer, U. T.; Zimmermann, W.
Conformational fitting of a flexible oligomeric substrate does not
explain the enzymatic PET degradation. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10,
No. 5581.
(40) Fecker, T.; Galaz-Davison, P.; Engelberger, F.; Narui, Y.;
Sotomayor, M.; Parra, L. P.; Ramírez-Sarmiento, C. A. Active Site
Flexibility as a Hallmark for Efficient PET Degradation by I.
Sakaiensis PETase. Biophys. J. 2018, 114, 1302−1312.
(41) Silva, C.; Da, S.; Silva, N.; Matamá, T.; Arau ́jo, R.; Martins, M.;
Chen, S.; Chen, J.; Wu, J.; Casal, M.; Cavaco-Paulo, A. Engineered
Thermobifida fusca cutinase with increased activity on polyester
substrates. Biotechnol. J. 2011, 6, 1230−1239.
(42) Arau ́jo, R.; Silva, C.; O’Neill, A.; Micaelo, N.; Guebitz, G.;
Soares, C. M.; Casal, M.; Cavaco-Paulo, A. Tailoring cutinase activity
towards polyethylene terephthalate and polyamide 6, 6 fibers. J.
Biotechnol. 2007, 128, 849−857.
(43) Kan, Y.; He, L.; Luo, Y.; Bao, R. IsPETase is a novel biocatalyst
for poly (ethylene terephthalate)(PET) hydrolysis. ChemBioChem
2021, 22, 1706−1716.
(44) Berselli, A.; Ramos, M. J.; Menziani, M. C. Novel Pet-
Degrading Enzymes: Structure-Function from a Computational
Perspective. ChemBioChem 2021, 22, 2032−2050.
(45) Abraham, M. J.; Murtola, T.; Schulz, R.; Páll, S.; Smith, J. C.;
Hess, B.; Lindahl, E. GROMACS: High Performance Molecular
Simulations through Multi-Level Parallelism from Laptops to
Supercomputers. SoftwareX 2015, 1−2, 19−25.
(46) Maier, J. A.; Martinez, C.; Kasavajhala, K.; Wickstrom, L.;
Hauser, K. E.; Simmerling, C. ff14SB: Improving the Accuracy of
Protein Side Chain and Backbone Parameters from ff99SB. J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 2015, 11, 3696−3713.
(47) Parrinello, M.; Rahman, A. Polymorphic Transitions in Single
Crystals: A New Molecular Dynamics Method. J. Appl. Phys. 1981, 52,
7182−7190.
(48) Hess, B.; Bekker, H.; Berendsen, H. J. C.; Fraaije, J. G. E. M.
LINCS: A Linear Constraint Solver for Molecular Simulations. J.
Comput. Chem. 1997, 18, 1463−1472.
(49) Darden, T.; York, D.; Pedersen, L. Particle Mesh Ewald: An N·
log(N) Method for Ewald Sums in Large Systems. J. Chem. Phys.
1993, 98, 10089−10092.
(50) Morris, G. M.; Huey, R.; Lindstrom, W.; Sanner, M. F.; Belew,
R. K.; Goodsell, D. S.; Olson, A. J. AutoDock4 and AutoDockTools4:
Automated Docking with Selective Receptor Flexibility. J. Comput.
Chem. 2009, 30, 2785−2791.
(51) Jerves, C.; Neves, R. P.; Ramos, M. J.; da Silva, S.; Fernandes, P.
A. Reaction mechanism of the PET degrading enzyme PETase
studied with DFT/MM molecular dynamics simulations. ACS Catal.
2021, 11, 11626−11638.
(52) Hanwell, M. D.; Curtis, D. E.; Lonie, D. C.; Vandermeersch, T.;
Zurek, E.; Hutchison, G. R. Avogadro: an advanced semantic chemical
editor, visualization, and analysis platform. J. Cheminf. 2012, 4,
No. 17.
(53) Eberhardt, J.; Santos-Martins, D.; Tillack, A. F.; Forli, S.
AutoDock Vina 1.2.0: New Docking Methods, Expanded Force Field,
and Python Bindings. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2021, 61, 3891−3898.
(54) da Costa, C. H. S.; Dos Santos, A. M.; Alves, C. N.; Martí, S.;
Moliner, V.; Santana, K.; Lameira, J. Assessment of the PETase
conformational changes induced by poly (ethylene terephthalate)
binding. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 2021, 89, 1340−1352.
(55) Wang, J.; Wolf, R. M.; Caldwell, J. W.; Kollman, P. A.; Case, D.
A. Development and Testing of a General Amber Force Field. J.
Comput. Chem. 2004, 25, 1157−1174.
(56) Sousa da Silva, A. W.; Vranken, W. F. ACPYPE - AnteChamber
PYthon Parser interfacE. BMC Res. Notes 2012, 5, No. 367.
(57) Schrodinger, LLC. The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System,
Version 1.8, 2015, http://www.pymol.org/pymol.
(58) García-Meseguer, R.; Ortí, E.; Tun ̃ ón, I.; Ruiz-Pernía, J. J.;
Aragó, J. Insights into the Enhancement of the Poly (ethylene
terephthalate) Degradation by FAST-PETase from Computational
Modeling. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2023, 145, 19243−19255.
(59) Burgin, T.; Pollard, B. C.; Knott, B. C.; Mayes, H. B.; Crowley,
M. F.; McGeehan, J. E.; Beckham, G. T.; Woodcock, H. L. The
reaction mechanism of the Ideonella sakaiensis PETase enzyme.
Commun. Chem. 2024, 7, No. 65.
(60) Gowers, R. J.; Linke, M.; Barnoud, J.; Reddy, T. J. E.; Melo, M.
N.; Seyler, S. L.; Doman ́ski, J.; Dotson, D. L.; Buchoux, S.; Kenney, I.
M.; Beckstein, O.MDAnalysis: A Python Package for the Rapid
Analysis of Molecular Dynamics Simulations. In Proceedings of the
15th Python in Science Conference 2016; pp 98−105.
(61) Cheng, X.; Ivanov, I.; Wang, H.; Sine, S. M.; McCammon, J. A.
Nanosecond-timescale conformational dynamics of the human α7
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. Biophys. J. 2007, 93, 2622−2634.
(62) Parra, R. G.; Schafer, N. P.; Radusky, L. G.; Tsai, M.-Y.;
Guzovsky, A. B.; Wolynes, P. G.; Ferreiro, D. U. Protein
Frustratometer 2: A Tool to Localize Energetic Frustration in Protein
Molecules, Now with Electrostatics. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016, 44,
W356−W360.
(63) Chen, C.-C.; Han, X.; Li, X.; et al. General features to enhance
enzymatic activity of poly (ethylene terephthalate) hydrolysis. Nat.
Catal. 2021, 4, 425−430.
(64) Guo, B.; Vanga, S. R.; Lopez-Lorenzo, X.; Saenz-Mendez, P.;
Ericsson, S. R.; Fang, Y.; Ye, X.; Schriever, K.; Bäckström, E.; Biundo,
A.; Zubarev, R. A.; Furó, I.; Hakkarainen, M.; Syrén, P.-O.
Conformational selection in biocatalytic plastic degradation by
PETase. ACS Catal. 2022, 12, 3397−3409.
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling pubs.acs.org/jcim Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
7588
(65) Ferreiro, D. U.; Komives, E. A.; Wolynes, P. G. Frustration,
Function and Folding. Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol. 2018, 48, 68−73.
(66) Bryngelson, J. D.; Wolynes, P. G. Spin glasses and the statistical
mechanics of protein folding. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 1987, 84,
7524−7528.
(67) Ferreiro, D. U.; Komives, E. A.; Wolynes, P. G. Frustration in
biomolecules. Q. Rev. Biophys. 2014, 47, 285−363.
(68) Ferreiro, D. U.; Hegler, J. A.; Komives, E. A.; Wolynes, P. G.
Localizing Frustration in Native Proteins and Protein Assemblies.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2007, 104, 19819−19824.
(69) Chen, M.; Chen, X.; Schafer, N. P.; Clementi, C.; Komives, E.
A.; Ferreiro, D. U.; Wolynes, P. G. Surveying biomolecular frustration
at atomic resolution. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, No. 5944.
(70) Hammes, G. G. Multiple conformational changes in enzyme
catalysis. Biochemistry 2002, 41, 8221−8228.
(71) Hammes-Schiffer, S.; Benkovic, S. J. Relating protein motion to
catalysis. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 2006, 75, 519−541.
(72) Chen, L.; Fan, F.; Yang, M.; Wang, L.; Bai, Y.; Qiu, S.; Lyu, C.;
Huang, J. Atomistic insight into the binding mode and self-regulation
mechanism of Is PETase towards PET substrates with different
polymerization degrees. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2023, 25, 18332−
18345.
(73) Baker, P. J.; Montclare, J. K. Biotransformations Using
Cutinase. In Green Polymer Chemistry: Biocatalysis and Biomaterials;
American Chemical Society, 2010; Chapter 11; pp 141−158.
(74) Crnjar, A.; Grin ̃ en, A.; Kamerlin, S. C. L.; Ramírez-Sarmiento,
C. A. Conformational Selection of a Tryptophan Side Chain Drives
the Generalized Increase in Activity of PET Hydrolases through a
Ser/Ile Double Mutation. ACS Org. Inorg. Au 2023, 3, 109−119.
(75) Qu, Z.; Zhang, L.; Sun, Y. Molecular Insights into the
Enhanced Activity and/or Thermostability of PET Hydrolase by
D186 Mutations. Molecules 2024, 29, 1338.
(76) Son, H. F.; Joo, S.; Seo, H.; Sagong, H.-Y.; Lee, S. H.; Hong,
H.; Kim, K.-J. Structural bioinformatics-based protein engineering of
thermo-stable PETase from Ideonella sakaiensis. Enzyme Microb.
Technol. 2020, 141, 109656.
(77) Wang, J.; Oliveira, R. J.; Chu, X.; Whitford, P. C.; Chahine, J.;
Han, W.; Wang, E.; Onuchic, J. N.; Leite, V. B. Topography of
funneled landscapes determines the thermodynamics and kinetics of
protein folding. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2012, 109, 15763−15768.
(78) Chu, X.; Gan, L.; Wang, E.; Wang, J. Quantifying the
topography of the intrinsic energy landscape of flexible biomolecular
recognition. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2013, 110, E2342−E2351.
(79) Falkenstein, P.; Wei, R.; Matysik, J.; Song, C. Methods
Enzymology; Elsevier, 2021; Vol. 648, pp 231−252.
(80) Kamerzell, T. J.; Middaugh, C. R. The complex inter-
relationships between protein flexibility and stability. J. Pharm. Sci.
2008, 97, 3494−3517.
(81) Ming, Y.; Wang, W.; Yin, R.; Zeng, M.; Tang, L.; Tang, S.; Li,
M. A Review of Enzyme Design in Catalytic Stability by Artificial
Intelligence. Briefings Bioinf. 2023, 24, bbad065.
(82) Dauparas, J.; Anishchenko, I.; Bennett, N.; et al. Robust deep
learning-based protein sequence design using ProteinMPNN. Science
2022, 378, 49−56.
(83) Watson, J. L.; Juergens, D.; Bennett, N. R.; et al. De novo
design of protein structure and function with RFdiffusion. Nature
2023, 620, 1089−1100.
(84) Mu, J.; Li, Z.; Zhang, B.; Zhang, Q.; Iqbal, J.; Wadood, A.; Wei,
T.; Feng, Y.; Chen, H.-F. Graphormer supervised de novo protein
design method and function validation. Brief. Bioinform. 2024, 25,
bbae135.
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling pubs.acs.org/jcim Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jcim.4c00877
J. Chem. Inf. Model. 2024, 64, 7576−7589
7589