Vol.:(0123456789)
Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00449-025-03131-7
RESEARCH PAPER
Recycling the recyclers: strategies for the immobilisation 
of a PET‑degrading cutinase
Stefanie Fritzsche1 · Marcus Popp1 · Lukas Spälter1 · Natalie Bonakdar2 · Nicolas Vogel2 · Kathrin Castiglione1
Received: 12 November 2024 / Accepted: 20 January 2025 / Published online: 2 February 2025 
© The Author(s) 2025
Abstract
Enzymatic degradation of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) represents a sustainable approach to reducing plastic waste and 
protecting fossil resources. The cost efficiency of enzymatic PET degradation processes could be substantially improved by 
reusing the enzymes. However, conventional immobilisation strategies, such as binding to porous carriers, are challenging 
as the immobilised enzyme can only interact with the macromolecular solid PET substrate to a limited extent, thus reducing 
the degradation efficiency. To mitigate this challenge, this work compared different immobilisation strategies of the PET-
degrading cutinase ICCG DAQI. Immobilisation approaches included enzyme fixation via linkers to carriers, the synthesis of 
cross-linked enzyme aggregates with different porosities, and immobilisation on stimulus-responsive polymers. The high-
est degradation efficiencies were obtained with the pH-responsive material  Kollicoat®, where 80% of the initial enzyme 
activity could be recovered after immobilisation. Degradation of textile PET fibres by the cutinase-Kollicoat® immobilisate 
was investigated in batch reactions on a 1 L-scale. In three consecutive reaction cycles, the product yield of the released 
terephthalic acid exceeded 97% in less than 14 h. Even in the fifth cycle, 78% of the maximum yield was achieved in the 
same reaction time. An advantage of this process is the efficient pH-dependent recovery of the immobilisate after the reac-
tion, which integrates seamlessly into the terephthalic acid recovery by lowering the pH after hydrolysis. This integration 
therefore not only simplifies the downstream processing, but also provides a cost-effective and resource-efficient solution for 
both enzyme reuse and product separation after PET degradation, making it a promising approach for industrial application.
Keywords Plastic waste · Enzymatic depolymerisation · Polyethylene terephthalate · Stimulus-responsive polymers · Cross-
linked enzyme aggregates · Kollicoat®
Background
The pollution of the Earth's ecosystems by plastics such 
as polyethylene terephthalate (PET) has become a severe 
environmental issue of the twenty-first century [1 , 2]. With 
a global market volume of over 25 million tonnes in 2022, 
PET is widely used in plastic bottles and synthetic fibres due 
to its durability, ease of processing and gas barrier proper -
ties [3, 4]. In principle, it can be recycled through chemical, 
thermal, and mechanical processes [5]. In practice, however, 
these processes are often environmentally, economically and 
socially unsustainable, due to harsh and harmful reaction 
conditions and loss of plastic quality [4, 6]. In recent years, 
the focus has therefore shifted to the use of PET-degrading 
enzymes as natural biocatalysts. Various enzymes belonging 
to the class of esterases (EC 3.1), such as cutinases, lipases 
and PETases have been shown to hydrolyse PET into its 
monomeric components, terephthalic acid and ethylene 
glycol, under mild environmental conditions, providing a 
promising route for sustainable recycling [7 –10]. By opti-
mising biocatalysts and reaction conditions, high concen-
trations of up to 20% (w/v) PET can now be degraded in 
a manageable time, even less than 12 h [11, 12]. Further 
improvements in the economic and environmental efficiency 
of PET degradation could be achieved by recycling of the 
 * Kathrin Castiglione 
 kathrin.castiglione@fau.de
1 Institute of Bioprocess Engineering, Department 
of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Friedrich-
Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, 
Paul-Gordan-Straße 3, 91052 Erlangen, Germany
2 Institute of Particle Technology, Department of Chemical 
and Biological Engineering, Friedrich-Alexander-Univer
sität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Cauerstraße 4, 91058 Erlangen, 
Germany
606 Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619
enzymes, given their stability in relation to the short pro-
cessing times. Reusing the enzymes would reduce the cost 
of biocatalyst production and simplify the purification of 
the hydrolysis products terephthalic acid and ethylene gly -
col [13, 14]. These two products of enzymatic hydrolysis, 
especially terephthalic acid, can be used for the production 
of new plastics, such as PET and polybutylene terephtha-
late (PBT), whilst ethylene glycol, for instance, can also be 
used as a feedstock for microbial cell cultivation [15–17]. To 
facilitate separation and recovery, enzymes can be immobi-
lised. In general, there are two types of enzyme immobili-
sation: physical entrapment and chemical fixation [18]. For 
macromolecular substrates such as PET, physical microen-
capsulation or membrane encapsulation does not provide 
sufficient mass transfer. In the field of chemical fixation, 
methods with and without the use of carrier materials can 
be considered. Carrier-free immobilisation systems are also 
applicable to enzymes converting macromolecular substrates 
and are a cost-effective immobilisation option, especially 
for extracellular enzymes [19– 22]. Co-precipitation with 
starch can improve substrate accessibility and internal mass 
transfer by the production of cross-linked enzyme aggre -
gates (CLEAs) with greater porosity and larger pores [23, 
24]. Inorganic materials, natural or synthetic polymers, or 
magnetic nanoparticles can be used as carriers for chemical 
fixation [18, 25]. However, solid porous supports can hin-
der the efficiency of PET degradation, partly because most 
proteins are located within porous structures. As a result, 
only surface-exposed enzymes will initially interact with 
solid PET until the degradation products are small enough 
to diffuse into the pores. Additionally, even enzymes bound 
to the carrier surface might show poor interaction with the 
macromolecular PET substrate due to rigidification effects. 
This can lead to significant rate limitations compared to the 
enzymes used in soluble form [ 26, 27]. The flexibility of 
immobilised enzymes and thus the enzyme–substrate inter -
action when using solid supports can be increased using 
longer spacers between the solid carrier materials and the 
enzyme. For instance, attaching the enzyme to a longer alde-
hyde chain via a suitable functional group allows the enzyme 
to retain its molecular dynamics leading to more effective 
degradation [14, 28, 29]. In addition, smart carriers, such 
as water-soluble stimulus-responsive polymers, offer an 
elegant solution for macromolecular substrates [30]. These 
polymers undergo conformational changes in response to 
stimuli, such as temperature, pH, ionic strength, and light 
[31–33]. Biocatalysts can be adsorbed or covalently attached 
to these naturally derived or synthetic polymers [32]. Under 
suitable environmental conditions, the responsive polymer 
can then be converted to a soluble state, enhancing the flex-
ibility of the bound PET-degrading enzymes and completely 
avoiding their localisation within porous structures during 
catalysis. This can facilitate substrate accessibility and 
therefore the catalytic reaction even with macromolecular 
and insoluble polymeric substrates such as PET. After the 
biocatalytic reaction, the enzyme–polymer conjugate can be 
easily separated by inducing a conformational change with 
an appropriate stimulus [31].
Cutinases from Thermobifida fusca and Humicola inso-
lens (HiC) have already been immobilised with high yields 
and stabilities on various materials, including chitosan beads 
and other resins [34, 35]. PETase has also been successfully 
immobilised using magnetic nanoparticles [25]. However, 
immobilisation approaches are often used for hydrolysis of 
substrates with large surface areas, such as dispersible PET 
nanoparticles, or use a soluble surrogate substrate, such as 
nitrophenolic compounds, rather than the actual bulk sub-
strate PET.
In this study, we evaluated different immobilisation meth-
ods of the PET-degrading cutinase ICCG DAQI, focussing 
on approaches that ensure good accessibility of immobi-
lised enzymes to macromolecular PET: The methods used 
included ReliZyme™ solid carrier particles with flexible 
spacers, CLEAs and pCLEAs as carrier-free systems, and 
thermoresponsive and pH-responsive polymers that provide 
both good accessibility in their soluble state and efficient 
separation in their insoluble state. The cutinase is a leaf-
branch compost cutinase (LCC) variant, initially thermo-
stabilised by Tournier et al., whose specific activity towards 
PET was enhanced by the introduction of additional point 
mutations [17, 36]. As previously demonstrated, this PET-
degrading enzyme can efficiently hydrolyse various poly -
ester materials completely in less than 24 h [17, 36, 37]. 
In this work, the suitability of the different immobilisa-
tion strategies was investigated for two types of substrates. 
First, the general esterase activity was determined via a 
model degradation reaction, using the soluble, small sub-
strate nitrophenylacetate (pNPA), which is hydrolysed to 
photometrically detectable nitrophenol. This assay is used 
to measure whether, and to what extent, the immobilised 
enzyme retains a general catalytic activity. Second, we inves-
tigated the actual targeted macromolecular PET degradation 
by incubating the immobilised enzymes with post-industrial 
PET fibres and measuring the yield of terephthalic acid as an 
indicator of PET degradation. The comparison of these two 
parameters allowed us to assess accessibility issues between 
the immobilised enzyme and the macromolecular PET sub-
strate, ultimately with the aim of identifying the most effi-
cient cutinase immobilisation method. Finally, we evaluated 
the recyclability of the immobilised enzyme by repetitive 
degradation experiments using the same, recovered enzyme 
immobilisates.
607Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619 
Materials and methods
Materials
Analytical grade salts, titrants and components for bacterial 
cell culture were obtained from Carl Roth GmbH (Karlsruhe, 
Germany). For the preparation of phosphate buffers, mono-
potassium phosphate and dipotassium phosphate were 
obtained from Carl Roth GmbH (Karlsruhe, Germany). 
Enzymes used for molecular cloning were from New Eng-
land Biolabs (Ipswich, MA). p-Nitrophenyl acetate (pNPA), 
N-ethyl-N′-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-carbodiimide hydro-
chloride (EDC) as well as N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) 
were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, 
MA). Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), azobisisobutyronitrile 
(AIBN), acrylamide, and acrylonitrile were from Sigma 
Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). 25% aqueous glutaraldehyde 
(GA) solution as well as α-amylase (Aspergillus oryzae,  
30 U  mg−1) were purchased from Merck KGaA (Darmstadt, 
Germany). ReliZyme™ particles EP 403/S, HA 403/S and 
HFA 403/S were from Resindion S.r.l. (Binasco, Italy), 
whilst  Kollicoat® MAE 100 P was from Sigma Aldrich 
(St. Louis, MO). PET fibres (post-industrial textile fibres, 
9% crystallinity [36]) were provided by Gneuss Kunstst-
offtechnik (Bad Oeynhausen, Germany).
Protein production and purification
The recombinant production of the cutinase ICCG DAQI in 
E. coli BL21 (DE3) using autoinduction medium as well as 
the purification by immobilised metal affinity chromatog-
raphy (IMAC) was performed as described before [36, 38, 
39]. Protein purity was determined by PAGE with Coomas-
sie staining, whilst quantitative determination of protein 
concentration was performed using a Pierce BCA Protein 
Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The 
purified protein was aliquoted in storage buffer (20 mM Tris, 
300 mM NaCl, pH 8) and stored at − 80 °C until use.
Esterase activity assay
General esterase activity was determined spectrophotometri-
cally using nitrophenol substrates as previously described 
[36, 39]. Briefly, a substrate stock solution of pNPA was pre-
pared in acetonitrile. The appropriately diluted enzyme solu-
tion was pre-incubated in the required volume of the reac-
tion buffer (20 mM Tris, 10 mM NaCl, pH 8) in a 96-well 
microtiter plate at 37 °C according to the assay procedure 
already described in the literature [40]. After addition of the 
substrate, the release of p-nitrophenol was monitored imme-
diately by measuring the absorbance at 405 nm for 10 min 
at 37 °C in a plate reader (Tecan, Männedorf, Switzerland) 
[40]. The p-nitrophenol concentration was quantified using 
the p-nitrophenol extinction coefficient (17.4   mM−1  cm−1) 
determined under reaction conditions [36]. The linear slope 
obtained was used to calculate the esterase activity, where 
one unit of esterase activity was defined as the release of 
1 μmol p-nitrophenol per minute.
Small‑ and large‑scale PET hydrolysis
The hydrolysis of post-industrial PET substrate was per -
formed either in miniaturised stirred-tank reactors (bioRE-
ACTOR 48, 2mag, Munich, Germany) or on a 1 L-scale 
in a stirred-tank reactor (Labfors 3, Infors HT, Bottmin-
gen, Switzerland). Each miniaturised stirred-tank reactor 
(16 mL working volume), equipped with a magnetic induc-
tive S-stirrer, contained 2 g  L−1 of PET fibre substrate dis-
persed in phosphate buffer (100 mM, pH 9). Hydrolysis was 
carried out at 300 rpm and 70 °C for up to 24 h as previ-
ously described [36]. For large-scale PET hydrolysis (1 L 
working volume), a Labfors 3 system (Infors HT, Bottmin-
gen, Switzerland) with a maximum working volume of 2 
L and a 6-bladed Rushton turbine impeller was used [39 ]. 
Hydrolysis experiments were also performed in 100 mM 
phosphate buffer at 70 °C and pH 9 using 10 g  L−1 PET 
fibres and stirring at 300 rpm. pH control was achieved by 
automatic addition of 1 M NaOH or 1 M HCl. For both 
reactor systems, enzymatic hydrolysis was initiated by the 
addition of free or immobilised enzyme. Samples were taken 
at regular intervals via sampling ports and analysed for the 
hydrolysis products terephthalic acid, ethylene glycol, mono-
(2-hydroxyethyl)terephthalic acid (MHET) and bis-(2-hy -
droxyethyl)terephthalic acid (BHET) by high performance 
liquid chromatography (HPLC) as previously described [36]. 
The terephthalic acid yield was calculated as the ratio of its 
concentration measured by HPLC to the maximum possible 
concentration based on the initial PET concentration (maxi-
mum 1.73 g  L−1 terephthalic acid for 2 g  L−1 PET).
Immobilisation on ReliZyme™ particles
For the immobilisation on ReliZyme™ particle types HFA 
and EP, no activation prior to immobilisation was neces-
sary, whilst HA was first activated using GA. Activation 
was achieved by incubating the particle suspension (2% 
(w/v)) in water with GA (1.25 g  L−1) for 2.5 h before the 
particles were separated and washed (10 min, 4500g). Both 
the non-activated HFA and EP particles and the activated 
HA particles (2% (w/v) in 100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 
8) were incubated with the purified enzyme (2.2  mgenzyme 
 gparticles
−1) for up to 20 h with continuous shaking at room 
temperature. The enzyme-loaded particles were then iso-
lated and washed thrice by centrifugation (10 min, 4500g ) 
608 Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619
before 200 mg particles were used per hydrolysis batch in 
the miniaturised stirred-tank reactors with a working volume 
of 16 mL (100 mM phosphate buffer, pH 8) as described 
above. For the reference hydrolysis with free enzyme, the 
same amount of enzyme as used for immobilisation (0.44 mg 
per hydrolysis batch) was applied to ensure comparability.
Synthesis of CLEAs
Different ammonium sulphate (AS) saturations for precipi-
tation (50–80%) and GA concentrations for cross-linking 
(10–20 mM) were used for the preparation of CLEAs. Satu-
rated AS stock solution and phosphate buffer (100 mM, pH 
8) were added to glass flasks and stirred at 600 rpm (VARI-
OMAG POLY 15, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) 
on ice. The enzyme solution was gradually added and pre -
cipitated for 1 h. Subsequently, cross-linking was initiated 
by the addition of GA, followed by incubation on ice for 4 h. 
After quenching the reaction by diluting with 100 mM lysine 
solution, the flasks were stored overnight at 4 °C. To sepa-
rate unbound enzymes from the CLEAs, the samples were 
centrifuged at 4500g and 4 °C for 15 min. The supernatants 
were decanted and the remaining pellets were suspended in 
phosphate buffer and washed twice. The esterase activity of 
both the synthesised CLEAs and the washing supernatants 
was determined as described above, as well as the hydrolysis 
of PET in miniaturised stirred-tank reactors.
CLEA modification by starch‑coprecipitation 
(pCLEAs)
For the synthesis of pCLEAs with co-precipitation of starch, 
saturated AS stock solution and phosphate buffer (100 mM, 
pH 8) were added to glass flasks and stirred at 600 rpm, 
before 3% (w/v) starch was added simultaneously with the 
enzyme solution. The subsequent incubation for efficient 
precipitation and cross-linking steps followed those of a con-
ventional CLEA synthesis, with the only difference being 
the addition of 30 U  mL−1 of amylase to remove residual 
starch after the addition of lysine. Starch degradation was 
evaluated through the addition of a 0.05 M iodine solution, 
optically comparing the staining of samples co-precipitated 
with starch to those synthesised without starch [24].
Reusability of CLEAs and pCLEAs
The stability of the general esterase activity of CLEAs and 
thus their recyclability for the ester hydrolysis reaction was 
investigated by repeating the pNPA assay as described above 
several times. After determination of the initial activities, the 
microtiter plate was centrifuged at 4000g and 4 °C for 5 min. 
The resulting supernatants were discarded, and the samples 
were resuspended in fresh reaction buffer, before the esterase 
activity was measured again. This procedure was repeated 
10 times. To assess the recyclability of the CLEAs under 
PET hydrolysis process conditions, subsequent hydrolysis 
runs were performed as described above. After the first run, 
the reactor medium was centrifuged (4500g, 4 °C, 15 min), 
followed by washing and resuspension of the CLEA pellet 
in fresh hydrolysis buffer. A new hydrolysis run was initiated 
by the addition of PET fibres.
Immobilisation on a thermoresponsive polymer
The thermoresponsive polymer poly(acrylamide-co-acry -
lonitrile) (p(AM-AN)) was synthesised by the polymeri-
sation of acrylamide and acrylonitrile according to the 
literature [41]. Briefly, acrylamide and acrylonitrile were 
dissolved in DMSO in a ratio of 82:18 before the initia-
tor AIBN was added. After 6 h at 65 °C under nitrogen 
atmosphere, the polymer was precipitated by the addition 
of methanol. After several rinses with methanol, the isolated 
polymer was dried at 70 °C for 24 h. To activate the polymer, 
1% (v/v) GA was added to a 2% (w/v) polymer solution in 
deionised water and incubated with stirring for 6 h at 45 °C 
[41]. The activated polymer was separated, washed and then 
incubated with 1 mg   mL−1 enzyme in phosphate buffer for 
3 h at 45 °C. After this, the enzyme–polymer immobili-
sate was separated, washed twice and finally used for PET 
hydrolysis. To characterise the thermoresponsive behaviour 
of p(AM-AN), a 2% (w/v) polymer solution was incubated 
at temperatures between 5 and 50 °C and turbidity was 
assessed by measuring the extinction at 500 nm. The upper 
critical solution temperature (UCST) was determined using a 
sigmoidal least squares regression curve in GraphPad Prism. 
The inflexion point at 50% extinction corresponded to the 
UCST.
Immobilisation on a pH‑responsive polymer
A 2% (w/v)  Kollicoat® solution was prepared in deionised 
water by first increasing the pH to 11 with 2 M NaOH to 
ensure a complete dissolution and then reducing to pH 7 
with 2 M HCl. For enzyme adsorption, 50 mL of the solution 
was mixed with 3 mg purified enzyme. If a covalent bind-
ing was intended, 0.6 g  L−1 of NHS and EDC was added. 
After incubation for 3 h at 300 rpm and room temperature, 
the pH of the mixture was reduced to 4.5 with 3 M ace-
tic acid and the precipitate was separated by centrifugation 
(400g, 10 min, 4 °C). The supernatant was discarded and 
the precipitate was washed twice with 0.01 M acetate buffer 
(pH 4.5). In the next step, the precipitate was redissolved 
in 50 mL phosphate buffer (pH 9), the pH was adjusted to 
9 and the resulting polymer-enzyme solution was used for 
hydrolysis on a 1 L-scale in a Labfors 3 stirred-tank reactor 
as described above.
609Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619 
Reusability of  Kollicoat®
After hydrolysis, the medium was acidified to pH 4.8 with 
3 M acetic acid. The resulting precipitate was separated by 
centrifugation (400g , 10 min, 4 °C), washed with acetate 
buffer (pH 4.5) and finally redissolved in 100 mM phosphate 
buffer (pH 9). The hydrolysis in the stirred-tank reactor was 
restarted according to the conditions described with the 
addition of fresh PET fibres. At the beginning and the end 
of each hydrolysis, the esterase activity (pNPA assay) and 
the hydrolysis products (HPLC) were analysed.
Thermal and pH stability
Thermal stability was evaluated by incubating samples of 
free and immobilised enzyme in 100 mM phosphate buffer 
(pH 9) at 70 °C (Thermomixer, Eppendorf SE, Hamburg, 
Germany) for 14 days. General esterase activity was meas-
ured periodically and compared with the initial activity to 
determine the half-life of both free and immobilised enzyme 
at 70 °C. The pH stability was assessed by incubating the 
enzyme at pH values between 4 and 8 for up to 24 h at 70 
°C und and then measuring the esterase activity in reaction 
buffer (20 mM Tris, 10 mM NaCl, pH 8).
Statistical analysis
A two-sided t-test for independent samples (Excel) with a 
significance level of α ≤ 0.05 was used to determine whether 
the differences between individual results were statistically 
significant.
Results
ReliZyme™ as solid carrier particles
As the first immobilisation approach, a classical carrier 
fixation using synthetic polymer particles as support was 
investigated. For this purpose, methacrylic acid-based 
ReliZyme™ particles with different surface functionali-
sation and spacer lengths were used. HFA 403/S and EP 
403/S differ in the length and structure of their alkyl spac-
ers. Both have terminal epoxy groups that allow direct, 
covalent immobilisation of the cutinase via lysine resi-
dues on the protein surface (Fig.  1). In contrast, HA 403/S 
requires activation of its hexamethylamino spacer prior to 
immobilisation (Fig.  1). Incubation with the bifunctional 
GA leads to the formation of aldehyde groups which allow 
binding to the amino groups of the enzyme [42].
To assess the general suitability of cutinase immobili-
sation, the relative amount of immobilised enzymes was 
determined by measuring the residual esterase activity 
in the supernatants during the incubation of the cutinase 
ICCG DAQI with the particles. Only low immobilisation 
efficiencies of ICCG DAQI were achieved with HFA 403/S 
(< 20% immobilised enzymes) (Fig.  2a). This low effi-
ciency may be due to differences in the length and struc-
ture of the alkyl chains between HFA 403/S and EP 403/S 
(Fig.  1), which appear to limit efficient immobilisation 
for HFA 403/S, as has been observed for other enzymes 
[43]. In addition, the reduced stability of HFA 403/S at 
temperatures above 10 °C and its short storage stability 
[44] likely further compromise its suitability for cutinase 
immobilisation under the conditions used in this study. In 
contrast, for HA 403/S and EP 403/S particles, the amount 
of immobilised cutinase was 60% and 80%, respectively 
after 20 h incubation.
These two types of particles, functionalised with epoxy 
and GA-activated amino groups, were therefore used for 
the hydrolysis of post-industrial PET fibres. In the first 
hydrolysis cycle, a release of terephthalic acid, indicat-
ing the successful degradation of PET into its monomer, 
was observed for both cutinase-ReliZyme™ immobi-
lisates with efficiencies of 74% for HA 403/S particles 
and 18% for EP 403/S particles (Fig.  2b). The degrada-
tion efficiency was less effective compared to that of the 
free enzyme, which completely hydrolysed all available 
PET (Fig.  2 b). In addition, the yield of terephthalic acid 
decreased significantly in the second cycle to less than 2% 
for both cutinase particle immobilisates. The terephthalic 
acid equivalents, i.e. the sum of all degradation products 
including the intermediate products MHET and BHET, 
showed the same trends (Table S1). The results therefore 
show that although cutinase could be immobilised on solid 
particles via appropriate linker groups, it was not possible 
to achieve efficient PET hydrolysis, particularly with recy -
cled immobilised enzymes.
Fig. 1  Overview of the functional groups of the carrier materials ReliZyme™ EP 403/S, HFA 403/S and HA 403/S. Figure created with Chem-
Draw Professional based on [29]
610 Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619
Carrier‑free immobilisation using CLEAs
CLEAs are a carrier-free immobilisation method where pro-
teins are first precipitated to form aggregates, which are then 
stabilised by cross-linking with a cross-linking agent [22]. 
For the first precipitation step, the two most commonly used 
precipitants, AS and PEG, were compared for their suita-
bility to precipitate the cutinase ICCG DAQI (Fig. S1). PEG 
showed poor esterase activity recovery (< 10%) at the PEG 
saturations tested (30, 50 and 70%), whereas AS yielded the 
best activity recovery of 70% at a saturation of 70%.
In the second step of CLEA production, the protein 
aggregates formed after precipitation are stabilised with 
a cross-linking agent, the concentration of which is cru-
cial for both CLEA stability and catalytic activity. In this 
work, GA was used as a cross-linker with concentrations 
between 10 and 20 mM. With increasing GA concentra-
tion, both the immobilisation efficiency, measured as the 
relative esterase activity of the CLEAs compared to the 
initial activity, and the terephthalic acid yield in PET 
fibre degradation decreased (Fig.  3a). We hypothesise 
that this decrease is caused by mass transfer limitations 
and reduced substrate accessibility due to denser cross-
linking resulting in a more compact CLEA structure. The 
observed differences between general esterase activity 
(small pNPA substrate) and terephthalic acid yield (mac-
romolecular PET substrate) support this hypothesis: at 
higher cross-linking densities, the cutinase can still hydro-
lyse small substrates, but PET cannot be enzymatically 
degraded due to accessibility limitations. When accessing 
the reusability, the weakly cross-linked CLEAs (10 mM 
GA) showed a faster decrease in esterase activity com -
pared to the more cross-linked samples, with less than 
20% activity measured after five recycling cycles (Fig.  3b). 
CLEAs with higher cross-linking density (20 mM GA) 
had a lower initial esterase activity compared to the free 
enzyme (100% esterase activity). However, amongst the 
GA concentrations tested, it showed the smallest loss of 
activity over the recycling cycles in the model reaction, 
with more than 50% of the initial activity measured after 
ten times of recycling (Fig.  3b). Stronger cross-linking 
appears to form more stable, compact aggregates, reduc-
ing enzyme loss and making CLEAs easier to separate and 
recycle, thereby preserving activity over cycles.
Unfortunately, the reduced stability of less cross-linked 
CLEAs was also observed under real process conditions 
(PET fibres, stirred-tank reactor, 70 °C, 22 h), when the 
CLEAs were isolated after the first PET hydrolysis, puri-
fied and reused for a second hydrolysis. Weakly cross-linked 
CLEAs (10 mM) achieved moderate PET degradation in 
the first cycle, yielding 67% terephthalic acid (Fig.  3a). 
However, in the second cycle, the degradation achieved was 
minimal, with only 5% terephthalic acid yield (Fig. S2). The 
observation that reusability of the CLEAs and high hydroly-
sis activity with solid PET as the substrate were mutually 
exclusive could be due to the poor substrate accessibility at 
higher degrees of cross-linking. Nevertheless, higher cross-
linking seems necessary to maintain stability and hence 
reusability of CLEAs under process conditions of 70 °C for 
more than 20 h.
Fig. 2  PET hydrolysis using cutinase immobilised onto solid 
ReliZyme™ carriers. a Relative amount of immobilised enzyme dur -
ing the incubation of cutinase ICCG DAQI with ReliZyme™ particles 
HFA 403/S, HA 403/S and EP 403/S. Each data point represents the 
mean of three pNPA-measurements. b Terephthalic acid yields in 
relation to the theoretical maximum during the hydrolysis of textile 
PET fibres with ICCG DAQI as free enzyme (0.44 mg per reactor) or 
immobilised on different ReliZyme™ carriers (HA 403/S and EP 
403/S, per reactor: use of 0.44  mgenzyme for immobilisation) on a 16 
mL-scale. Using the immobilised enzyme, the particles were sepa-
rated after hydrolysis and used to hydrolyse fresh PET fibres
611Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619 
Carrier‑free immobilisation using pCLEAs
One concept to overcome the accessibility obstacle is to 
increase the porosity of CLEAs at higher cross-linking 
through the co-precipitation of starch and enzymatic 
removal of the starch after cross-linking [23, 24]. Such 
porous CLEAs (pCLEAs) are advantageous because they 
can reduce mass transfer limitations and accessibility 
issues for macromolecular enzymatic substrates, thereby 
enhancing catalytic efficiency [24]. For the synthesis of 
pCLEAs, starch was precipitated simultaneously with the 
enzyme using AS as precipitating agent. Amylase was 
added to remove the starch after cross-linking with GA 
to create the porous structure [24]. After synthesis, we 
first assessed the effect of increased porosity via the gen-
eral esterase activity using the model degradation reaction 
with the small and soluble substrate pNPA for the highly 
cross-linked stable CLEAs (20 mM) and an intermedi-
ate cross-linker density (15 mM). These pCLEAs with 
medium to high cross-linker concentrations resulted in a 
substantial increase in general esterase activity, suggest-
ing that, at least for the smaller substrate pNPA, there was 
indeed less diffusion limitation within pCLEAs compared 
to conventional CLEAs (Fig.  4). In particular, for pCLEAs 
with 15 mM GA, esterase activity could be improved over 
threefold via the porosity added by starch co-precipitation 
(Fig.  4a). Similarly, an enhanced catalytic activity of the 
pCLEAs compared to the non-porous CLEAs was also 
found during PET degradation, where successful PET fibre 
hydrolysis (102 ± 5% terephthalic acid yield) was observed 
for pCLEAs cross-linked with 15 mM GA (Fig.  4a). 
Although pCLEAs with 20 mM GA showed a fourfold 
increase in general esterase activity in the model reaction, 
no substantial release of terephthalic acid (< 10%) was 
measured when using PET fibres as substrates (Fig.  4b). 
The observed difference between general esterase activ -
ity and PET hydrolysis can be attributed to the different 
substrates (pNPA versus PET) and the resulting different 
effects of cross-linking on mass transport and substrate 
accessibility to the enzymes. Soluble substrates can dif-
fuse into the pores, and thus increase the overall activity. 
In contrast, the insoluble, macroscopic fibres only provide 
limited contact areas, thus reducing the overall efficiency 
of the degradation process.
Although pCLEAs with intermediate cross-linking den-
sity (15 mM) showed promising results for PET hydrolysis 
(Fig. 4a), their recyclability appeared to be limited. In the 
second hydrolysis cycle, esterase activity dropped below 
20% and terephthalic acid release was minimal (3% yield), 
probably due to reduced stability from higher porosity 
despite the increased cross-linking. In conclusion, neither 
CLEAs nor pCLEAs showed the desired combination of 
catalytic activity and recyclability.
Fig. 3  PET hydrolysis using CLEAs. a Terephthalic acid yield and 
relative esterase activity for different GA concentrations used in 
CLEA synthesis with constant AS saturation. PET fibres were hydro-
lysed in miniaturised stirred-tank reactors. The relative esterase 
activities were compared to the initial free esterase activity used for 
CLEA production (pNPA assay, n = 3). Terephthalic acid yields have 
a relative error of 5.3%, taking into account errors in weighing small 
amounts of fibre, sample preparation and HPLC measurement. b Rel -
ative catalytic esterase activity (pNPA assay) of CLEAs compared to 
their initial activity. The initial esterase activity of less cross-linked 
CLEAs (10 mM GA) was 69% of the activity of the free enzyme 
used to prepare the CLEAs, and that of the more cross-linked CLEAs 
(20 mM GA) was 24% of the activity of the free enzyme used. After 
each cycle, the centrifuged supernatant was discarded, the resulting 
pellet was washed, and fresh pNPA substrate was added to start the 
reaction. Each data point represents the mean ± standard deviation of 
three esterase measurements
612 Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619
Immobilisation on soluble carriers
pH- and thermoresponsive polymers may offer a promis-
ing approach to enzyme immobilisation as they exhibit dif-
ferent conformations depending on process conditions. In 
particular, the polymers can be highly swollen or collapsed 
depending on the external conditions. When used as a carrier 
for enzyme immobilisation, these conformational changes 
provide a way to combine both efficient separation prop-
erties and accessibility to solid substrates [30, 45, 46]. At 
PET hydrolysis conditions of 70 °C and pH 9, the polymers 
remain soluble, ensuring optimal substrate accessibility for 
the immobilised enzyme. After hydrolysis and cooling, ther-
moresponsive polymers undergo a volume phase transition, 
collapsing into a coiled state and allowing easy separation 
of the immobilised enzyme. Similarly, when the pH is low-
ered for terephthalic acid recovery [47], a pH-responsive 
polymer can become insoluble around pH 5, allowing the 
enzyme-polymer complex to be removed before lowering the 
pH further below 4 to separate the terephthalic acid.
p(AM-AN) was selected as a thermoresponsive polymer 
[41]. A 2% (w/v) p(AM-AN) solution showed thermorespon-
sive behaviour as the transparent solution of the polymer at 
70 °C became turbid when cooled to 4 °C, indicating that 
the polymer precipitated (Fig. 5). We assessed this precipita-
tion by temperature-dependent extinction measurements at 
500 nm and determined an UCST (50% extinction) of 19 °C 
(Fig. 5). After activation of the amine groups of the poly -
mer with GA, the resulting aldehyde groups reacted with 
the amine groups of cutinase to form a cutinase-p(AM-AN) 
immobilisate. When this immobilisate was used for PET 
fibre hydrolysis, over 80% terephthalic acid was obtained in 
the first cycle (Fig. S3). However, when the cutinase-p(AM-
AN) immobilisate was separated after hydrolysis and reused 
for a second hydrolysis cycle, the immobilisate could not be 
well separated from the aqueous phase, ultimately resulting 
in an inefficient yield of only 1% in the second hydrolysis 
cycle (Fig. S3).
pH-responsive polymers exhibit a swelling or collapsing 
behaviour in response to pH changes, affecting electrostatic 
interactions and consequently the hydrophobicity of the 
polymer chain [48]. This swelling-collapse-transition could 
be clearly seen for the pH-responsive polymer  Kollicoat® 
(Fig. 5). This methacrylic acid–ethyl acrylate copolymer has 
two different solubility states, depending on the pH value. 
At a pH above 5.5, the carboxyl groups in the polymer are 
deprotonated and form a water-soluble polyelectrolyte, 
leading to complete dissolution in water. Conversely, at pH 
values below 5.5, the solubility of the polymer decreases 
due to protonation, leading to reversible precipitation [49, 
50]. We investigated the pH-responsiveness of  Kollicoat® 
by measuring the extinction at 500 nm of a 2% (w/v) solu-
tion over a pH range of 1 to 12. A significant change in 
extinction was observed between pH 5 and 6, indicating 
the swelling–collapse–transition of the polymer (Fig.  5). 
Below pH 5, the polymer remained completely undissolved 
(extinction > 90%), whereas above pH 6, it was completely 
dissolved with extinction values below 5% (Fig.  5). A pH 
of 4.8 was therefore chosen for the precipitation process of 
 Kollicoat® in this work, which is in line with values reported 
in the literature for structurally identical  Eudragit® [46, 51, 
52].
When 3 mg cutinase ICCG DAQI was immobilised with 
2% (w/v)  Kollicoat®, via the addition of NHS and EDC as 
Fig. 4  Comparison of CLEAs and pCLEAs for cutinase immobilisa-
tion. Shown are both the terephthalic acid yield and relative esterase 
activity for CLEAs and pCLEAs with 15 mM (a) and 20 mM (b) 
cross-linker concentration. PET fibres were hydrolysed in miniatur -
ised stirred-tank reactors. Terephthalic acid yields have a relative 
error of 5.3%, taking into account errors in weighing small amounts 
of fibre, sample preparation and HPLC measurement. The relative 
esterase activities were compared to the initial free esterase activity 
used for CLEA production (pNPA assay, n = 3)
613Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619 
coupling agents at pH 7, less than 1% of the initial ester -
ase activity was detected in the supernatant and subsequent 
washes (Fig. S4). The immobilisation efficiency, measured 
as the relative esterase activity of the resulting immobilisate 
compared to the free enzyme activity was 81%, indicating 
sufficient loading of the polymers with active enzyme. The 
reduced specific activity of the recovered cutinase is prob-
ably due to conformational changes of the cutinase or steric 
hindrance as reported for other enzymes in the literature [46, 
51]. The cutinase-Kollicoat® immobilisate showed success-
ful degradation of PET fibres on a 1 L-scale in a stirred-tank 
reactor, with terephthalic acid yields of over 97% in less than 
14 h for the first three hydrolysis cycles. This almost com-
plete conversion was also achieved with recycled cutinase-
Kollicoat® immobilisates, which could be precipitated from 
the reaction solution by changing the pH to 4.8. Even in the 
fifth recycling cycle, the yield of terephthalic acid remained 
at 78% (Fig.  6a). This reduction of PET yield after several 
hydrolysis cycles on a 1 L-scale is reflected by the decrease 
of the general esterase activity over the cycles (Fig. S5a). 
Both thermal inactivation of cutinase and incomplete recov-
ery of the immobilisate during recycling contribute to the 
Fig. 5  Thermoresponsive polymer (p(AM-AN)) and pH-responsive 
polymer  (Kollicoat®) under their respective hydrolysis conditions 
(70 °C, pH 9) and separation conditions (4 °C, pH 4). For the pH-
responsive polymer, a clear collapse of the precipitated polymer by 
sedimentation was observed after a waiting period of 15 min. Also 
shown is the extinction at a wavelength of 500 nm of a  Kollicoat® 
solution (2% (w/v)) in the pH range from 1 to 12 and a p(AM-AN) 
solution (2% (w/v)) in the temperature range of 5–50 °C. Each value 
represents the mean value, normalised to the maximum extinc-
tion of three technical replicates ± standard deviation. The UCST of 
p(AM-AN) was determined at 50% extinction using a sigmoidal least 
squares regression curve (R2 = 0.99, dotted line) in GraphPad Prism
614 Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619
observed decrease in activity over cycles. This is indicated 
by the loss of esterase activity observed during the hydroly-
sis cycles, as well as the sharp decline during the recycling 
step (Fig. S5b). Further optimisation of the immobilisate 
separation process could potentially minimise the loss of 
enzymatic activity during recycling. The observation of tere-
phthalic acid yields was also observed in the NaOH con-
sumption curves. During the hydrolysis, NaOH was automat-
ically dosed to maintain a stable pH of 9 in the stirred-tank 
reactor to neutralise the formation of terephthalic acid from 
the PET hydrolysis. Whilst the curves during the first and 
second hydrolysis cycles showed no noticeable differences, 
from the third hydrolysis cycle onwards, a reduced NaOH 
addition rate and consequently a slower hydrolysis rate was 
observed (Fig. 6b). By the fifth hydrolysis cycle, less NaOH 
was needed to maintain a pH of 9 in the 1 L stirred-tank 
reactor, corroborating the reduced terephthalic acid yield. 
Nevertheless, the cutinase-Kollicoat® immobilisates showed 
substantially improved recyclability compared to all other 
strategies.
As also non-covalent immobilisation on responsive poly-
mers is described in the literature, the immobilisation of 
cutinase without addition of EDC for covalent binding was 
tested [52, 53]. This physisorbed cutinase-Kollicoat® immo-
bilisate also showed effective hydrolysis of post-industrial 
PET fibres. Although the terephthalic acid yield decreased 
more rapidly after the initial recycling processes compared 
to the covalently immobilised enzyme shown in Fig.  6a, a 
final terephthalic acid yield of 79% was achieved after five 
consecutive times of hydrolysis and recycling (Fig. S6). In 
both cases, the cutinase-Kollicoat® immobilisate was easily 
separated by lowering the pH to 4.8. At this pH, the respon-
sive polymer  Kollicoat® was efficiently precipitated whilst 
the hydrolysis product terephthalic acid remained in solu-
tion. Further lowering of the pH to 2.5 allowed the complete 
removal of terephthalic acid from the hydrolysis medium. 
Therefore, this approach allows the isolation of the cutinase-
Kollicoat® immobilisate separate from the terephthalic acid. 
Based on HPLC measurements before and after the precipi-
tation procedure, over 90% of the released terephthalic acid 
was recovered as the final isolate after separation of the 
immobilised cutinase.
As described above, the pH is lowered to 4.8 during the 
precipitation step to recover the cutinase-Kollicoat® immo-
bilisates. To evaluate the effect of this low pH on the stabil-
ity of the immobilisate and to determine whether immo-
bilisation has a stabilising effect on the enzyme, both the 
free enzyme and the immobilisate are incubated at different 
pH values at 70 °C for up to 24 h and then esterase activity 
was measured using the pNPA assay at pH 8. Compared to 
the free enzyme, all immobilised samples retained higher 
esterase activity at all pH values (Table S2), indicating 
improved pH and thermal cutinase stability when immo-
bilised on  Kollicoat®. Stability tests showed no significant 
loss of activity of the immobilisate after 30 min and 6 h at 
pH 4 (p ≤ 0.43 and p ≤ 0.14). Therefore, no adverse effects 
on enzyme activity or stability are expected when the pH is 
lowered to recover  Kollicoat® between cycles.
Fig. 6  PET hydrolysis with cutinase-Kollicoat ® immobilisates. a 
Terephthalic acid yields in relation to the theoretical maximum after 
the hydrolysis of textile PET fibres with cutinase ICCG DAQI immobi-
lised on  Kollicoat® on a 1 L-scale in a stirred-tank reactor. The maxi-
mum release of the intermediate products MHET and BHET was less 
than 3%. After each of the five hydrolysis cycles,  Kollicoat® was pre-
cipitated by alteration of the pH, washed and reused for the hydrolysis 
of fresh PET fibres. b Automatic NaOH addition profiles for main-
taining a constant pH despite the terephthalic acid release during PET 
hydrolysis on a 1 L-scale in a stirred-tank reactor, plotted over 14 h 
for the five consecutive hydrolysis cycles
615Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619 
Discussion
Reusing enzymes with solid carriers
The immobilisation of the cutinase ICCG DAQI on meth-
acrylic acid-based particles was strongly influenced by the 
functional groups present on the particles, as has also been 
observed in other studies [43, 54]. In this work, the high-
est immobilisation efficiencies of over 80% were achieved 
using ReliZyme™ EP 403/S (Fig.  2a), which is compara-
ble to other studies (50 to 100%, depending on the target 
enzyme and loading conditions) [54, 55]. Despite the high 
immobilisation efficiencies, the use of these loaded parti-
cles for PET hydrolysis resulted in low product yields with 
the solid substrate PET especially after a recycling step 
(Fig.  2b), indicating problems with substrate accessibil-
ity and steric hindrance. Similarly, Lu et al.  [56] showed 
good general activity by immobilising ICCG on larger 
resin particles (200 µm diameter), but observed poor PET 
degradation, likely due to accessibility issues. In contrast, 
immobilisation on diatomaceous earth (20 µm diameter) 
enabled successful PET degradation in a rotating packed 
bed reactor when combined with β-cyclodextrin to miti-
gate shear stress. However, this approach also showed lim-
itations in terms of reusability [56]. Therefore, although 
solid supports have been shown to effectively immobilise 
enzymes for the conversion of macromolecular substrates 
[25, 56–58], particle size and porosity have a substantial 
effect on mass transfer and efficiency. In this study, porous 
particles were selected for PET hydrolysis due to their 
potential to facilitate the hydrolysis of intermediates, such 
as MHET and BHET, by enzymes immobilised within the 
pores. This mechanism could complement the action of 
surface-bound enzymes that degrade macromolecular PET. 
However, further investigation of carrier particles with dif-
ferent structures, materials, diameters and porosities was 
not pursued within this study.
Carrier‑free immobilisation
Carrier-free immobilisation strategies like CLEAs can be 
a suitable option for the hydrolysis of solid substrates as 
has been demonstrated for enzymes involved in the deg-
radation of lignocellulosic biomass or bioplastics, such 
as cellulases and poly-3-hydroxybutyrate depolymerase 
[19, 20, 22, 59]. However, finding the sweet spot between 
maintaining catalytic activity and ensuring recyclability 
is generally a particular challenge with CLEAs, espe-
cially when a bulky substrate is to be hydrolysed. The 
concentration of the cross-linking agent in the CLEA syn-
thesis is critical as it controls covalent binding between 
enzymes, which influences not only aggregate stability, 
but might also cause diffusion problems and reduced 
substrate accessibility [21, 60, 61]. For cutinase-based 
CLEAs, a combination of high catalytic activity of the 
cutinase towards PET substrates with recyclability of the 
immobilisate could not be identified (Fig.  3). pCLEAs 
were then synthesised to address these shortcomings as 
their larger pore structure is likely to reduce mass trans-
fer limitations and an increase in substrate accessibil-
ity. This increased porosity shows an improved esterase 
activity of the pCLEAs compared to CLEAs (Fig. 4 ), but 
also resulted in decreased stability and recyclability. This 
is consistent with previous reports of pCLEAs for other 
enzymes, which also reported enhanced accessibility and 
activity compared to CLEAs [21, 23, 24]. However, the 
trade-off between high degradation efficiency and reus-
ability of CLEAs shown in this work was also evident for 
other CLEA approaches. For example, CLEAs based on 
Ideonella sakaiensis PETase and amylopectin as a macro-
molecular cross-linker for improved substrate accessibility 
effectively degraded macromolecular PET substrate films 
achieving complete degradation (100% product yield) after 
32 h, though recycling efficiency was limited. After 8 h of 
hydrolysis, CLEAs could be reused three times, yet prod-
uct yields remained below 40% in this shorter time frame 
[62]. Additional strategies, such as co-precipitation with 
bovine serum albumin or alternative cross-linkers like pol -
yethyleneimine and oxidised dextran, may further improve 
both accessibility and stability [62– 65].
Immobilisation on stimulus‑responsive polymers
Using the thermoresponsive polymer p(AM-AN) for 
immobilisation of PET-degrading enzymes was not suc-
cessful as the precipitate could not be efficiently separated 
at temperatures below UCST in this work as no collapse 
into a sufficiently dense aggregate occurred (Fig.  5) [41]. 
Using the pH-responsive polymer  Kollicoat ® MAE 100 
P [49], a cutinase immobilisation efficiency of over 80% 
could be achieved. Notably, less than 1% active cutinase 
loss was detected in the incubation or wash supernatants 
(Fig. S4), which indicates a reduced specific activity of the 
bound enzyme. Similar effects have been also reported in 
the literature, with differences of up to 30% between enzyme 
binding and activity measurements [51, 66, 67]. Possible 
reasons for this decreased activity include steric hindrance 
of the enzyme's active site or substrate-binding groove by the 
support material or loss of enzyme flexibility as shown by 
kinetic analysis and reduced substrate affinity for enzymes 
immobilised on structurally similar  Eudragit® [45, 46].
The literature describes both physisorption and covalent 
linkage for successful immobilisation of enzymes on pH-
responsive polymers such as  Eudragit® or  Kollicoat® [45, 
616 Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619
46, 52, 66, 68–72]. In this work, both options were inves-
tigated and NHS was used in addition to EDC to increase 
binding efficiency by stabilising the intermediate product of 
bond formation [73]. Complete PET hydrolysis was achieved 
with and without EDC, and although immobilisation with 
EDC showed a slower decline in yield and esterase activity 
over the cycles, both methods reached similar degradation 
yields by the fifth cycle for PET hydrolysis on a 1 L-scale 
(Fig.  6, Fig. S6). As there was no significant difference 
between immobilisation with and without EDC in this study, 
it remains unclear whether the addition of EDC and NHS 
led to the formation of covalent bonds. However, the slight 
differences in thermal stability between immobilisation with 
and without EDC (Table S2) suggest that covalent bonds 
have formed. In the literature, both increased thermal and 
pH stabilisation through covalent bonding and adsorption 
have been observed [46, 52, 66, 68].
Although many different enzymes have been immobi-
lised using a pH-responsive polymer before [45, 46, 52, 
66, 68–72], to our knowledge, there have been no reports 
of successful immobilisation of PET-degrading enzymes 
on pH-responsive polymers such as  Kollicoat ®. From an 
economic point of view, this carrier material is well suited 
as it is already produced on a large-scale for the pharma-
ceutical industry as a tablet coating material [49]. In this 
work, only 0.1% (w/v) final concentration of  Kollicoat ® 
was used during PET hydrolysis, making the cost of the 
soluble polymer (400 €  kg−1 [74]) minor compared to the 
savings in biocatalyst production and purification. For the 
 Kollicoat®-immobilisate, 3 mg cutinase  gPET
−1 was used 
in this study, a benchmark often used in the literature per 
batch hydrolysis process to ensure efficient and rapid deg-
radation within 14 h [12, 17]. Accordingly, the catalyst cost 
was amortised after the first complete hydrolysis cycle, 
making this immobilisation method already profitable from 
the second cycle onwards in terms of biocatalyst cost. In 
addition, yields could be further improved after the fourth 
cycle by extending the hydrolysis time. The necessary pH 
adjustments for the separation of the immobilisate involve 
minimal additional effort and cost, as lowering the pH below 
4 is already a required step in the purification of tereph-
thalic acid [47]. This enables efficient enzyme recovery 
during downstream pH reduction, integrating it seamlessly 
into the existing purification step without additional steps 
or resources. Furthermore, in this study, the prior precipita-
tion and separation of the polymer had minimal negative 
impact on the subsequent terephthalic acid precipitation 
(> 90% terephthalic acid recovery), demonstrating that the 
recovery of the immobilised cutinase can be achieved with-
out compromising isolation of the target product. Thus, this 
method not only simplifies the workflow, but also improves 
the overall efficiency and sustainability of enzymatic PET 
degradation.
Conclusion
Combining high enzymatic activity and recyclability of 
the enzymes for PET degradation has proven to be chal-
lenging as conventional immobilisation methods, such as 
solid supports, resulted in low activities due to the dete-
riorated interaction between the catalyst and the macro-
molecular PET substrate. This study investigated different 
approaches to overcome this problem. Modifications of 
existing methods, such as the generation of pCLEAs, sug-
gested that it was possible to establish sufficient interac-
tion between the enzyme and its solid substrate even in 
immobilised form, but stability and recyclability decreased 
with more porous cutinase aggregates. Smart polymers, in 
particular the pH-responsive  Kollicoat ®, showed promis-
ing results in the enzymatic degradation of PET and reuse 
of the cutinase-polymer immobilisate for five efficient 
cycles of PET hydrolysis on the 1 L-scale, with approxi-
mately 80% product yield in the fifth cycle. The immobi-
lisate not only showed high activity and stability, but also 
simplified downstream processing, as both catalyst and 
terephthalic acid can be recovered via a pH change. Due to 
the different pHs required for these two steps, a sequential 
precipitation of first the enzyme, and then the reaction 
product is possible, allowing a seamless integration of the 
biocatalyst recovery with product processing and a simple 
and elegant process design.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00449- 025- 03131-7.
Acknowledgements We thank Gneuss Kunststofftechnik GmbH for 
providing samples of textile fibres and Resindion S.r.l. for samples of 
ReliZyme™ particles. We would also like to thank Arabella Essert for 
her support in the protein engineering of the ICCG DAQI enzyme variant.
Author contributions S.F. and K.C. conceived and designed the experi-
ments. M.P., L.S. and S.F. performed the experiments, analysed and 
interpreted the data. N.B. and N.V. conducted the polymer synthesis. 
S.F., M.P., L.S. and K.C. drafted the manuscript, with additional input 
from N.B. and N.V. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Funding Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt 
DEAL. The authors did not receive funding from any organisation for 
the submitted work.
Data availability All data generated and analysed during this study 
are included in this published article and its supplementary informa-
tion file. Further data is available from the corresponding author on 
reasonable request.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no competing 
interests.
Consent for publication Not applicable.
Ethics approval and consent to participate Not applicable.
617Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619 
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
 1. Thushari GGN, Senevirathna JDM (2020) Plastic pollution in the 
marine environment. Heliyon 6:e04709. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
heliy on. 2020. e04709
 2. Kumar R, Verma A, Shome A, Sinha R, Sinha S, Jha PK, Kumar 
R, Kumar P, Shubham DS, Sharma P, Vara Prasad PV (2021) 
Impacts of plastic pollution on ecosystem services, sustainable 
development goals, and need to focus on circular economy and 
policy interventions. Sustainability 13:9963. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
3390/ su131 79963
 3. Statista Research Department (2024) Market volume of polyeth-
ylene terephthalate worldwide from 2015 to 2022, with a forecast 
for 2023 to 2030. https://  www. stati sta. com/ stati stics/ 12452 64/ 
polye thyle ne- terep hthal ate- market- volume- world wide/. Accessed 
30 Oct 2024
 4. Urbanek AK, Kosiorowska KE, Mirończuk AM (2021) Cur -
rent knowledge on polyethylene terephthalate degradation by 
genetically modified microorganisms. Front Bioeng Biotechnol 
9(9):771133. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3389/ fbioe. 2021. 771133
 5. Sinha V, Patel MR, Patel JV (2010) Pet waste management by 
chemical recycling: a review. J Polym Environ 18:8–25. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10924- 008- 0106-7
 6. Muringayil Joseph T, Azat S, Ahmadi Z, Moini Jazani O, Esmaeili 
A, Kianfar E, Haponiuk J, Thomas S (2024) Polyethylene tereph-
thalate (PET) recycling: a review. Case Stud Chem Environ Eng 
9:100673. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. cscee. 2024. 100673
 7. Kawai F (2021) The current state of research on PET hydrolyzing 
enzymes available for biorecycling. Catalysts 11:206. https:// doi. 
org/ 10. 3390/ catal 11020 206
 8. Kawai F, Kawabata T, Oda M (2019) Current knowledge on 
enzymatic PET degradation and its possible application to waste 
stream management and other fields. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 
103:4253–4268. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s00253- 019- 09717-y
 9. Orlando M, Molla G, Castellani P, Pirillo V, Torretta V, Ferronato 
N (2023) Microbial enzyme biotechnology to reach plastic waste 
circularity: current status, problems and perspectives. Int J Mol 
Sci 24:3877. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ ijms2 40438 77
 10. Wei R, Zimmermann W (2017) Biocatalysis as a green route 
for recycling the recalcitrant plastic polyethylene terephthalate. 
Microb Biotechnol 10:1302–1307. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1111/ 1751- 
7915. 12714
 11. Arnal G, Anglade J, Gavalda S, Tournier V, Chabot N, Borns-
cheuer UT, Weber G, Marty A (2023) Assessment of four engi-
neered PET degrading enzymes considering large-scale industrial 
applications. ACS Catal 13:13156–13166. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ 
acsca tal. 3c029 22
 12. Zheng Y, Li Q, Liu P, Yuan Y, Dian L, Wang Q, Liang Q, Su T, Qi 
Q (2024) Dynamic docking-assisted engineering of hydrolases for 
efficient PET depolymerization. ACS Catal 14:3627–3639. https:// 
doi. org/ 10. 1021/ acsca tal. 4c004 00
 13. Tufvesson P, Lima-Ramos J, Nordblad M, Woodley JM (2011) 
Guidelines and cost analysis for catalyst production in biocatalytic 
processes. Org Process Res Dev 15:266–274. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1021/ op100 2165
 14. Homaei AA, Sariri R, Vianello F, Stevanato R (2013) Enzyme 
immobilization: an update. J Chem Biol 6:185–205. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1007/ s12154- 013- 0102-9
 15. Chi J, Wang P, Ma Y, Zhu X, Zhu L, Chen M, Bi C, Zhang X 
(2024) Engineering Escherichia coli for utilization of PET 
degraded ethylene glycol as sole feedstock. Biotechnol Biofuels 
Bioprod 17:121. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s13068- 024- 02568-4
 16. Padias AB, Hall HK (1981) Oligomeric bishydroxybutyl tere-
phthalates from terephthalic acid. J Polym Sci Polym Chem Ed 
19:1021–1032. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ pol. 1981. 17019 0416
 17. Tournier V, Topham CM, Gilles A, David B, Folgoas C, Moya-
Leclair E, Kamionka E, Desrousseaux M-L, Texier H, Gav -
alda S, Cot M, Guémard E, Dalibey M, Nomme J, Cioci G, 
Barbe S, Chateau M, André I, Duquesne S, Marty A (2020) 
An engineered PET depolymerase to break down and recycle 
plastic bottles. Nature 580:216–219. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1038/  
s41586- 020- 2149-4
 18. Castiglione K, Weuster-Botz D (2018) Enzymatische prozesse. 
In: Chmiel H, Takors R, Weuster-Botz D (eds) Bioprozesstech-
nik, 4th edn. Springer Spektrum, Berlin
 19. Shuddhodana GMN, Bisaria VS (2018) Effectiveness of cross-
linked enzyme aggregates of cellulolytic enzymes in hydrolyz-
ing wheat straw. J Biosci Bioeng 126:445–450. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. jbiosc. 2018. 04. 007
 20. Hormigo D, García-Hidalgo J, Acebal C, de la Mata I, Arroyo M 
(2012) Preparation and characterization of cross-linked enzyme 
aggregates (CLEAs) of recombinant poly-3-hydroxybutyrate 
depolymerase from Streptomyces exfoliatus . Bioresour Technol 
115:177–182. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. biort ech. 2011. 09. 035
 21. Talekar S, Joshi A, Joshi G, Kamat P, Haripurkar R, Kambale S 
(2013) Parameters in preparation and characterization of cross 
linked enzyme aggregates (CLEAs). RSC Adv 3:12485. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1039/ c3ra4 0818c
 22. Sheldon RA (2019) CLEAs, combi-CLEAs and ‘smart’ mag-
netic CLEAs: biocatalysis in a bio-based economy. Catalysts 
9:261. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ catal 90302 61
 23. Talekar S, Shah V, Patil S, Nimbalkar M (2012) Porous cross 
linked enzyme aggregates (p-CLEAs) of Saccharomyces cer -
evisiae invertase. Catal Sci Technol 2:1575. https:// doi. org/ 10.  
1039/ c2cy2 0304a
 24. Wang M, Jia C (2011) Porous-CLEAs of papain: application to 
enzymatic hydrolysis of macromolecules. Bioresour Technol 
102:3541–3545. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. biort ech. 2010. 08. 120
 25. Schwaminger SP, Fehn S, Steegmüller T, Rauwolf S, Löwe 
H, Pflüger-Grau K, Berensmeier S (2021) Immobilization of 
PETase enzymes on magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for the 
decomposition of microplastic PET. Nanoscale Adv 3:4395–
4399. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1039/ D1NA0 0243K
 26. Mishra C, Deshpande V, Rao M (1983) Immobilization of Peni-
cillium funiculosum cellulase on a soluble polymer. Enzyme 
Microb Technol 5:342–344. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ 0141-  
0229(83) 90005-4
 27. Garcia-Galan C, Berenguer-Murcia Á, Fernandez-Lafuente R, 
Rodrigues RC (2011) Potential of different enzyme immobili-
zation strategies to improve enzyme performance. Adv Synth 
Catal 353:2885–2904. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ adsc. 20110 0534
 28. Martínez D, Sobrino A, Aguiar A, González-Bacerio J, Hernán -
dez L, Pérez ER, del Monte-Martínez A (2024) Rational design 
and immobilization of a recombinant sucrose: Sucrose 1-fruc-
tosyltransferase on  Sepabeads ® and ReliZyme™ supports for 
short-chain fructooligosaccharides production. Process Bio -
chem 137:71–84. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. procb io. 2023. 12. 015
618 Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619
 29. Resindion S.r.l. (2012) Relizyme and SEPABEADS—general 
documentation. Binasco
 30. Eldin MS, Mita DG (2014) Immobilized enzymes: strategies 
for overcoming the substrate diffusion-limitation problem. Curr 
Biotechnol 3:207–217. https://  doi.  org/  10. 2174/  22115  50103  
03140 91811 4737
 31. Galaev I (1999) “Smart” polymers and what they could do in 
biotechnology and medicine. Trends Biotechnol 17:335–340. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0167- 7799(99) 01345-1
 32. Vaghari H, Jafarizadeh-Malmiri H, Mohammadlou M, Berenjian 
A, Anarjan N, Jafari N, Nasiri S (2016) Application of magnetic 
nanoparticles in smart enzyme immobilization. Biotechnol Lett 
38:223–233. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s10529- 015- 1977-z
 33. Sheldon RA, van Pelt S (2013) Enzyme immobilisation in bio-
catalysis: why, what and how. Chem Soc Rev 42:6223–6235. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1039/ C3CS6 0075K
 34. Su A, Shirke A, Baik J, Zou Y, Gross R (2018) Immobilized 
cutinases: preparation, solvent tolerance and thermal stability. 
Enzyme Microb Technol 116:33–40. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. 
enzmi ctec. 2018. 05. 010
 35. Hegde K, Veeranki V (2014) Studies on immobilization of 
cutinases from Thermobifida fusca on glutaraldehyde activated 
chitosan beads. Br Biotechnol J 4:1049–1063. https:// doi. org/  
10. 9734/ BBJ/ 2014/ 12558
 36. Fritzsche S, Tischer F, Peukert W, Castiglione K (2023) You 
get what you screen for: a benchmark analysis of leaf branch 
compost cutinase variants for polyethylene terephthalate (PET) 
degradation. React Chem Eng 8:2156–2169. https://  doi. org/ 10. 
1039/ D3RE0 0056G
 37. Norton-Baker B, Denton MCR, Murphy NP, Fram B, Lim S, 
Erickson E, Gauthier NP, Beckham GT (2024) Enabling high-
throughput enzyme discovery and engineering with a low-cost, 
robot-assisted pipeline. Sci Rep 14:14449. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1038/ s41598- 024- 64938-0
 38. Studier FW (2005) Protein production by auto-induction in 
high-density shaking cultures. Protein Expr Purif 41:207–234. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. pep. 2005. 01. 016
 39. Fritzsche S, Hübner H, Oldiges M, Castiglione K (2024) Com-
parative evaluation of the extracellular production of a poly -
ethylene terephthalate degrading cutinase by Corynebacterium 
glutamicum and leaky Escherichia coli in batch and fed-batch 
processes. Microb Cell Fact 23:274. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/  
s12934- 024- 02547-2
 40. Bhunia RK, Showman LJ, Jose A, Nikolau BJ (2018) Com-
bined use of cutinase and high-resolution mass-spectrometry 
to query the molecular architecture of cutin. Plant Methods 
14:117. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1186/ s13007- 018- 0384-6
 41. Lou L-L, Qu H, Yu W, Wang B, Ouyang L, Liu S, Zhou W 
(2018) Covalently immobilized lipase on a thermoresponsive 
polymer with an upper critical solution temperature as an effi-
cient and recyclable asymmetric catalyst in aqueous media. 
ChemCatChem 10:1166–1172. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ cctc.  
20170 1512
 42. Migneault I, Dartiguenave C, Bertrand MJ, Waldron KC (2004) 
Glutaraldehyde: behavior in aqueous solution, reaction with 
proteins, and application to enzyme crosslinking. Biotechniques 
37:790–802. https:// doi. org/ 10. 2144/ 04375 RV01
 43. Babich L, Hartog AF, van Hemert LJC, Rutjes FPJT, Wever R 
(2012) Synthesis of carbohydrates in a continuous flow reac-
tor by immobilized phosphatase and aldolase. Chemsuschem 
5:2348–2353. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ cssc. 20120 0468
 44. Resindion S.r.l. (2024) Product Technical Datasheet ReliZyme 
HFA 403
 45. Silva CJSM, Zhang Q, Shen J, Cavaco-Paulo A (2006) 
Immobilization of proteases with a water soluble–insoluble 
reversible polymer for treatment of wool. Enzyme Microb Tech-
nol 39:634–640. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. enzmi ctec. 2005. 11. 
016
 46. Abdel-Mageed HM, Radwan RA, AbuelEzz NZ, Nasser HA, El 
Shamy AA, Abdelnaby RM, EL Gohary NA (2019) Bioconjuga-
tion as a smart immobilization approach for α-amylase enzyme 
using stimuli-responsive Eudragit-L100 polymer: a robust bio-
catalyst for applications in pharmaceutical industry. Artif Cells 
Nanomed Biotechnol 47:2361–2368. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/  
21691 401. 2019. 16264 14
 47. Karayannidis GP, Chatziavgoustis AP, Achilias DS (2002) 
Poly(ethylene terephthalate) recycling and recovery of pure 
terephthalic acid by alkaline hydrolysis. Adv Polym Technol 
21:250–259. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ adv. 10029
 48. Liu F, Urban MW (2010) Recent advances and challenges in 
designing stimuli-responsive polymers. Prog Polym Sci 35:3–23. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. progp olyms ci. 2009. 10. 002
 49. BASF SE (2016) Technical Information Kollicoat MAE 100-55/
Kollicoat MAE 100 P. Ludwigshafen
 50. Kocak G, Tuncer C, Bütün V (2017) pH-Responsive polymers. 
Polym Chem 8:144–176. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1039/ C6PY0 1872F
 51. Kumar A, Gupta MN (1998) Immobilization of trypsin on an 
enteric polymer Eudragit S-100 for the biocatalysis of macromo-
lecular substrate. J Mol Catal B Enzym 5:289–294. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1016/ S1381- 1177(98) 00053-8
 52. Sardar M, Agarwal R, Kumar A, Gupta MN (1997) Noncova-
lent immobilization of enzymes on an enteric polymer Eudragit 
S-100. Enzyme Microb Technol 20:361–367. https:// doi. org/ 10. 
1016/ S0141- 0229(96) 00152-4
 53. Wang R, Kim J-H, Kim B-S, Park C-S, Yoo S-H (2011) Prepara-
tion and characterization of non-covalently immobilized amylo-
sucrase using a pH-dependent autoprecipitating carrier. Bioresour 
Technol 102:6370–6374. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. biort ech. 2011. 
03. 034
 54. Kahar U, Sani M, Chan K-G, Goh K (2016) Immobilization of 
α-amylase from Anoxybacillus sp. SK3-4 on ReliZyme and immo-
bead supports. Molecules 21:1196. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ molec 
ules2 10911 96
 55. D’ Arrigo P, Allegretti C, Fiorati A, Piubelli L, Rosini E, Tes-
saro D, Valentino M, Pollegioni L (2015) Immobilization of 
l-aspartate oxidase from Sulfolobus tokodaii as a biocatalyst for 
resolution of aspartate solutions. Catal Sci Technol 5:1106–1114. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1039/ C4CY0 0968A
 56. Lu D, Wu J, Jin S, Wu Q, Deng L, Wang F, Nie K (2024) The 
enhancement of waste PET particles enzymatic degradation with 
a rotating packed bed reactor. J Clean Prod 434:140088. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. jclep ro. 2023. 140088
 57. Sulman AM, Matveeva VG, Bronstein LM (2022) Cellulase 
immobilization on nanostructured supports for biomass waste 
processing. Nanomaterials 12:3796. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ nano1 
22137 96
 58. Bilgin R, Yalcin MS, Yildirim D (2016) Optimization of cova-
lent immobilization of Trichoderma reesei cellulase onto modified 
ReliZyme HA403 and Sepabeads EC-EP supports for cellulose 
hydrolysis, in buffer and ionic liquids/buffer media. Artif Cells 
Nanomed Biotechnol 44:1276–1284. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3109/  
21691 401. 2015. 10248 42
 59. Jia J, Zhang W, Yang Z, Yang X, Wang N, Yu X (2017) Novel 
magnetic cross-linked cellulase aggregates with a potential 
application in lignocellulosic biomass bioconversion. Molecules 
22:269. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ molec ules2 20202 69
 60. Zhen Q, Wang M, Qi W, Su R, He Z (2013) Preparation of 
β-mannanase CLEAs using macromolecular cross-linkers. Catal 
Sci Technol 3:1937. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1039/ c3cy2 0886a
 61. Gupta MN, Raghava S (2011) Enzyme stabilization via cross-
linked enzyme aggregates, pp 133–145
619Bioprocess and Biosystems Engineering (2025) 48:605–619 
 62. Lee YL, Jaafar NR, Ling JG, Huyop F, Abu Bakar FD, Rah-
man RA, Illias RMd (2024) Cross-linked enzyme aggregates of 
polyethylene terephthalate hydrolyse (PETase) from Ideonella 
sakaiensis for the improvement of plastic degradation. Int J Biol 
Macromol 263:130284. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/j. ijbio mac. 2024. 
130284
 63. Yan J, Gui X, Wang G, Yan Y (2012) Improving stability and 
activity of cross-linked enzyme aggregates based on polyethylen-
imine in hydrolysis of fish oil for enrichment of polyunsaturated 
fatty acids. Appl Biochem Biotechnol 166:925–932. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 1007/ s12010- 011- 9480-z
 64. Velasco-Lozano S, López-Gallego F, Vázquez-Duhalt R, Mateos-
Díaz JC, Guisán JM, Favela-Torres E (2014) Carrier-free immobi-
lization of lipase from Candida rugosa with polyethyleneimines 
by carboxyl-activated cross-linking. Biomacromol 15:1896–1903. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ bm500 333v
 65. Mateo C, Palomo JM, van Langen LM, van Rantwijk F, Sheldon 
RA (2004) A new, mild cross-linking methodology to prepare 
cross-linked enzyme aggregates. Biotechnol Bioeng 86:273–276. 
https:// doi. org/ 10. 1002/ bit. 20033
 66. Zhang Y, Xu J-L, Li D, Yuan Z-H (2010) Preparation and proper-
ties of an immobilized cellulase on the reversibly soluble matrix 
Eudragit L-100. Biocatal Biotransform 28:313–319. https:// doi.  
org/ 10. 3109/ 10242 422. 2010. 516391
 67. Tyagi R, Roy I, Agarwal R, Gupta MN (1998) Carbodi-imide 
coupling of enzymes to the reversibly soluble insoluble polymer 
Eudragit S-100. Biotechnol Appl Biochem 28:201–206. https://  
doi. org/ 10. 1111/j. 1470- 8744. 1998. tb005 30.x
 68. Dourado F, Bastos M, Mota M, Gama FM (2002) Studies on the 
properties of Celluclast/Eudragit L-100 conjugate. J Biotechnol 
99:121–131. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1016/ S0168- 1656(02) 00178-5
 69. Gupta MN, Sardar M (2000) Simultaneous purification and 
immobilization of Aspergillus niger xylanase on the reversibly 
soluble polymer EudragitTM L-100. Enzyme Microb Technol 
27:672–679
 70. Smith E, Zhang Q, Shen J, Schroeder M, Silva C (2008) Modifica-
tion of  Esperase® by covalent bonding to  Eudragit® polymers L 
100 and S 100 for wool fibre surface treatment. Biocatal Biotrans-
form 26:391–398. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1080/ 10242 42080 22495 21
 71. Zhang Y, Xu J-L, Yuan Z-H, Qi W, Liu Y-Y, He M-C (2012) 
Artificial intelligence techniques to optimize the EDC/NHS-medi-
ated immobilization of cellulase on Eudragit L-100. Int J Mol Sci 
13:7952–7962. https:// doi. org/ 10. 3390/ ijms1 30779 52
 72. Yu X, Zhang Z, Li J, Su Y, Gao M, Jin T, Chen G (2021) Co-
immobilization of multi-enzyme on reversibly soluble polymers 
in cascade catalysis for the one-pot conversion of gluconic acid 
from corn straw. Bioresour Technol 321:124509. https:// doi. org/ 
10. 1016/j. biort ech. 2020. 124509
 73. Gao Y, Kyratzis I (2008) Covalent immobilization of proteins on 
carbon nanotubes using the cross-linker 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylami-
nopropyl)carbodiimide—a critical assessment. Bioconjug Chem 
19:1945–1950. https:// doi. org/ 10. 1021/ bc800 051c
 74. Merck KGaA (2024)  Kollicoat® MAE 100 P. https:// www. sigma 
aldri ch. com/ DE/ de/ produ ct/ sigma/ 61354? srslt id= AfmBO oruUM 
CRUwI 2CLl3 q9QTg WED9L hCkFh oeCbU Gz_ nuG5S oOePw 
9kM. Accessed 19 Oct 2024
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.