Title: Identification of Prospective PETases Across Prokaryotes Using an in silico Approach 
Yashkumar Rathod1, Sumit Biswas1,* 
1 ViStA Lab, Department of Biological Sciences, BITS, Pilani – K K Birla Goa Campus, Goa 
403726, India. 
*Corresponding author e-mail: sumit@goa.bits-pilani.ac.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Abstract 
Background: Plastics count as one of the most potent threats to the habitats and survival of global 
flora and fauna. Reports keep accumulating globally about the ever -exploding load of plastic 
wastes, but the need and economics of multiple industrial and household processes compels the 
production of more plastic materials. It has always been imperative to look for natural sources of 
degradation of plastic. The identification of plastic-degrading microbes, therefore remains a major 
focus of the microbial fraternity. While the discoveries of Ideonella sakaiensis or later, 
Rhizobacter gummiphilus were more out of providence, the structure determination of the enzyme 
responsible for PET degradation does provide a fillip to efforts towards identification of more such 
prokaryotic entities.  
Results: In this work, a comprehensive profiling of prokaryotic sequences has been undertaken to 
look for the presence of similar plastic-degradation abilities across the kingdom. The identification 
of twenty- seven such ‘hits’ across different bacterial species l ed us to believe in the natural 
diversity of plastic -degradation enzymes. Moreover, there seems to be conservation of the 
structural motif that renders such ability as has been observed from the constructed models and 
analysis of their interfaces. D ocking of BHET, one of the key products of PET, against these 27 
entities showed considerable interactions with the above and pointed towards the possible roles of 
these bacteria as natural plastic degradation models. Eight of these proteins have very clos e 
similarity in binding interactions and surface properties to the PETase from I. sakaiensis and were 
shortlisted as prospective candidates.  
Conclusions: Of these eight, three PETases from  Halopseudomonas pertucinogena  
Halopseudomonas bauzanensis and Ketobacter sp. revealed significant similarity in structure and 
conformational stability to the PETase from I. sakaiensis as was evident from the analysis of their 
molecular dynamics parameters. Principal Component Analysis and the free energy landscape 
during binding to BHET also validated the hypothesis and these three PETases could be 
immediately explored for possible plastic degradation activity. 
 
Keywords: PETase, molecular dynamics, Ideonella sakaiensis, BHET, plastic degradation 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Introduction 
The world is burdened by a burgeoning load of plastics and the accumulation of these contaminants 
in the ecosystem is a potent threat to life and livelihood [1, 2]. The array of these plastic pollutants, 
of different sizes and types is also mind- boggling. While the load of plastic pollution keeps 
increasing, driven by global demand and eventual production, means and methods of plastic 
recycling are few and far in between and ineffective on a broader perspective. The staggering range 
of the burden is often disturbing. The yearly production of plastic waste has been projected to 
reach 3.4 billion tonnes by 2050, according to the study done by World Bank [3]. 
In an effort to limit the load of plastic pollutants, degradation of plastics using microbial sources 
has been the subject of study over the past few decades. The polymerization of plastic is effected 
by means of weak forces like van der Waals interactions, electrostatic forces as well as hydrogen 
bonds. etc. Microbes are known to degrade plastics in a sequential manner. Broadly, this can be 
simplified as physical or chemical deterioration, followed by breakdown of polymers which are 
then shipped to the cytoplasm of the microbes for metabolic breakdown [3].  
One of the biggest sources of the pollution and perhaps the most commonly used of plastics is 
Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET). Microbial biodegradation of PET has been mooted for long and 
a few breakthroughs have been achieved over the years. Enzymes from  Thermobifida fusca were 
reported from the early years of this century to be effective in the degradation of PET
[4]. Lipases 
from Candida antarctica [4] and cutinases from Humicola insolens  [5] have also been known to 
display PET degradation, and some of these have been shown to have synergistic effects in 
elevating the efficacy and reducing the time of the degradation process [6].  
Ideonella sakaiensis, a plastic-degrading bacterium, was first discovered in 2016 [7]. I. sakaiensis 
is a Gram negative, aerobic, rod -shaped bacterium belonging to the genus Ideonella and family 
Comamonadaceae [8]. Originally isolated from a sediment sample taken outside of a plastic bottle 
recycling facility in Sakai, the bacterium also uses PET as a sole carbon and energy source for 
growth. The PETase enzyme found in the bacteria aids in the degradation of the ester bond of PET. 
IsPETase (PETase from I. sakaiensis) has demonstrated the highest plastic degradation activity 
compared to all other bacterial enzymes despite the fact that similar enzymes have been discovered 
in a number of other organisms.  
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
The mechanism of PET degradation by the IsPETase enzyme [9] has been studied and reported by 
numerous groups. The PETase enzymes showed the presence of a conserved, PET-binding active 
site. Ser (160), Asp (206) and His (237) form a highly conserved catalytic triad that aids in the 
stable binding with PET. Several mutations were introduced into the PETase enzyme of Ideonella 
sakaiensis, and wild- type bacteria were used for comparison.  [6] has also reported that mutant 
IsPETase R280A is 22.4% more effective than the wild type. According to the report, these 
variants were more effective at higher temperatures and their plastic degradation rate was 
significantly higher compared to the wild type, but they are not effectively utilised for refuse 
degradation [10]. However, wild-type bacteria have certain limitations that prevent large -scale 
application. IsPETase in its natural state is exceedingly unstable and therefore, IsPETase have also 
been modified to degrade PET completely at higher temperatures [11]. 
The mechanism and high- resolution crystal structure of IsPETase [12]  showed that the enzyme 
has a hydrophobic cavity that binds to PET polymers and breaks the PET into monomers like bis(2-
hydroxyethyl)-TPA (BHET) and mono-(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalic acid (MHET) 13. IsPETase 
though is incapable of hydrolyzing MHET to terephthalic  acid (TPA) and ethylene glycol (EG). 
Very recently, [14] reported that PETase from Rhizobacter gummiphilus has comparable binding 
affinity for PET and hydrolysis activity at moderate temperatures. With very few substitutions in 
the conserved domain, RgPETase was found to be  remarkably similar to IsPETase. These are 
though, the only two instances of discovery of PET degrading bacteria till date. 
The discovery of plastic degradation abilities in prokaryotic species is a slow process, and 
discoveries are few and far in between. With the knowledge of the available enzymes and the 
couple of structures that have been solved, we therefore strived to predict the presence of such 
plastic degradation abilities in other bacterial species. The search was manifold, both at the level 
of the sequences and the conservation of the degradation domain. The hits were subjected to in 
silico verification using structural parameters and docking tools. In this investigation, BHET was 
chosen as the substrate both due to its structural similarity to the nucleus of PET and it’s ability to 
hydrolyze into TPA and EG monomers. The predicted structures and the enzymes shed light on 
the variety of plastic degradation domains from across the prokaryotes, and also demonstrate th e 
range of alternatives that could be explored in addition to I. sakaiensis for plastic degradation  
mediated by bacteria. 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Methods 
1. Sequence alignment and conserved domain identification: 
The enzyme polyethylene terephthalate hydrolase (PETase) of  I. sakaiensis (PDB ID: 6ILW) [9] 
with resolution 1.57 Å was used as a target in this study. This structure was chosen on the basis of 
maximum completeness among the other structures of PETase available in the PDB. Sequences 
similar to those of IsPETase, from across all prokaryotes, were searched for using the Protein Blast 
tool of NCBI [15] , with a selected threshold of 95% query coverage. 27 sequences were thus 
obtained and aligned against the sequence of 6ILW (supplementary table 1 and figure S6). The 
obtained sequences were subjected to domain identification using MotifScan [16] , using motif 
sources from Pfam [17] and HAMAP [18]. Based on the lowest e-value, domains were identified 
on the basis of their conserved nature.  
Sequences of the domains (supplementary figure  S8) thus retrieved, were aligned among the 27 
hits and the total number of mutations (substitutions and indels) were identified. IsPETase 
structure was submitted to the Consurf web server [19]. The web server identified conserved amino 
acids based on the sequence alignment and the conservation score was fixed in the range of 1 to 9, 
with various colours designated to each value, and the protein structure was represented by colour 
patches based on their conservation values (supplementary figure S4). 
2. Protein Interactome: 
To understand the nature of the interactions of the PETase protein with other proteins in the cell, 
the STRING database ( https://string-db.org/) was used to create the protein -protein interactions 
(PPIs) network. I. sakaiensis was chosen as the query organism in the STRING database's "search 
protein by name" function in order to navigate the database. The minimum required interaction 
score was set to “low confidence” so that an exhaustive search of the proteins in the organism is 
performed. The size of the interactions was kept at “not >50 interactions” in the first and second 
shell to have a fair idea of the interacting proteins with PETase. 
3. Homology Modelling: 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
The structure of the 27 entries listed before were searched for in the PDB, and revealed that only 
one of the entries (7DZT, Rhizobacter sp.)  had a deposited structure. To compensate for the lack 
of crystal structure, the rest of the 26 entries were subjected to homology modelling using Maestro 
module [20] of Schrödinger release 2023.1 with customized settings for structural prediction. 
Option of “One Target Multiple Templates” was selected, followed by selection of top ten similar 
structures for the models. PROCHECK [21]and ERRAT [22]were used to verify the quality of the 
predicted structures. PyMOL  was used to view and depict the final structures. The modelled 
structures were aligned with an aim to understand deviations from the template structure of 6ILW.  
4. Docking and molecular dynamics simulation studies: 
The ligand for docking at the PETase site was chosen to be the 3D conformer of bis (2-
hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (BHET) retrieved from PubChem. The 3D structure -data files (SDF) 
format was utilised for docking analysis. The docked structures were analyzed for the lowest 
energy conformer, Root mean square deviation (RMSD) and hydrogen bond (HB) interaction. 
Receptor Preparation:  
The basic receptor molecule was chosen to be the enzyme PET hydrolase of  
 I. sakaiensis (PDB 
ID: 6ILW) with resolution 1.57 Å. The protein had a molecular weight of 28.6 kDa and contained 
265 amino acids. The target was prepared by removing water, repairing broken side chains, adding 
polar hydrogens, and adding Gasteiger charges to balance surface charges. The same was done for 
all the other modelled structures obtained from homology modelling.  
Binding Site Prediction: 
T
he active site of the enzyme was identified from literature and grid of dimensions 17.1648 x  
14.3731 x 17.5487 Å was built around it, centered at 22.4021, 7.7184 and 10.6203 Å . A grid box 
was thereby constructed around subsite 1 (Tyr87, Met161, Trp185, Ile208) and subsite  2 (Thr88, 
Ala89, Trp159, Ile232, Asn233, Ser236, Ser238, Asn241, Asn244, Ser246 and Arg280), reported 
to be the active site of the enzyme. From the structure of IsPETase, it was reported that subsites 1 
and 2 aid in the stable binding of ligand and in case of any substitution in the catalytic triad (Ser160, 
Asp206, His 237) the ligand's binding affinity is altered [10]. A conserved serine hydrolase motif 
Gly-X1-Ser-X2-Gly (supplementary figure S8) is also  a part of this catalytic triad, and the grid 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
box was aimed at these regions for all the protein structures. Ligand docking of the BHET 
compound onto the enzyme targets was accomplished with the help of Autodock Vina in version 
0.8 of the PyRx programme [23, 24]. Prepared molecule was loaded into the PyRx programme and 
grid box was set to the position center x: 22.4021, center y: 7.7184, center z: 10.6203, and size x: 
17.1648, size y: 14.3731, size z: 17.5487. 
Molecular Dynamics: 
Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation was performed utilizing Gromacs 2021.3 through the 
command line interface [25]. Proteins were vacuum energy minimized before the actual MD 
procedure to obtain the optimized PDB structure. The most optimal PETase was identified from 
docking scores and RMSD, followed by subsequent 100 nanosecond molecular dynamics (MD) 
simulation, repeated over three iterations each . The simulation employed the Charmm36 
forcefield. The protein topology file was constructed using the Gromacs software, whereas the 
ligand topology file was prepared using the CGenFF server [26]. For solvating the complex, the 
TIP3P water model was used in a 1 nm -sized dodecahedron box. To counterbalance the overall 
charge of the protein-ligand complex, an adequate amount of sodium (Na+) or chloride (Cl-) ions 
were added. The system's energy minimisation was performed using the steepest descent algorithm 
for 50,000 iterations to resolve steric clashes. 
The C -rescale and V -rescale coupling approach was used for equilibration in NVT and NPT 
ensemble simulations respectively, with positional restrains imposed on the protein and ligand to 
preserve its structural integrity  during the equilibration phase . The structural coordinates of the 
system were saved for every 10 ps by GROMACS. Generated MD trajectories were analysed in 
order to calculate root mean square deviation (RMSD), root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) and 
to conduct Principal Component Analysis (PCA). The conformational stability, fluctuating 
residues, and compactness of the protein and the protein- BHET complexes were validated using 
the gmx rms, gmx rmsf, gmx gyrate modules of GROMACS, respectively. The Molecular 
Mechanics/Poisson-Boltzmann Surface Area (MMPBSA) approach was utilised to determine the 
relative binding free energy of protein-ligand complexes. The gmx_MMPBSA tool was employed 
to compute the binding free energies of protein -ligand complexes, using 1000 frames collected 
from the final 10 ns (90–100 ns) of the molecular dynamics simulation. 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was conducted in this study to examine the motion and 
compactness of the molecule during the simulation. The covariance matrix was constructed using 
the gromacs "gmx covar" module based on the previously determined trajec tories. The eigen 
vectors and eigen values obtained from the covariance matrix were analysed using the "gmx 
anaeig" package. The eigen vector indicates the direction of motion, whereas the eigenvalues 
indicate the degree of motion along each major component. The data was stored in .xvg file, and 
a software application based on Python programming language was constructed for the purpose of 
data visualization.  
Results and Discussion: 
Sequence Similarities and Domain Identification: 
The search for sequences similar to the IsPETase across prokaryotes yielded a total number of 169 
hits. Some of these (11) were mutants of IsPETase which had been generated for functional 
characterization, and were excluded from the search results. Similarly, 56 mutants of PETase from 
I. sakaiensis were filtered to remove any redundancies. Of the remaining hits, the best matches 
were selected – a process which yielded 27 sequences across various prokaryotic genomes, having 
similarity to IsPETase. All the 27  sequences which were selected showed the presence of the 
conserved serine hydrolase motif (GWSXG), which has been reported to be necessary for the 
binding of MHET to the active site of IsPETase. ConSurfDB displayed multiple highly conserved 
areas which were highlighted using a colour-coded approach, with the hydrolase domain classified 
among the highly conserved sections ( supplementary figures S4 and S5). The presence of the 
cysteines nearabout the active site for secondary disulphide bond formation, which has also been 
implicated for PETase activity, is evident among all these 27 sequences. 
The 27 sequences thus obtained were checked for their sources and revealed the presence of these 
sequences across Rhizobacter sp., Acidovorax sp., Ketobacter sp., Piscinibacter sp., etc. The 
source species for the 27 have been listed in supplementary table 1. The obtained sequences were 
aligned using Clustal Omega and displayed conservation as high as 97.72% in PETase 
(WP_085749752.1) from R. gummiphilus  with 99% sequence coverage. This was in complete 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
agreement with the work of Sagong et al., 2021 [28]. The lowest similarity which was considered 
was the sequence from Halopseudomonas pertucinogena with a sequence identity of 51.32% and 
98% sequence coverage. Apart from the conserved serine hydrolase motif and the cysteine, the 
presence of a conserved methionine near the serine hydrolase motif was also a hallmark of the 27 
sequences (supplementary figure S6). 
Further, the sequence alignment revealed that all the sequences belonged to the type II category of 
PETases, except Proteobacteria bac terium. T ype II PETases are typically characterized by  
additional disulphide linkages due to the conserved cysteine residues at positions 203 and 239. 
Type II PETases are more efficient in their plastic degradation abilities compared to type I PETases 
due to the additional disulphide bonds and certain substitutions in the subsite 2 (supplementary 
figure S6) [6]. 
Domain identification using MotifScan with the Pfam dataset revealed the presence of the esterase 
domain acetyl xylene esterase (AXE) across all the 27 sequences. The AXE domain was identified 
at position 123 to 155 in I. sakaiensis exhibiting an E value of 0.00049 and belonging to the 
pfam_FS family. The Pfam FS is a database of complete sequences, encompassing the full 
diversity of proteins, to reveal maximum identification. The AXE domain, identified by Pfam FS, 
is typified by a Ser at position 160, a Met at 161 and four consecutive Gly residues after the M161 
(supplementary figure S7 and S8) and this was used for all further analyses. 
In the analysis of 27 hits, the amino acid composition inside the domain exhibited alterations at 
31% (283 out of 918) of the assessed sites, with substitutions being the primary alteration. 
Deletions were noted (supplementary table 2) in merely 1.5% (14 out of 918), whereas additions 
were negligible (2 out of 918). 
The Protein Interactome: 
The PPI network as created by the STRING database revealed a handful of proteins that are part 
of the IsPETase network. Some of these proteins have been implicated in critical processes in the 
associated pathway of plastic degradation. Remarkable among the se was chlorogenate esterase 
(supplementary figure S3), which has synergistic effects with PETase in breaking down PET by 
catalysing the hydrolysis of MHET (mono(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalate) into its two ecologically 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
safe monomers, terephthalate and ethylene glycol . Chlorogenate esterase (MHETase) interacts 
with both s ubsites 1 and 2 for the subsequent degradation of MHET [ 7, 30]. In the absence of 
MHETase, PET is transformed into MHET, TPA, and EG but no further degradation of MHET 
happens. TPA and EG serve as more readily useable carbon sources, but MHET necessitates 
additional degradation to be transformed into TPA and EG. The other proteins involved in the 
network are basic functional proteins like topoisomerase s or serine kinases with one membrane 
protein also finding its place. 
Similarities in Structures of Predicted PETases: 
Given the recent discovery of PETase, not many structures were available and it was difficult to 
determine the structures from defined templates. To confirm the similarities in the sequence and 
the domains, the hits were modelled against the template of th e complete structure of IsPETase. 
The structure of RgPETase from Rhizobacter gummiphilus. was available from the PDB with the 
id. 7DZT. The homology models for the rest of the 26 hits were obtained using the Maestro module 
of Schrödinger and validated using ERRAT and Verify3D. Assessing the stereochemical 
properties using PROCHECK, the Ramachandran Plot for the modelled structures (from 
PROCHECK) also verified (supplementary table 3)  the structural integrities (more than 94% in 
allowed regions for all entries except two where 90% were in allowed regions). 
The structures were visualized in PyMOL and superimposed with the template structure (6ILW) 
to reveal striking similarities in their overall architecture, as shown in figure 1. The similarities in 
the predicted structures were also checked using GraSR [29] to verify the visual output from 
PyMOL. GraSR  constructs a graph based on inter -residue distances derived from the tertiary 
structure. The output is generated based on the predictions from a deep graph neural network. The 
obtained T
M value represents the similarity of the structure on a scale of 0 to 1, with 1 being the 
most similar. For our predicted structures, the TM for all the models were above 0.9, with the closest 
being the structure from Acidovorax delafieldii. This was indicative of strong structural similarity 
of the predicted structures with that of IsPETase. The TM values have been listed in supplementary 
table 4. 
 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(a) (b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Superimposition of modelled structures with IsPETase revealed similarity in architecture 
across the AXE domains (highlighted in red box) and also in the overall structure (a) Anterior face, 
(b) Posterior face 
Heteromolecular associations of PETase-BHET complex: 
The top docking clusters of PETase bound to BHET showed engagement of BHET in the structure 
near the binding pocket encompassing the serine hydrolase motif across the 27 queries . The 
presence of a methionine at the docking site was notable in terms of its possible role in the binding 
of BHET, very much in accordance with previous report [30]. 
The most favorable binding pose of PETase-B HET complex showed stable binding with a docking 
score of -5.5 kcal/mol. The chemical structure of BHET and its heteromolecular associations with 
PETase have been demonstrated in figure 2 . Detailed analysis of the binding pose indicated a 
strong association of PETase with BHET, stabilized by several hydrophobic interactions and 
hydrogen bonds. S 160, D 206, and H 237 were present at the catalytic site for IsPETase, and the 
same site was discovered to be highly conserved across other PETases.  
  
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 
 
 
 
 
                       
                           (a)                                                                                  (b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                          
                              (c)                                                                                      (d) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                       
                                                                              (e) 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Figure 2: The protein- ligand interaction picture depicts the binding interactions between the 
ligand and particular amino acid residues in the protein's active region. Essential interactions, 
including hydrogen bonds, hydrophobic contacts, and π -π stacking, are illu strated, emphasising 
the ligand's binding mechanism and the stability of the complex. a ) PETase from Ideonella 
sakaiensis b) PETase from Rhizobacter gummiphilus . c ) PETase from Halopseudomonas 
pertucinogena d) PETase from Halopseudomonas bauzanensis e) PETase from Ketobacter sp. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                    
                                                                             (c) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                  
                                                                                (e) 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Figure 3 – The docking pose illustrates the ligand's accommodation within the protein's binding pocket. 
This 3D visualisation elucidates the ligand's orientation, location, and interactions with critical residues, 
offering insights into the binding mode and possible efficacy of the complex.  The conserved catalytic 
residues are denoted in black, while Met is indicated in red in all the magnified images.  a) PETase from 
Ideonella sakaiensis  b) PETase from Rhizobacter gummiphilus. c ) PETase from Halopseudomonas 
pertucinogena d) PETase from Halopseudomonas bauzanensis e) PETase from Ketobacter sp 
 
Table 1: Hydrogen bonds and Hydrophilic interactions 
Bacteria Name Hydrogen bonds Hydrophobic interactions 
Ideonella sakaiensis  Tyr (87), Met (161), Ile (208) Trp (159), Ile (208), His (237) 
Rhizobacter gummiphilus Tyr (85), Thr (86), Ser (158), 
Met (159), Ile (205) 
Trp (157), Ile (205), His (234) 
Marinobacter daqiaonensis Ala (106), Ser (107), Ser (178), 
Tyr (257) 
Phe (105), Ile (226) 
Halopseudomonas 
pertucinogena 
Phe (98), Ser (171), Trp (195) Ile (219), Trp(195) 
Pseudomonas zhaodongensis Tyr (93), Ser (95), Ser (166) Met (167), Tyr (190), Val (214) 
Halopseudomonas bauzanensis Phe(98), Ser (171), Ile(217), Tyr 
(248) 
Phe (98), Ile (217) 
Ketobacter sp. Phe (104), Ser (106), Ser (177) , 
Trp(201), Val(225) 
Phe(104), Trp (201), Val (225) 
Burkholderia sp. Gly (106) Ala (109) 
Aquabacterium sp. Tyr (86), His (158), Trp (184), 
Ile (207) 
Met (160) 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Candidatus muproteobacteria 
bacterium  
Tyr (77), Ser (150), His (229) Nil  
Pseudomonas nanhaiensis Ser (101), Ser (171) Phe (99), Val (218) 
Candidatus pseudomonas 
excrementavium 
172 (Ser), Leu (217) Ile (218) 
Acidovorax delafieldii Tyr (87), Thr (88) Ile (222), His (251) 
Ketobacter alkanivorans Ser (108), Tyr (110), Ser (181), 
Trp (205) 
Met (182), Val (229) 
Piscinibacter sp. Tyr (88), Ser (161), His (238) Ile (209), His (238) 
Rhizobacter sp. Tyr (87) Ile (208), His (237) 
 
Comparing the docking score between  the predicted structures and with the one obtained for 
IsPETase allowed us to rate the proteins preliminarily as prospective PETases. While the best 
docking score obtained, as mentioned earlier, was - 5.5 kcal/mol, some of the structures showed 
either low docking scores or had unacceptable values of RMSD. Of the 27 structures considered 
(including RgPETase), 15 structures showed binding affinity within -4.5 kcal/mol with acceptable 
RMSD values. Of these 15, 8 had docking scores very close to IsPETase, and 5 of these had 
identical docking pockets. (figures 2 and 3, table 2).  
HpPETase, HbPETase, and KsPETase belong to the type II class of PETases, exhibiting specific 
substitutions in the AXE domain and in subsite 1 and subsite 2, which influence the substrate 
binding position. The binding pockets of type II  PETases exhibit modest variations and thereby, 
the binding conformation of the ligand differs from that of IsPETase, which is a type IIb class of 
PETase.  
The serine, which was earlier mentioned as one of the conserved residues in the AXE domain, was 
expectedly present almost all the complexes formed, as either the donor or acceptor in the 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
formation of hydrogen bonds with the BHET. Similarly, the presence of a tyrosine at position 87  
of subsite 1 is deemed to favour an interaction between the aromatic group of the BHET and the 
PETase [30]. Among the predicted PETases, there is an equivalent distribution of tyrosine and 
phenylalanine at this position, which seems to be favourably interacting with the BHET as well. 
HpPETase, HbPETase and KsPETase showed the presence of a phenylalanine at th is position. 
Traditionally, the nitrogen atoms of Y87  and M161 have been known to be involved in the 
formation of the oxyanion hole, found in type II PETases. In the case of HpPETase, HbPETase 
and KsPETase, the nitrogen from the phenylalanine and the methionine contribute to the oxyanion 
hole which stabilizes the negatively charged oxyanion intermediate during PET hydrolysis . The 
W185 in the subsite 1, however, is a residue which has been conserved across all the five PETases. 
Similarly, the isoleucine at 208, a part of subsite 1, has been found to be conserved in HpPETase 
and HbPETase, but has been replaced by a valine (hydrophobic) in RgPETase and KsPETase . 
Going by the activity of RgPETase, the substitution has minimal effect on the  surface 
hydrophobicity. 
In the subsite 2,  W159 and N241 are highly conserved across all the PETases and has been found 
to be crucial  for the enzymatic function , while A89 is replaced by a serine in RgPETase, 
HpPETase, HbPETase and KsPETase. Despite the substitution, there has been no reduction in the 
hydrolase activity of RgPETase when compared to IsPETase [14]. The threonine at position 88 is 
however a determinant in the classification of type II PETases into subcategories a and b. While 
T88 is highly conserved in type IIb PETases [6], substitutions of threonine to valine or leucine has 
been noted in type IIa PETases. The presence of a T88L mutation in RgPETase and T88V in 
KsPETase, HpPETase, and HbPETase , are indicative of their classification as type IIa  PETases 
[6]. Similarly, Ser 238 is substituted by phenylalanine in RgPETase and Ks PETase, but in 
HpPETase and HbPETase, it is substituted by a tyrosine, which further point to their type IIa 
categorisation. All these substitutions have significantly improved the binding of substrate, with  
HpPETase showing four times higher binding free energy, while KsPETase show ed two times 
higher binding free energy when compared with the IsPETase. When compared with RgPETase 
(also a type IIa PETase ), all three candidates have substitutions in subsite II and show better 
binding free energy. 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
The docking pose related to the lowest docking scores were selected for further MD simulations. 
The pose was manually checked for the location, orientation and interactions  of the ligand with 
the key binding site residues and the absence of unfavorable bonds. The docking poses chosen for 
the MD were therefore based on the correctness of the orientation and not the mechanical choice 
of the topmost poses (table 2). 
The binding free energy of protein- ligand complexes was calculated using MMPBSA to assess 
their stability and binding affinity. The cumulative binding free energies for the five prospective 
PETase-BHET (IsPETase -BHET, RgPETase -BHET, HpPETase -BHET, HbPETase -BHET, and 
KsPETase-BHET) complexes were - 2.75 ± 3.41, -0.59 ± 3.45, -12.16 ± 3.02, -1.98 ± 3.93, and -
6.14 ± 3.14 kcal/mol, respectively, as presented in table 3. The PETase from Halopseudomonas 
pertucinogena has the most robust binding relative to the other PETases in the list, having nearly 
four-fold binding affinity than IsPETase, whereas, the PETase derived from Ketobacter sp. 
exhibits twice the binding affinity in comparison to IsPETase. PETase from Halopseudomonas 
bauzanensis exhibits somewhat lower binding free energy than IsPETase, while RgPETase had 
the lowest binding affinity for BHET. 
Table 2: Docking score, Lower Bond (L.B.) RMSD Values and Upper Bond (U.B.) RMSD 
Values 
No Bacteria Name Docking Score L.B. RMSD 
Values 
U.B. RMSD 
Values 
1 Ideonella sakaiensis  -5.1 1.183 1.702 
2 Rhizobacter gummiphilus -5.4 1.244 0.505 
3 Marinobacter daqiaonensis -5.5 1.372 1.041 
4 Halopseudomonas 
pertucinogena 
-5.5 1.905 1.341 
5 Pseudomonas zhaodongensis -5.3 1.157 0.202 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
6 Halopseudomonas 
bauzanensis 
-5.4 1.682 1.259 
7 Ketobacter sp. -5.2 1.916 1.447 
8 Burkholderia sp. -5.3 1.609 1.356 
9 Aquabacterium sp. -5.1 1.434 0.932 
10 Candidatus 
muproteobacteria bacterium  
-5.1 1.88 1.136 
11 Pseudomonas nanhaiensis -5.1 2.01 1.215 
12 Candidatus pseudomonas 
excrementavium 
-4.7 1.148 0.146 
13 Acidovorax delafieldii -4.6 1.79 1.048 
14 Ketobacter alkanivorans -4.6 1.665 1.183 
15 Piscinibacter sp. -4.6 1.566 1.306 
16 Rhizobacter sp. -4.5 1.412 1.105 
 
Table 3: MMPBSA Binding Free energy of protein-ligand complex 
 
 
 
 
PETase MMPBSA Binding Free 
Energy (ΔG binding) 
(Kcal/mol) 
Ideonella sakaiensis -2.75 +/- 3.41 
Rhizobacter gummiphilus -0.59 +/- 3.45 
Halopseudomonas pertucinogena -12.16 +/- 3.02 
Halopseudomonas bauzanensis -1.98 +/- 3.93 
Ketobacter sp. -6.14 +/- 3.14 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Solvation being a crucial factor, influencing the protein’s folding and stability, the SASA value s 
for the PETases were also  looked at showing the  least solvent -accessible surface area for I. 
sakaiensis and R. gummiphilus ( figure 4 a,b ). The other PETases – from H. pertucinogena 
(HpPETase), H. bauzanensis  (HbPETase) and Ketobacter sp. (KsPETase) also had comparable 
SASA values (figure 4c, 4d and 4e).  Among the surface amino acids contributing to the binding, 
a methionine near the serine hydrolase motif in the AXE domain was found to be omnipresent and 
almost always had a SASA value of zero in the ligand -bound complex, indicative of its role in 
binding BHET  (figure 3). Likewise, this methionine was also found to be involved in the 
hydrophobic interactions between the PETase and its target.  
 
 
 
 
(a) (b) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                             (c)                                                                                                       (d) 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                     (e) 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Figure 4– The Solvent Accessible Surface Area (SASA) plot for the protein -ligand complex during the 
molecular dynamics simulation illustrates the degree of the protein's surface exposure to the solvent over 
time. Variations in SASA values indicate conformational changes, folding processes, or modifications in 
the stability of the complex. a) PETase from Ideonella sakaiensis  (black colour) b) PETase from 
Rhizobacter gummiphilus (purple) c) PETase from Halopseudomonas pertucinogena (orange) d) PETase 
from Halopseudomonas bauzanensis (pink) e) PETase from Ketobacter sp. (cyan) 
 
Stability of PETase-BHET interactions 
The detailed secondary structural transitions of PETase in presence of BHET were studied 
employing MD simulations for 100 ns. In order to mitigate the potential for poor connections and 
geometry inside the structure, energy minimization was conducted prior to conducting the 
molecular dynamics (MD) simulation.  
Among all the PETase enzymes, HpPETase was found to be the most resilient on interaction with 
BHET (even better than IsPETase), with the RMSD values stabilizing around 0.4 nm throughout 
the simulation, after an initial inflection (figure 5c) . In case of the IsPETase-BHET complex, the 
average root mean square deviation (RMSD) values remained consistently below 0.5 nm for the 
whole simulation. The HbPETase -BHET complex exhibited the third highest stability, with an 
average RMSD value of 0.6 nm. The KsPETase performed better than the RgPETase  in it’s 
interactions with BHET – the RMSD stabilizing around 0.8 nm in due course, albeit with 
intermediate flexions. The RgPETase, which has now been experimentally proven to degrade PET,  
stabilized at around a RMSD value of 1 nm. Overall, the dynamics for all the 5 PETases suggested 
that the structures of the proteins remained intact during the simulation (figure 5). In each RMSD 
plot, the darker lines highlight the RMSD during the protein-ligand interaction against the RMSD 
of the protein backbone (in faded lines). 
  
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                   (a)                                                                                                    (b)  
                                                                               
 
 
                   
                         (c)                                                                                                  (d) 
 
 
 
 
                                                                          (e)  
Figure 5: The RMSD plots demonstrate the structural stability of the protein-ligand complex throughout 
the duration of simulation. Consistent RMSD values indicate that the complex has reached equilibrium, 
signifying stable interactions between the protein and ligand. In each figure bright colour lines represent 
protein-ligand RMSD and light colour lines are representing the protein backbone a) PETase from Ideonella 
sakaiensis (black colour) b) PETase from Rhizobacter gummiphilus  (purple colour) c ) PETase from 
Halopseudomonas pertucinogena (orange colour) d) PETase from Halopseudomonas bauzanensis  (pink 
colour) e) PETase from Ketobacter sp. (cyan colour) 
 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
The root mean square fluctuation (RMSF) was calculated to analyze the mobility and flexibility of 
individual amino acids from their mean positions during simulation, which allow s the  
identification of the specific areas of the protein showing higher degrees of dynamic behavior. The 
RMSF values consistently stayed below 0.3 for all the PETases, with occasional peaks above 0.3 
(+0.1) (figure 6). In all the figures, the curve for RMSF of the specific PETase has been contrasted 
with the curve for IsPETase (shown in the background in grey). For the reported PETases of I. 
sakaiensis and R. gummiphilus, the RMSF values were identical and lower  in comparison to the 
other PETases. Alignment of the sequences of the PETases with the RMSF data revealed that the 
fluctuations were greater in the regions of the proteins having flexible loops, as compared to the 
more structured regions (supplementary table 5). The N terminal residues which show increased 
flexibility are predictably the ones with greater exposure to the solvent. The peaks of significant 
intensity visible in the RMSF plot of HbPETase, KsPETase, and HpPETase (figure 6b, 6c and 6d) 
are indicative of the presence of significantly more flexible regions of the protein segment at 
multiple places in these enzymes . The substitution and addition events observed in the sequence 
alignment have an impact on the peak heights observed in RMSF. Though the loop regions display 
increased variability in these PETases, this has however not impacted the ligand binding, as none 
of the residues from these regions contributed to the ligand binding cavity. The residues 
comprising the binding site of all the proteins exhibited a high degree of stability and fluctuations, 
if any were of relatively insi gnificant magnitude. The orange colour used in the figure indicates 
regions of intense peaks, while specific information relating to the residues can be found in the 
supplementary table 5.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)                                                                                (b) 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 
 
 
 
 
                                (c)                                                                                  (d) 
Figure 6: The Root Mean Square Fluctuation (RMSF) plot for the protein- ligand complex during the 
molecular dynamics simulation demonstrates the temporal flexibility of each residue. Peaks in the RMSF 
profile signify places of increased mobility, such as loops or ter minal ends, whereas valleys denote more 
stable, stiff areas. In each plot, the RMSF of protein residues were compared with IsPETase. The RMSF of 
IsPETase is depicted in grey in each plot. a ) PETase from Rhizobacter gummiphilus . b ) PETase from 
Halopseudomonas pertucinogena  c ) PETase from Halopseudomonas bauzanensis
 d) PETase from 
Ketobacter sp. 
These results are also in correlation with the Free Energy Landscape plots ( figure 7). While the 
free energy minima for IsPETase ( figure 7a) and RgPETase ( figure 7b) are quite similar, 
HpPEtase, HbPETase, and KsPETase enzymes too exhibit suitably low free energy levels in the 
presence of the BHET ligand (figure 7c, 7d and 7e), which indicates structural stability throughout 
the simulation. The radius of gyration of the five PETases were also within permissible range 
showing acceptable stability and maintenance of conformational compaction during the simulation 
(figure 8). However, the radius of gyration showed more fluctuations in the KsPETase (figure 8e), 
indicating a higher order of flexibility. 
  
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(a)                                                                                 (b) 
 
 
 
 
 
                 
                   (c)                                                                                     (d)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(e) 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Figure 7: Free energy landscape between PC1 and PC3 of the different PETases with BHET (a) 
IsPETase (b) RgPETase (c) HpPETase (d) HbPETase (e) KsPETase 
 
 
 
 
                     (a)                                                                                              (b) 
 
 
 
                              
                           (c)                                                                                              (d) 
 
 
 
 
                                                                            (e) 
Figure 8: The Radius of Gyration (Rg) plot for the protein- ligand complex during the molecular 
dynamics simulation measures the compactness of the complex over time. Stable Rg values 
suggest that the complex maintains its folded structure throughout the simulation, indicating 
consistent interactions between the protein and ligand. 1) PETase from Ideonella sakaiensis (black 
colour) 2) PETase from Rhizobacter gummiphilus  (purple) 3) PETase from Halopseudomonas 
pertucinogena (orange) 4) PETase from Halopseudomonas bauzanensis
 (pink) 5) PETase from 
Ketobacter sp. (cyan) 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
 
Principal Component Analysis was performed to identify collective motion of the different 
PETases. Quantitative understanding of the directions of motion captured by the eigenvectors were 
depicted the 2D projection of eigen vectors 1 and 3 (principal components 1 and 3) on the resulting 
100 nanosecond molecular dynamics trajectories. In order to simplify the calculation, the 
covariance matrix of Cα atomic fluctuations was converted into a diagonal matrix to determine the 
eigen values. A denser and more localized area in the conformational space corresponds to a stable 
ensemble, with very few structural variations. On the other hand, a more dispersed distribution 
with multiple clusters would be representative of greater conformational flexibility. The PCA 
scatter plots of IsPETase, HpPETase and HbPETase (figures 9a, c and d) thereby reveal a singular 
predominant conformation with no significant dispersion during the simulation process. On the 
other hand, the plot for RgPETase (figure 9b), which shoes more dive rsity (two distinct clusters) 
is reflective of a transition between states, resulting mostly from the ligand binding. The plot for 
KsPETase shows an even larger diffusiveness (more than two clusters), indicating a transition 
between at least two different conformational states during the interaction with the ligand. The 
observations reported for all the PETases captured more than 99% of the total motion, and hence, 
reveal a complete landscape of the interactions. 
                             
                                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)                                                                                        (b) 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
  
 
 
 
 
                                  
 
 
 
               (c)                                                                                    (d)                                                                
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                          
(e) 
Figure 9: The PCA scatter plots of PC1 vs PC3 illustrate the principal patterns of motion in the 
protein-ligand complex throughout the simulation. The clear grouping or dispersion in the figure 
signifies the extent of conformational alterations and dynamic behaviour of the complex. a) 
PETase from Ideonella sakaiensis  (black colour) b) PETase from Rhizobacter gummiphilus  
(purple colour) c) PETase from Halopseudomonas pertucinogena (orange colour) d) PETase from 
Halopseudomonas bauzanensis (pink colour) e) PETase from Ketobacter sp. (cyan colour) 
 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Conclusion 
The discovery of a PETase from I. sakaiensis with high degradability and specificity in the recent 
past provided a major boost to the search for plastic degrading enzymes from microbes. The 
subsequent discovery of R. gummiphilus stirred the interest even more, and the past few years have 
seen renewed vigour in the quest for a naturally occurring solution to the ever-increasing threat of 
plastic pollution in the environment. The work in this manuscript would supplant and provide a 
headstart to these efforts as it reveals a handful of prospective bacterial candidates which could be 
tapped to harness their plastic degradation abilities.  
All of the species shortlisted for this work have shown the presence of a conserved hydrolysis 
domain, and some of them have been documented to hydrolyze PET and other polymers. 
Substitution in the catalytic triad has been demonstrated to diminish enzyme activity, and sequence 
alignment confirms that the catalytic triad residues are 100% conserved across all enzymes.  
Besides the typified Ser 160, Asp 206 and His 237 catalytic triad , the presence of a conserved 
Met161 in the vicinity has also been revealed as a major contributor to binding targets.  All the 
three candidates have substitutions akin to the t ype IIa category of PETases, further bolstered by 
the two conserved cysteine residues at positions 203 and 239 for the formation of an extra 
disulphide bond (unlike type I PETases). 
The spectrum of variation in the source of these bacterial candidates is also diverse and includes 
species residing in environments ranging from the marine to sub- zero habitats. Ketobacter 
alkanivorans [31], Marinobacter daqiaonensis [32], and Gammaproteobacteria bacterium [33] 
were identified from marine sources and possess conserved hydrolase domains that may aid in the 
breakdown of microplastics in the ocean, a major issue that plagues the environment and mankind. 
On the other hand, Oleispira antarctica is another bacterium that could be instrumental in plastic 
degradation at lower temperatures[34]. A.delafieldii is a common Gram negative aerobe which had 
previously exhibited high degradation activity against Poly(tetramethylene succinate) -co-
(tetramethylene adipate) (PBSA) [35] are commonly found in soil, water and on plants but are 
seldom implicated in human infections Interestingly, Schlegelella brevitalea  has been identified 
as a triple mutant of Ideonella sakaiensis , although its hydrolysis activity may not be as efficient 
as that of I. sakaiensis  [36]. The species of Pseudomonas  that have been reported, are known to 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
survive across variable environmental conditions and can prospectively degrade plastics to varying 
degrees [37].  
The notable conservation of the AXE domain among all the examined PETases, particularly the 
essential residues in the binding locations (including subsite1 and subsite 2), strongly indicates an 
evolutionary inclination for plastic degradation abilities. The MD studies of the five PETases from 
various species revealed significant potential in HpPETase, HbPETase, and KsPETase for plastic 
degradation, comparable to the experimentally validated IsPETase and RgPETase. The binding of 
BHET to HpPETase , infact, showed better binding energies than the reference IsPETase and 
RgPETase, signifying improved substrate affinity. The values of the MMPBSA calculations  in 
conjunction with its RMSD plot, illustrate enhanced structural stability over time for HpPETase -
BHET binding, when contrasted with both IsPETase and RgPETase. The same could also be 
hypothesized for the HbPETase and the KsPETase too, arguably to a lesser extent though. The 
conformational stability of the PETases during the simulation using the PCA  analysis again 
revealed stable structural conformations for the HpPETase, comparable to IsPETase. Interestingly, 
the PETase from R. gummiphilus (one of the validated PETases) displayed a rather diffusive 
trajectory during the dynamics, suggesting a flexible conformation during binding interactions, 
which may be attributed to the presence of variable region 1 (VR1, Q26- S51), the wobbling 
tryptophan-containing loop (WW-loop, W183-S187), variable region 2 (VR2, P207-V228) and the 
C-terminal region (G271-Y292) in the structure of this PETase. Furthermore, the outputs of Free 
Energy Landscape (FEL) and Radius of Gyration (Rg) consistently demonstrated that these 
potential PETases preserve structural integrity and compactness during the simulation duration.  
The PETase from H. pe rtucinogena and to some extent, H. bauzanensis can be therefore, subjected 
to experimental analysis of their plastic degradation activity. Indeed, a structure for the PETase 
from H. bauzanensis have been now deposited, but the reports of its activity still remains elusive. 
The prospective PETase from Ketobacter sp. however, does not show as much promise as the other 
two, but in some aspects, resembles the binding interactions of R. gummiphilus and hence, can also 
be tried for PET degradation. Although the results obtained in the current study suggest the PET 
degradation activities of these three alone, the rest of the PETases could also be a source of plastic 
degradation enzymes, with suitable protein engineering processes to increase their activity. In that 
direction, the characterization of the interface in these prospective enzymes, with a detailed 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
understanding of the surface amino acids and their binding mechanisms is also supposed to provide 
a significant platform to the process.  
Declarations: 
Ethics approval and consent to participate: Not Applicable 
Consent for publication: All the authors have read the manuscript and have provided consent for 
publication. 
Availability of data and materials: The data supporting the results are provided with the 
supplementary files and is open for access to readers. 
Competing interests: The authors have no competing interests, or other interests that might be 
perceived to influence the results and/or discussion reported in this paper. 
Funding: The authors have not received any funding in the execution of this manuscript. 
Authors' contributions: YR has been responsible for the acquisition and analysis of the data , 
investigation, prepared figures and tables and also scripted the first draft of the manuscript. SB has 
been involved in the ideation, analysis, validation of data and the final version of the manuscript.  
Acknowledgements: YR has been supported by a fellowship from BITS, Pilani during the tenure 
of this work. 
References:  
1. Lusher AL, Tirelli V, OConnor I, Officer R. Microplastics in Arctic polar waters: the first reported values 
of particles in surface and sub-surface samples. Sci Rep. 2015;5. 
2. OBrine T, Thompson RC. Degradation of plastic carrier bags in the marine environment. Mar Pollut 
Bull. 2010;60:2279–83. 
3. Wu C, Ma Y, Wang D, Shan Y, Song X, Hu H, et al. Integrated microbiology and metabolomics analysis 
reveal plastic mulch film residue affects soil microorganisms and their metabolic functions. J Hazard 
Mater. 2022;423:127258. 
4. Wei R, Zimmermann W. Biocatalysis as a green route for recycling the recalcitrant plastic polyethylene 
terephthalate. Microb Biotechnol. 2017;10:1302–7. 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
5. Carniel A, Valoni É, Nicomedes J, da Conceição Gomes A, de Castro AM. Lipase from Candida 
antarctica (CALB) and cutinase from Humicola insolens act synergistically for PET hydrolysis to 
terephthalic acid. Process Biochemistry. 2017;59:84–90. 
6. Joo S, Cho IJ, Seo H, Son HF, Sagong H-Y, Shin TJ, et al. Structural insight into molecular mechanism of 
poly(ethylene terephthalate) degradation. Nat Commun. 2018;9. 
7. Yoshida S, Hiraga K, Takehana T, Taniguchi I, Yamaji H, Maeda Y, et al. A bacterium that degrades and 
assimilates poly(ethylene terephthalate). Science (1979). 2016;351:1196–9. 
8. Yoshida S, Hiraga K, Taniguchi I, Oda K. Ideonella sakaiensis, PETase, and MHETase: From 
identification of microbial PET degradation to enzyme characterization. Methods Enzymol. 2021;:187–
205. 
9. Liu C, Shi C, Zhu S, Wei R, Yin C-C. Structural and functional characterization of polyethylene 
terephthalate hydrolase from Ideonella sakaiensis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2019;508:289–94. 
10. Chen C, Han X, Ko T, Liu W, Guo R. Structural studies reveal the molecular mechanism of PET ase. 
FEBS J. 2018;285:3717–23. 
11. Son HF, Cho IJ, Joo S, Seo H, Sagong H-Y, Choi SY, et al. Rational Protein Engineering of Thermo-
Stable PETase from Ideonella sakaiensis for Highly Efficient PET Degradation. ACS Catal. 2019;9:3519–26. 
12. Austin HP, Allen MD, Donohoe BS, Rorrer NA, Kearns FL, Silveira RL, et al. Characterization and 
engineering of a plastic-degrading aromatic polyesterase. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences. 2018;115. 
13. Chen C-C, Han X, Li X, Jiang P, Niu D, Ma L, et al. General features to enhance enzymatic activity of 
poly(ethylene terephthalate) hydrolysis. Nat Catal. 2021;4:425–30. 
14. Sagong H-Y, Son HF, Seo H, Hong H, Lee D, Kim K-J. Implications for the PET decomposition 
mechanism through similarity and dissimilarity between PETases from Rhizobacter gummiphilus and 
Ideonella sakaiensis. J Hazard Mater. 2021;416:126075. 
15. Altschul SF, Gish W, Miller W, Myers EW, Lipman DJ. Basic local alignment search tool. J Mol Biol. 
1990;215:403–10. 
16. Gasteiger E, Gattiker A, Hoogland C, Ivanyi I, Appel RD, Bairoch A. ExPASy: the proteomics server for 
in-depth protein knowledge and analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003;31:3784–8. 
17. Sonnhammer ELL, Eddy SR, Durbin R. Pfam: A comprehensive database of protein domain families 
based on seed alignments. Proteins: Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics. 1997;28:405–20. 
18. Pedruzzi I, Rivoire C, Auchincloss AH, Coudert E, Keller G, de Castro E, et al. HAMAP in 2015: updates 
to the protein family classification and annotation system. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015;43:D1064–70. 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
19. Ashkenazy H, Abadi S, Martz E, Chay O, Mayrose I, Pupko T, et al. ConSurf 2016: an improved 
methodology to estimate and visualize evolutionary conservation in macromolecules. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2016;44:W344–50. 
20. Zhu K, Day T, Warshaviak D, Murrett C, Friesner R, Pearlman D. Antibody structure determination 
using a combination of homology modeling, energy-based refinement, and loop prediction. Proteins: 
Structure, Function, and Bioinformatics. 2014;82:1646–55. 
21. Laskowski RA, MacArthur MW, Moss DS, Thornton JM. PROCHECK: a program to check the 
stereochemical quality of protein structures. J Appl Crystallogr. 1993;26:283–91. 
22. Colovos C, Yeates TO. Verification of protein structures: Patterns of nonbonded atomic interactions. 
Protein Science. 1993;2:1511–9. 
23. Trott O, Olson AJ. AutoDock Vina: Improving the speed and accuracy of docking with a new scoring 
function, efficient optimization, and multithreading. J Comput Chem. 2009;:NA–NA. 
24. Duru CE, Duru IA, García BAA, Enenebeaku UE. Computational Modeling of the Activity of 
Metronidazole against EhG\alpha{}1 of Entamoeba histolytica Enhanced by its Copper and Zinc 
Complexes. Chemistry Africa. 2021;4:545–51. 
25. Pronk S, Páll S, Schulz R, Larsson P, Bjelkmar P, Apostolov R, et al. GROMACS 4.5: a high-throughput 
and highly parallel open source molecular simulation toolkit. Bioinformatics. 2013;29:845–54. 
26. Vanommeslaeghe K, Hatcher E, Acharya C, Kundu S, Zhong S, Shim J, et al. CHARMM general force 
field: A force field for drug-like molecules compatible with the CHARMM all-atom additive biological 
force fields. J Comput Chem. 2010;31:671–90. 
27. Sagong H-Y, Son HF, Seo H, Hong H, Lee D, Kim K-J. Implications for the PET decomposition 
mechanism through similarity and dissimilarity between PETases from Rhizobacter gummiphilus and 
Ideonella sakaiensis. J Hazard Mater. 2021;416:126075. 
28. Sagong H-Y, Kim S, Lee D, Hong H, Lee SH, Seo H, et al. Structural and functional characterization of 
an auxiliary domain-containing PET hydrolase from Burkholderiales bacterium. J Hazard Mater. 
2022;429:128267. 
29. Xia C, Feng S-H, Xia Y, Pan X, Shen H-B. Fast protein structure comparison through effective 
representation learning with contrastive graph neural networks. PLoS Comput Biol. 2022;18:e1009986-. 
30. Boneta S, Arafet K, Moliner V. QM/MM Study of the Enzymatic Biodegradation Mechanism of 
Polyethylene Terephthalate. J Chem Inf Model. 2021;61:3041–51. 
31. Kim S-H, Kim J-G, Jung M-Y, Kim S-J, Gwak J-H, Yu W-J, et al. Ketobacter alkanivorans gen. nov., sp. 
nov., an n-alkane-degrading bacterium isolated from seawater. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol. 2018;68:2258–
64. 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint 
32. Ivanova EP, Ng HJ, Webb HK, Feng G, Oshima K, Hattori M, et al. Draft Genome Sequences of 
Marinobacter similis A3d10 T and Marinobacter salarius R9SW1 T. Genome Announc. 2014;2. 
33. Birnstiel S, Sebastián M, Romera-Castillo C. Structure and activity of marine bacterial communities 
responding to plastic leachates. Science of The Total Environment. 2022;834:155264. 
34. Blázquez-Sánchez P, Engelberger F, Cifuentes-Anticevic J, Sonnendecker C, Griñén A, Reyes J, et al. 
Antarctic Polyester Hydrolases Degrade Aliphatic and Aromatic Polyesters at Moderate Temperatures. 
Appl Environ Microbiol. 2022;88. 
35. Uchida H, Nakajima-Kambe T, Shigeno-Akutsu Y, Nomura N, Tokiwa Y, Nakahara T. Properties of a 
bacterium which degrades solid poly(tetramethylene succinate)-co-adipate, a biodegradable plastic. 
FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2000;189:25–9. 
36. Wang X, Song C, Qi Q, Zhang Y, Li R, Huo L. Biochemical characterization of a polyethylene 
terephthalate hydrolase and design of high-throughput screening for its directed evolution. Engineering 
Microbiology. 2022;2:100020. 
37. Wilkes RA, Aristilde L. Degradation and metabolism of synthetic plastics and associated products 
byPseudomonassp.: capabilities and challenges. J Appl Microbiol. 2017;123:582–93. 
  
 
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprintthis version posted August 14, 2025. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.08.14.670228doi: bioRxiv preprint