www.chemsuschem.org
A High-Throughput Investigation of the Binding Specificity
of Carbohydrate-Binding Modules for Synthetic and
Natural Polymers
Andrew Philip Rennison, Jaime Fernandez-Macgregor, Julie Melot, Fabien Durbesson,
Tobias Tandrup, Peter Westh, Renaud Vincentelli,* and Marie Sofie Møller*
Carbohydrate-binding modules (CBMs) are noncatalytic domains
that enhance enzyme binding to substrates. Type A CBMs show
potential for engineering plastic-degrading enzymes due to their
affinity for synthetic polymers. This study presents a high-
throughput screening pipeline for characterizing the affinity
and specificity of type A CBMs towards the synthetic polymers
polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polystyrene (PS), and polyeth-
ylene (PE), and the polysaccharides cellulose, chitin, and starch.
/C25 800 CBMs from the families CBM2, CBM3, CBM10, and
CBM64 are expressed as green fluorescent protein (GFP)-fusion
proteins and tested for binding using a modified holdup assay,
which produced up to 10 000 data points per day. The screening
identifies /C25 150 binders for PET and PE, around 250 for PS, and
demonstrates family-specific binding patterns for avicel, chitin,
and starch. To demonstrate practical utility, four CBMs with high
PET affinity are fused to the PET hydrolase LCCICCG, enhancing
activity on PET powder by around 5-fold. These CBM-enzyme
fusions mitigate competitive binding to plastic impurities,
improving performance in mixed plastic assays. This work signifi-
cantly expands the repertoire of CBMs binding to synthetic poly-
mers, advances our understanding of CBM-substrate interactions,
and provides knowledge for engineering enzymes to tackle plas-
tic pollution, particularly where mixed plastics pose significant
challenges.
1. Introduction
Plastic pollution is a prominent environmental issue, driven by
the rise in single-use plastics and inadequate disposal systems.
This has led to widespread plastic dispersal in the biosphere,[1]
causing numerous adverse effects.[2,3] The projection that the
ocean will contain more plastic waste than fish by 2050[4] under-
scores the urgent need to address existing pollution and prevent
future waste. Additionally, over 98% of plastic packaging is made
from virgin fossil feedstocks, with 6% of global oil consumption
going to plastic production,[4] highlighting the need for sustain-
able recycling practices.
Recycling plastic waste and creating a closed-loop economy
are often proposed to mitigate the environmental impact of
plastics. Generally, plastic recycling can be divided into two types,
chemical/physical[5] and enzymatic[6] methods. However, both
have issues. Chemical/physical methods are energetically expen-
sive or use polluting reagents like methanol,[7] often reducing the
quality of recycled polymers.[8] Enzymatic recycling, though much
less developed, is currently limited to polyethylene terephthalate
(PET) degradation and is not yet industrialized.[9,10] Both recycling
pathways require sorting mixed plastic waste into constituent
polymers, adding costs and environmental impacts. Crucially, nei-
ther can reduce existing plastic waste without collection
schemes. Therefore, an in situ solution is also needed to remedi-
ate plastic pollution.
Numerous studies have identified fungal, bacterial, and algae
species acting on various plastics.[11] Bacterial degradation of PET
has been well reported since the discovery ofIdeonella sakaiensis
in 2016, which can use PET as its sole carbon source.[12] Significant
degradation of polystyrene (PS) and polyethylene (PE) by bacte-
rial isolates has also been shown.[13,14] Many fungal isolates from
polluted environments, particularly from the genus Aspergillus,
have demonstrated activity on these plastics.[15,16] Fungi, known
for their role in the turnover of recalcitrant biomass and produc-
tion of industrially relevant enzymes for bioprocessing recalci-
trant material, secrete enzymes like laccases, peroxidases, and
cutinases that act on lignin and complex biopolymers as well
as polymers such as PE, PET, and PS.[17– 19] However, enzymatic
degradation of PET is much more developed than other plastics.
The PAZy database (www.pazy.eu), which catalogs biochemically
characterized enzymes, currently lists over 100 PET hydrolases,
two nonspecific oxidase classes of PE degraders, and no enzymes
for PS degradation.[20]
A. P. Rennison, T. Tandrup, P. Westh, M. S. Møller
Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine
The Technical University of Denmark
Søltofts Plads, Building 221, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
E-mail: msmo@dtu.dk
J. Fernandez-Macgregor, J. Melot, F. Durbesson, R. Vincentelli
Laboratory Architecture et Fonction des Macromolecules Biologiques
Aix-Marseille University
Luminy Campus, 13288 Marseille, France
E-mail: renaud.vincentelli@univ-amu.fr
Supporting information for this article is available on the WWW under https://
doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202500468
© 2025 The Author(s). ChemSusChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH. This is
an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited and is not used for
commercial purposes.
ChemSusChem 2025, 18, e202500468 (1 of 12) © 2025 The Author(s). ChemSusChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
ChemSusChem
Research Article
doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202500468
In nature, many enzymes involved in bioprocessing natural
polymers are modular proteins, including carbohydrate-binding
modules (CBMs) besides the catalytic domain. These noncatalytic
CBMs can enhance enzyme activity by increasing affinity or
enzyme concentration at the substrate. They can also increase
enzyme specificity by directing it to a particular polymer within
a complex polysaccharide environment such as the plant cell
wall.[21] Several CBMs that bind to plastics have been
identified,[22– 24] and studies have shown their potential in engi-
neering plastic-degrading enzymes, primarily focusing on PET
degradation;[25– 27] however, there are also examples of CBM fused
laccases and lytic polysaccharide monooxygenases with activity
on other plastics.[28,29] These CBMs are classified as type A, char-
acterized by a planar binding surface that allows them to bind to
insoluble targets,[21] and are mainly grouped into CBM families 2
and 3 (CBM2 and CBM3) in the carbohydrate-active enzymes
(CAZy) database (www.cazy.org).[30] A number of other binding
modules have also been identified that increase the activity of
PET hydrolases when used as part of fusion enzymes, in particular
PHA binding domains.[31]
While industrial scale enzymatic degradation of pure PET
streams may not require a CBM,[24] municipal solid waste often
comprises mixed plastics like PET, PS, and PE.[32] Enzyme cocktails
for degrading mixed plastics will likely need substrate-binding
domains with specificity for each plastic substrate, to avoid non-
target binding. Engineering fungal or bacterial strains for in situ
biodegradation of plastic pollution may also require binding
domains, due to the lower substrate concentration compared
to industrial conditions. Substrate-binding domains that do not
bind to environmentally abundant polysaccharides like cellulose
or starch would be beneficial in these conditions.
The binding of CBMs to polysaccharides and their impact on
enzymatic activity have been studied for decades.[33] However,
many studies have been biased towards polysaccharides that
the associated catalytic domains act upon, and systematic studies
testing CBMs against various polysaccharides are rare. Some stud-
ies screen multiple CBMs from different families on one substrate
or test various substrates with CBMs from one family.[34,35] These
limited studies do not provide sufficient data to predict binding
affinity and selectivity based on sequence, structure, or phylog-
eny. It has been proposed that the specificity of type A CBMs is
influenced by the spacing between aromatic residues in the bind-
ing plane or their relative angles.[36,37] However, these proposals
are often based on testing of individual modules and may not
apply across the entire family. Many type A CBM families bind
both cellulose and chitin, with a distinction often made between
these and starch-binding domains (SBDs). Given the similarity
between the surfaces of starch granules and crystalline cellu-
lose,[38,39] some promiscuity in binding could be expected.
Understanding CBM specificity for these highly abundant poly-
saccharides would not only aid in developing enzymes for biore-
mediation of plastic waste but also enhance our knowledge of
biomass turnover on Earth.
In this study, we developed a high-throughput (HTP) screen-
ing pipeline (Figure 1a) for type A CBMs binding to synthetic pol-
ymers (PET, PS, and low-density polyethylene, LDPE) and
polysaccharides (cellulose, β-chitin, and starch). Approximately
1200 proteins from CBM families 2, 3, 10, and 64 were rationally
selected, designed as fusions with an enhanced green fluorescent
protein (EGFP), and expressed and purified in an HTP manner.
These proteins were analyzed using an adapted holdup (HU)
assay[40,41] (Figure 1b), with binding intensities (BI) calculated
for each substrate (Figure 1c). CBMs that specifically bound to
a given plastic were then fused to the PET-degrading enzyme
LCCICCG[55,66] and the selectivity of these fusion enzymes was
determined in mixed substrate assays.
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Design of a High Throughput Assay for CBM
Interactions
Inspired by a HTP holdup assay developed for identifying protein
binding to peptides immobilized on insoluble beads,[40] a holdup
assay to screen for proteins binding to insoluble polymers was
developed (Figure 1). The protocol is almost fully automated
on a Tecan liquid handling robot, using a modification of the pro-
gram described previously. [41] In short, substrates were sus-
pended in liquid and transferred to 384-well filter plates with
one well out of every four remaining empty to act as a control.
Following washing, EGFP-labelled CBMs were added to both the
substrate and control wells and allowed to equilibrate. The liquid
from each well was then aspirated into a receiver plate, and
unbound protein was detected by GFP fluorescence. This enabled
calculation of the BI, representing the percentage of bound pro-
tein at a single concentration relative to the control. The use of
insoluble polymers, unlike the peptide-coated beads used in the
original method, necessitated additional controls and considera-
tions to ensure data quality.
To ensure accurate pipetting of the suspended substrate
into the 384-well filter plates, the mass of the remaining sub-
strate in the suspensions after the plates had been filled was
checked by drying the suspension at 105 °C overnight. The con-
sistent concentration before and after dispensing confirmed
pipetting accuracy. Visual inspection verified the filling of wells,
although consistency in substrate amounts per well could not
be confirmed. Furthermore, the red fluorescent signal from
mCherry, doped into each purified EGFP-CBM protein, served
as a control to verify consistent protein pipetting and complete
liquid transfer from the holdup assay to the receiver plate during
centrifugation (Figure 1). False positives could arise if test
wells contained less volume than the control well within a group
of four. To mitigate this, wells with mCherry fluorescence
outside 80– 120% of the group median were excluded from
BI calculations. If the control well (without substrate) fell outside
this range, the entire group was excluded. Finally, a large
excess of substrate relative to protein minimized the impact
of volume discrepancies on binding. Overfilling had no effect,
while underfilling would only result in tolerable false negatives
in this HTP study.
Given that many proteins, including the fusion partner EGFP,
bind nonspecifically to synthetic polymers,[42] standalone EGFP
modules were randomly distributed across plates to determine
ChemSusChem 2025, 18, e202500468 (2 of 12) © 2025 The Author(s). ChemSusChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
ChemSusChem
Research Article
doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202500468
the mean BI of the reporter molecule on the reused substrates.
EGFP showed low binding to all substrates, with PS showing the
highest BI (0.14) and starch the lowest (0.09). EGFP BI values on
each substrate were used as thresholds to determine whether a
CBM was considered a binder in the holdup assay (SI Appendix,
Table S1, Supporting Information).
Key decisions were made to maintain the HTP nature while
retaining applicability to various substrates. To minimize
Figure 1. Setup for the high throughput (HTP) holdup assay. a) The process flow of HTP expression, purification, and binding analysis by the holdup assay.
b) The setup of the 384-well filter plates used in the assays. The purified EGFP-CBM is added from the 96 well plate, to the 384 well plate in the pattern
shown. The bottom right well of each group of four has no substrate added and is used as the control well. c) The conceptual framework of the holdup
assay. Substrate is added to the top of the filter plate, followed by the protein, which binds to the substrate at varying levels. Unbound protein is then
removed by centrifugation and collected in a 384 black plate; it is detected by the fluorescent signal from the EGFP module. BI values are calculated asa
fraction of the bound total, compared to the control wells.
ChemSusChem 2025, 18, e202500468 (3 of 12) © 2025 The Author(s). ChemSusChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
ChemSusChem
Research Article
doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202500468
substrate use, substrates in the filter plates were reused and
regenerated by washing with 1 M NaCl and 2 M urea. Two var-
iants of a chitin binding domain (ACQ50287) were distributed
randomly across the chitin test plate, and the BI was monitored
over 10 rounds of washing. No decrease in binding was observed
over this process, with only normal variation seen between wash-
ings (Figure S1, Supporting Information). In addition, several
strongly binding proteins were identified on the other substrates
after up to 10 washes, suggesting recycling of these substrates is
feasible. However, the washing procedure did cause xylan to form
gels within the filter plates making it impossible to recycle. In
such cases, or when the availability of substrate is not a factor,
fresh loading of new plates for each round of CBMs to be tested
could be considered. This study focused on the interaction of
type A CBMs with insoluble polysaccharides. However, type B
and C CBMs could also be analyzed using soluble glycans immo-
bilized on insoluble beads.
The HTP holdup assay results were validated for 24 represen-
tatives using a pulldown assay, with small and acceptable dis-
crepancies observed (see Supporting Information text). BI
values for synthetic polymers were generally higher in the holdup
assays than in the pulldown assay. This may be due to protein
interactions with residual protein on the surface due to recycling
in the holdup experiments. The validation confirmed the HTP
holdup assay as a reliable method for identifying the binding
of CBMs to insoluble polymers. Hence, the data can be used
for further analysis of CBM affinity and specificity and to identify
structural features that determine these properties.
Using BI as a measure of CBM binding to substrates was nec-
essary for adapting the holdup assay to insoluble polymers.
Previously, BI was used to calculate a dissociation constant (Kd)
for protein binding to peptides immobilized on agarose beads.[40]
However, the heterogeneous nature of the binding sites on the
polymeric substrates invalidates assumptions of one-to-one bind-
ing, making the calculation of binding site density on the surface
of the particles impossible and preventingKd calculation from a
single-point assay. Though it would be possible to modify the
holdup assay to produce binding curves for determining binding
affinity, this would reduce data point production per protein ten-
fold. For identifying CBMs for enzyme design, detailed calculation
of the binding parametersKd and Bmax was secondary to analyz-
ing a large number of CBMs, allowing the selection of the binders
and ranking the relative ability of each member of a large family
of enzymes. The holdup assay could produce up to 10 000 data
points per day, allowing BI calculation of/C25 2500 proteins on one
substrate daily, outperforming previous HTP screening techni-
ques that measure binding on a few hundred samples per day
at most.[43]
It should be noted that there are potential limitations and pit-
falls associated with the holdup method as applied in this study,
which warrant discussion. First, the HTP expression of the EGFP-
CBM constructs was done in a standardE. coli BL21 expression
strain for ease of use and downstream purification. However, this
may have affected the number of obtained CBMs. In particular,
proteins stabilized by disulfide bonds would be better expressed
in specialized strains.[44] While the vast majority of CBMs selected
for expression in this study were of bacterial origin, future studies
involving fungal proteins may benefit from alternative expression
systems, such asPichia pastoris. Second, the holdup method relies
on the free movement of unbound proteins through the filters, to
be detected in the receiver plate. During method development
for polysaccharides, it was observed that the filters became
clogged with certain substrates, in particular xylan, which makes
the assessment of CBM binding impossible in these cases.
Additionally, large aggregates of EGFP-CBM proteins may hinder
movement of unbound protein through the filter, potentially
leading to false positives. However, the use of the same protein
aliquots in the control wells is expected to mitigate this issue.
2.2. HTP Holdup Assays to Identify Binding Profiles of CBMs
The results and discussion of the selection and expression of the
EGFP-CBM proteins can be found in the supporting information.
Out of the 1097 EGFP-CBM proteins initially selected for expres-
sion, 797 yielded concentrations above 0.5μM after purification,
making them suitable for the HTP holdup assays. Details on the
design and validation of the holdup assay can be found in
Supporting Information text. BI values were determined for each
CBM against the polymers PET, PS, and LDPE, as well as the poly-
saccharides avicel,β-chitin, and starch. Constructs with BI values
below that of EGFP alone (Table S1, Supporting Information) on a
given substrate were considered nonbinders.
Histograms depicting the binding intensities for all binders on
each substrate are shown inFigure 2, with BI values available in
Dataset S1, Supporting Information. The holdup assay identified
727 CBMs that bound to at least one of the six substrates, equat-
ing to a 91.2% hit rate. The raw data and results plotted for each
of the 384-well filter plates are provided inDataset S2, Supporting
Information.
A high number of binders were observed for avicel and chitin
with 432 and 412 binders, respectively. These polysaccharides
also exhibited higher average BI values than the other substrates,
consistent with CBM2 and CBM3 being identified as cellulose and
chitin binders.[45– 47] The CBMs that bound most tightly to avicel
and chitin were from organisms found in environments rich
in these polysaccharides, including soil bacteria, cellulose-
degrading sludge communities, and plant pathogens. Both
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria and eukaryotes were
represented, with CBMs from marine bacteria being among the
strongest chitin binders. Previous studies have identified CBMs
with comparable affinities for both cellulose and chitin,[48,49] dem-
onstrated here by 270 CBMs binding to both substrates. Over 100
domains were identified as specific binders to either avicel or chi-
tin, mostly within the CBM2 and CBM3 families. However, specific
chitin binders all had lower BI values compared to specific avicel
binders. Unsurprisingly, significantly fewer starch-binding
domains were identified, with 249 in total, many of which bound
weakly (Figure 2). Only 17 CBMs had a BI value on starch over 0.3,
with only one approaching 0.5, a CBM2 from the bacteria
Phytohabitans suffuscus, isolated from orchid roots. However, a
much higher proportion of CBM10 and CBM64 bound to starch
compared to avicel and chitin, with many of these coming from
putative cellulases or xylanases.
ChemSusChem 2025, 18, e202500468 (4 of 12) © 2025 The Author(s). ChemSusChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
ChemSusChem
Research Article
doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202500468
The most promising PET binders were found in the CBM2 and
CBM3 families (Figure 2 andDataset S1, Supporting Information).
The highest BI on PET was 0.71 for a CBM2 fromStreptomyces
bingchenggensis, which also bound strongly to PS and avicel.
Another notable protein, a CBM2 fromRivularia sp., had a BI of
0.59 on PET but did not bind to the other two plastics. These
BI values are significantly higher than the 0.19 measured for
the widely studied PET hydrolase PHL7 (Dataset S1, Supporting
Information). However, it should be noted that tighter binding
is not necessarily advantageous for interfacial catalysis, in accor-
dance with the Sabatier principle.[50] Therefore, a full assessment
of the optimum affinity should be conducted for PET hydrolases
prior to design of fusion enzymes. BI values of CBMs binding to
LDPE were overall slightly lower than those for PET and PS
(Figure 2 and Dataset S1, Supporting Information). However,
notable examples of high BI values and specific CBMs were iden-
tified, including a CBM64 from the bacteriumFulvivigra maritima.
It demonstrated specific binding to LDPE with a BI of 0.56, with
several CBM2 domains also exhibiting specific binding to LDPE.
Among the tested synthetic polymers, the largest number of hits
were on PS, with CBM64 domains representing most of the higher
BI values (Figure 2). BI values on PS were generally higher, with 20
proteins having BI values of 0.5 or greater, compared to 5 for PET
and 8 for LDPE. The strongest PS binders were a CBM64 from
Spirochaeta thermophila and a CBM2 fromMicromonosporaceae
bacterium DSM 106 523, both displaying negligible binding to
PET and LDPE. The CBM10 family had similar number of hits
as CBM64 but generally lower BI values (Figure 2). Notably, three
CBM10s bound tightly and specifically to PS (AAA26710,
AAO31760, and BAA25188|330-363).
Figure 2. Histograms showing the binding intensities of EGFP-CBM constructs to each of the six substrates analyzed. Binders are identified as having a
higher BI than the average of lone EGFP binding over the course of several plates, as represented by the dotted line on each histogram. The number of
binders from each family and total binders on each particular substrate are seen in the insert on each plot, along with the proportion of confirmed binders
from the total tested in that family. Tables of the full dataset of the proteins binding to each of the substrates can be found in Dataset S1 and S2,
Supporting Information.
ChemSusChem 2025, 18, e202500468 (5 of 12) © 2025 The Author(s). ChemSusChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
ChemSusChem
Research Article
doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202500468
2.3. Binding Specificity of CBMs Is Phylogenetically and
Structurally Determined
The holdup assay clearly demonstrated a significant degree of
specificity, with many CBMs binding selectively to one or another
of the substrates. When considering only proteins that bind to a
single substrate, we see over 50 candidates on each of the six sub-
strates, with many more binding to two substrates. This diversity
makes it challenging to isolate specific features of the proteins
responsible for substrate-specific binding. To explore potential pat-
terns, phylogenetic trees were constructed to assess specificity
from an evolutionary viewpoint. For the polysaccharides (Figure 3),
the trees reveal groupings of BI on individual substrates, providing
some limited evidence for specificity. In contrast but not unex-
pected, for the plastics (Figure S2, Supporting Information), the
relationship between phylogeny and specificity is less pronounced,
though groupings by substrate are still apparent. It is reasonable to
assume that specific structural features promote substrate-specific
binding for both plastics and polysaccharides. Some of these fea-
tures are outlined in the following paragraphs. While it is not
intended to be an exhaustive or definitive list, if offers useful indi-
cators for future analyses of this extensive dataset.
Phylogenetic trees were constructed with sequences of CBMs
that demonstrated binding to at least one of the six substrates
analyzed. These trees were split into the four CBM families
and annotated with HTP holdup assay results (Figure 3, Figure
S2, Supporting Information). When focusing on the natural poly-
mers, the trees generally reflect known trends within CBM
families and reveal phylogenetically determined binding sub-
groupings. In the CBM2 tree, avicel and chitin binding are evenly
distributed (Figure 3), consistent with known preferences in this
family.[45,46] Some subgroups show avicel binding dominance,
while others exhibited low binding to both avicel and chitin
(Figure 3a), suggesting specificity for other polysaccharides like
xylan. The CBM3 tree shows a subgroup with pronounced avicel
binding (Figure 3b), indicating phylogenetically determined spec-
ificity. As stated previously, the CBM10 and CBM64 families
(Figure 3c,d) show stronger and more frequent binding to starch
compared to the other two families, as highlighted in comparison
of the trees (Figure 3).
Following the observations from the phylogenetic trees, com-
parisons of Alphafold2 models of selected CBMs were conducted
(Figure S3– S11, Supporting Information) to identify structural
specificity determinants, with a focus on the binding surface.[22]
There were several examples of CBM2 that were missing the
canonical aromatic triad (e.g., ADJ46832, ACY9890, and
ADJ46833) but showed some substrate preference for chitin
and PS, with negligible binding to the other substrates. In partic-
ular, polar or charged side chains seem to promote chitin binding
in the absence of aromatic residues on the binding surface
(Figure S3 and S4, Supporting Information). A significantly modi-
fied binding surface is seen in around 10 CBM2, having only a
single canonical aromatic residue and a protruding loop
of two or three residues containing a tyrosine orthogonal
to the plane, with plddt above 95 (Figure S5, Supporting
Information). These proteins did not bind any substrates signifi-
cantly, except for one (AGM06248), which bound tightly to PS and
chitin, potentially due to a histidine also protruding orthogonal to
the surface plane. An arginine three residues after the first of the
canonical binders is seen in around 10 CBM2, serving to rotate the
aromatic side chain through 90°,[37] which also disrupts binding to
PET (Figure S6, Supporting Information).
A majority of CBM3 modules have loop truncations removing
one of the aromatic residues from the binding surface, relative to
the canonical CBM3 structure (PDB: 1NBC) (e.g., ADZ85343,
ABX41011, and ADZ85351). These proteins show consistently
strong avicel binding (Figure S7, Supporting Information), in con-
trast to previous findings.[51] The subgroup with the extended loop
is underrepresented among both PET and chitin binders. Around
10 of these proteins also contain a shortα-helix found just after the
binding residue on the fourthβ-strand, which protrudes into the
binding surface (Figure S8, Supporting Information). This CBM3
subgroup generally showed very weak binding to the polysacchar-
ides, especially when the helix contained a polar residue making
up the binding surface. However, two members of the subgroup,
which had two hydrophobic residues in the helix contributing to
the binding surface, showed moderate avicel binding, while only
binding weakly to chitin.
Three of the 17 screened CBM64 members show major struc-
tural variation with an extended loop, which adds another tryp-
tophan residue to the binding surface (Figure S9, Supporting
Information). Proteins with this third tryptophan did not bind
PET or LDPE significantly, but two of them bound tightly to
PS. This subgroup also contains one of the modules with the
highest BI on starch, with CBM64 binding starch more frequently
than the other CBM families.
The HTP holdup assay identified several hundred CBMs bind-
ing to each of the six substrates tested, many of which were pre-
viously unidentified. Within the polysaccharides, the preference
for starch binding by CBM10 and CBM64 indicates a previously
unidentified binding tendency in these families, suggesting evo-
lutionary development of starch binding or a lack of pressure for
substrate specificity, resulting in promiscuity. A study on the
CBM64 fromSpirochaeta thermophila(ADN02703.1) showed that
this CBM displays properties of both type A and B binding modes,
binding to solubilized polysaccharides as well as insoluble flat
surfaces.[34] This dual binding mode may explain the binding
of this and other CBM64 modules to starch, with many amylopec-
tin branches behaving as semi-solubilized polysaccharides on the
granule surface.[38,39] The CBMs from each family identified in this
study binding to starch all had hydrophobic surfaces extending
from the canonical binding surface (Figure S12, Supporting
Information), which may facilitate this dual binding as glycans
extending from the starch surface wrap around the CBM during
binding. Importantly, none of these CBMs originate from starch-
active enzymes, so the ability to bind starch could serve as an
anchor during degradation of nearby cell material.
Within the CBM2 family, a known dimorphism exists between
glycine and arginine residues three positions after the first of the
three canonical binding aromatic residues, with arginine rotating
it through 90° and affecting the planar binding surface (Figure S6,
Supporting Information). This rotation has been proposed to
reduce binding to cellulose and drive specificity to xylan,[37] which
was not included in the screen. Of the eleven proteins with
ChemSusChem 2025, 18, e202500468 (6 of 12) © 2025 The Author(s). ChemSusChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
ChemSusChem
Research Article
doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202500468
arginine at this position, binding to PET and LDPE was signifi-
cantly reduced, while several bound tightly to PS. Several other
indicators of specificity to PS binding were observed, such as an
extra aromatic binding residue in CBM64 or a tyrosine protruding
from the binding surface in CBM2, with each of these possibly
driven by the nonplanar conformation of aromatic rings. Each
of these is a target for producing CBM variants with a high specific
affinity to PS over other plastics. Most CBM2 modules have the
Figure 3. Phylogenetic trees including proteins with at least one confirmed binder in the holdup assays, decorated with the BI of the three polysaccharide
substrates, avicel (red), chitin (blue), and starch (green). a) CBM2, b) CBM3, c) CBM10, and d) CBM64. Shading refers to groupings of proteins that bind spe-
cifically to the substrate represented by that color, with the yellow shading representing CBMs that do not bind of any of the substrates. Phylogenetic trees
of the same families, decorated with the BI values of the three plastic substrates can be seen in Figure S2, Supporting Information.
ChemSusChem 2025, 18, e202500468 (7 of 12) © 2025 The Author(s). ChemSusChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
ChemSusChem
Research Article
doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202500468
canonical aromatic triad of three tryptophan residues, with most
of the strongest binders to each substrate represented in this
group. The third position varies, featuring aromatic, polar, or ali-
phatic side chains. Most CBM2s with glycine in this position show
negligible binding to the polysaccharides (Figure S10, Supporting
Information), while histidine and serine (Figure S11, Supporting
Information) allow strong binding and specificity, indicating a tar-
get for future engineering of CBM2.
Specific binding to chitin by some CBM2 members seems to
be driven by polar residues either in place of or surrounding the
aromatic binding residues. The presence of polar amide groups
on the chitin chain would be more available for hydrogen bond-
ing than the hydroxyl groups in cellulose, which would favor
polar interactions in bonding. The CAZy database only reports
one instance of CBM3 binding to chitin;[52] however, around 70
were identified here, with several showing a strong preference
over avicel. Many of the CBM10 domains screened are natively
found as part of repeat tandems, which do not always have
the same specificity or affinity,[35] with similar effects seen in this
study. Two CBM10 domains of a mannanase from Vibrio sp.
(BAA25188) were screened alone and in their native conforma-
tion as a tandem protein, with only the C-terminal domain show-
ing affinity for starch and avicel.
The electrostatics and hydrophobicity of the CBM surfaces
were mapped to determine any associations between these
and substrate specificity. Maps displaying the electrostatic poten-
tial and Wimley– White hydrophobicity[53] of each of the 1190
CBMs selected for the screen in this study can be found in
Dataset S3. Each of the CBMs with a BI of 0.30 or more on starch
showed an extended hydrophobic surface (Figure S12,
Supporting Information), extending away from the canonical
binding surface. In terms of the synthetic polymers, some paral-
lels exist between the hydrophobic surfaces of the most tightly
binding CBMs on each plastic (Figure S13, Supporting
Information). The strongest PS and PET binders seem to have
a discontinuous hydrophobic binding surface, with polar patches
surrounding it. LDPE binders seem to have a more continuous
hydrophobic surface, with CBM2 binding to LDPE possessing a
neutral or minimally charged binding surface (Figure S14,
Supporting Information). The hydrophobic and electrostatic maps
also suggested further drivers of specificity between the plastics.
The strongest PET binders had hydrophobic patches that were
more separated compared to the PS binders, with LDPE binders
exhibiting a more continuous hydrophobic surface (Figure S13
and S14, Supporting Information). Binding specificity is often
influenced by the distance between aromatic residues in
nature.[36] In PET binders, the separated hydrophobic patches
could align with the more widely spaced aromatic moieties, as
compared to PS, facilitating specificity.
2.4. CBMs can be Used to Engineer Specific Plastic
Degrading Enzymes
In this study, one CBM from each of the four screened CBM fami-
lies, with varying specificity to PET or PS (Table S2, Supporting
Information), was fused with the commonly studied PET
hydrolase, LCCICCG.[54] A linker derived from Trichoderma reesei
Cel7A, previously used as a linker for PET hydrolase-CBM
fusions,[24] was used to attach each of the CBMs to the C-terminal
of the catalytic domain. The activity of these fusion enzymes on
crystalline PET powder was assayed and compared to LCCICCG
alone (Figure 4). Assays were performed at 50 °C, which is below
the optimum temperature of LCCICCG, to accommodate the lower
thermostability of the binding modules (Figure S15, Supporting
Information). To confirm proper folding of the CBMs in the fusion
enzymes, Langmuir binding isotherms to avicel were produced
(Figure S16 and Table S3, Supporting Information). All enzymes,
except LCCICCG-FlCBM64, showed affinity for avicel not seen in
LCCICCG alone. However, FlCBM64 did not bind strongly to avicel
in holdup and pulldown assays. Furthermore, Langmuir binding
isotherms for each protein on PET and PS were also produced.
LCCICCG was shown to bind nonspecifically to PET, PS, and
LDPE with varying affinity. The fusion enzymes showed a range
of affinities for the two substrates, with LCCICCG-RsCBM2 showing
the highest affinity for PET at 7.2 nM, and LCCICCG-FlCBM64 the
highest for PS at 8.7 nM.
CBM2s had no effect or were detrimental to activity on crys-
talline PET powder (Figure 4a), consistent with previous
Figure 4. Activity and selectivity of fusion enzymes made with LCCICCG and
CBMs obtained from the holdup assay. a) Activity of LCCICCG fusion
enzymes on PET; 300 nM enzyme was incubated in 50 g L/C0 1 of crystalline
PET powder for 1 h at 50 °C. The concentration of degradation products
was measured by UV absorbance at 240 nm and quantified using a stan-
dard curve of bis(2-hydroxyethl)-terephthalate (BHET), which serves as a
representative degradation product. Each point represents the mean of
triplicate experiments. b) Activity of LCCICCG fusion enzymes on PET in mix-
tures containing increasing amounts of PS“impurity”; 300 nM enzyme was
incubated in mixtures of PET and PS for 1 h at 50 °C. The activity of the
enzymes was calculated per unit mass of the PET substrate and then nor-
malized to the activity in the experiments without impurity. Each point rep-
resents the mean of triplicate experiments.
ChemSusChem 2025, 18, e202500468 (8 of 12) © 2025 The Author(s). ChemSusChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
ChemSusChem
Research Article
doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202500468
findings.[55] However, fusions with other CBMs significantly
increased PET degradation, with up to a 5-fold increase for
CBM10 and CBM64 fusions (Figure 4a). It should however be
stated that the % yield in each of these reactions was lower than
1% of the theoretical maximum, which is in line with previous
studies on degradation of crystalline PET under these condi-
tions.[55] To mimic a mixed plastic environment, assays were per-
formed with increasing amounts of PS“impurity” replacing PET in
the mixture to analyze the specificity of the enzymes (Figure 4b).
For the fusion enzymes withClCBM3 andFlCBM64, no significant
reduction in activity was observed upon adding PS impurity up to
75% of the total reaction mixture, compared to a steady decrease
in activity for LCCICCG alone. Conversely, the fusion enzyme with
RsCBM2 showed significantly lower activity on the PET substrate
as the PS impurity concentration increased, indicating increased
binding to the PS impurity compared to the lone catalytic
domain.
The increased activity upon CBM fusion to a PET hydrolase
aligns with previous studies on different PET substrates,[24] con-
firming that HTP screening can identify substrate-binding mod-
ules with promising applicability in enzymatic PET degradation. It
should be noted that these fusion enzymes may be less applica-
ble than LCCICCG for degrading PET in a single stream due to their
lower thermal stability (Figure S15 and Table S4, Supporting
Information) and the previously mentioned effects of high sub-
strate load. However, they could offer advantages in mixed plastic
environments, such as municipal solid waste.
The known PET binderBaCBM2, proposed for improving PET
hydrolase activity,[55] had a BI around the median for CBMs bind-
ing PET in this study. This highlights the potential of many CBMs
identified here for obtaining high-affinity, high-activity PET
hydrolase fusion enzymes. CBMs selectively binding LDPE and
PS were also identified. To date, only two enzymes have been
fully characterized with activity on PE, and little is known about
their binding modes or affinity for their target, leaving scope for
future design of fusion enzymes for PE degradation using the
CBMs identified in this HTP screen. No enzymes in the PAZy data-
base are currently characterized with activity on PS, but several
studies have identified putative enzymes with some PS degrada-
tion capability.[56] The PS-binding CBMs identified here could aid
in designing enzymes for degrading this polymer.
Strong binding of a PET hydrolase to PET does not always cor-
relate with high activity, as dynamic adsorption and desorption
are considered more relevant properties.[55] Hence, the identifica-
tion of drivers of CBM affinity and specificity could facilitate the
future development of CBMs tailored for engineering enzymes
for specific situations. Several fusion enzymes produced in this
study had enhanced activity on crystalline PET powder
(Figure 4a), while also maintaining activity in the presence of
another plastic, which acts as a competitor to binding
(Figure 4b). Higher activity of LCC ICCG-ClCBM3 and LCC ICCG-
FlCBM64 on PET alone suggests either slower adsorption or faster
desorption from the PET surface, likely applying to PS as well. This
would allow the enzymes to maintain higher activity on PET
despite transient inactivity while bound to PS, due to increased
dynamic interactions with both substrates. Development of these
enzymes would be highly valuable for the enzymatic degradation
of mixed plastic wastes. Furthermore, these insights could guide
future engineering efforts to develop enzymes active on PS and
LDPE, substrates for which enzyme discovery is ongoing.
3. Conclusion
This study presents a high-throughput methodology for system-
atically screening the binding specificity of type A CBMs to syn-
thetic polymers and natural polysaccharides. Using this method,
the binding of a diverse panel of CBMs from families CBM2, CBM3,
CBM10, and CBM64, to three plastics (PET, LDPE, and PS) and
three polysaccharides (avicel, chitin, and starch) was analyzed.
This identified hundreds of binding modules with distinct sub-
strate specificities, providing valuable insights into the structural
and phylogenetic determinants behind both binding strength
and specificity.
These findings highlight the potential of CBMs as modular
tools for enhancing the substrate binding specificity of plastic
degrading enzymes. The identification of CBMs with selective
affinities for these substrates opens new avenues for enzyme
engineering, allowing the design of fusion proteins tailored for
improved catalytic performance in mixed plastic environments.
Binding modules from family CBM3 and CBM64 were used to pro-
duce fusion enzymes with the widely studied PET hydrolase
LCCICCG, which resulted in enzymes that retained activity on
PET in the presence of PS as a competitive binder. Such enzymes
could be valuable in the development of enzymatic recycling of
mixed plastic wastes and in bioremediation.
Beyond their biotechnological applications, the observed
phylogenetic and structural trends in CBM specificity contribute
to a broader understanding of CBM evolution and function. The
substrate preferences observed within CBM families suggest con-
served mechanisms for recognizing carbohydrates within a com-
plex environment, such as the plant cell wall. This could point to
previously undescribed modes of action, such anchoring an
enzyme to an inert substrate within such environments.
Overall, this study significantly expands the repertoire of char-
acterized CBMs and establishes a foundation for leveraging these
domains in biocatalytic strategies for plastic degradation. The
high-throughput screening platform developed here can be fur-
ther applied to explore novel CBMs on soluble and insoluble sub-
strates, accelerating the discovery of functional binding modules
for emerging biotechnological challenges.
4. Experimental Section
HTP Expression and Purification of Proteins
Expression and purification of type A CBMs fused with EGFP
(see Supplementary Information for the description of the selection
process) were done using a modified version of the method previously
reported.[57] Expression was done inEscherichia coli(BL21) cells, which
were grown in LB media supplemented with 50μgm L/C0 1 of kanamycin.
Initially, agar stabs were used to inoculate 1 mL precultures in 96-deep-
well (DW) plates, which were covered with a breathable film and
grown overnight at 37 °C, 200 rpm. Glycerol stocks were then made
ChemSusChem 2025, 18, e202500468 (9 of 12) © 2025 The Author(s). ChemSusChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
ChemSusChem
Research Article
doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202500468
from each culture and used for subsequent precultures. Two hundred
microliters of each preculture were used to inoculate 2 mL cultures in
24-DW plates, which were grown at 37 °C, 160 rpm for 2 h before being
induced with 1 μM of isopropyl- β-D-thiogalactopyranoside and
grown overnight at 20 °C, 160 rpm. Cells were harvested by centrifu-
gation at 5000 rpm and resuspended in 1 mL of lysis buffer (50 mM
Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF),
0.25 mg mL/C0 1 lysozyme, pH 8.0) and then frozen at/C0 20 °C. DNase I
and MgSO4 were added to the frozen pellets at final concentrations of
20 μgm L/C0 1 and 20 mM, respectively, and the cells were lysed by
thawing at 37 °C for 10 min. Next, 200μL of 25% (dry bead vol-
ume/slurry volume) nickel chelating sepharose fast flow agarose
bead slurry (Cytiva, USA) was added to the lysates, and the protein
was allowed to bind with gentle shaking at 20 °C for 10 min. The
lysates were then transferred to a 96-well filter plate (Machery
Nagel, Germany) in a MultiScreen vacuum manifold (Sigma-
Aldrich, Germany) fitted with a DW adaptor. Vacuum was applied,
and the flow-through was collected in a 96-DW plate. The Ni resin
beads were washed sequentially with 10 mM imidazole and
50 mM imidazole in HTP binding buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM
NaCl, pH 8.0), and the protein was eluted in 500μL fractions using
HTP binding buffer with 500 mM imidazole. The purified protein
was then stored at/C0 20 °C prior to analysis.
HTP Screening of CBMs Against Plastics and Polysaccharides
All liquid handling for the holdup assays was performed using an
Evo200 liquid handling robot (Tecan, Switzerland) with a 96-tip pipet-
ting head. Substrates were suspended at a concentration of
13 mg mL/C0 1 in either assay buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 500 mM NaCl,
pH 8.0) or ethanol, depending on the substrate density to ensure
even suspension. The settled substrate in the transfer liquid was
resuspended by vigorous pipetting before transferring 75μLt oa
384-well MZHV Millipore plate with a low-binding membrane
(0.45 μm Durapore PVDF membrane, Millipore, USA), delivering
/C25 1 mg to each well. The 384-well plates were divided into 96 groups
of 4 wells in a square, with the bottom right well not containing any
substrate, serving as a control (Figure 1). After substrate addition, the
384-well plates were placed on a vacuum manifold and aspirated to
remove the transfer liquid. Each plate was then sequentially washed
with 100μL 1 M NaCl, 2 M urea, and assay buffer, with removal of
liquid on the Tecan vacuum manifold, followed by a final wash with
assay buffer and drying by centrifugation at 800 g for 5 min. Purified
protein, spiked with 100 nM of an in-house produced mCherry
(Uniprot: D1MPT3), was added to the 384-well filter plate, and the
plate was shaken at 1200 rpm at room temperature for 15 min.
The filter plate was then centrifuged at 800 g for 5 min with a
384-well receiver plate attached to the bottom. This receiver plate
was then read on a PHERAstar FSX Microplate Reader (BMG
Labtech) at two excitation/emission pairings: 575 nm/620 nm and
485 nm/520 nm to measure mCherry and EGFP fluorescence, respec-
tively. After each run, the washing procedure of sequential urea, NaCl,
and assay buffer washing was repeated, followed by a final wash with
assay buffer and drying by centrifugation. The regenerated plate was
then reused for the next cohort of EGFP-CBM constructs to be tested.
Given that only single-point concentration determinations were
made during the HU assays, theKd of the CBMs binding to each sub-
strate could not be determined. Instead, the related parameter of
binding intensity (BI) was used. This is defined in Equation (1)
BI ¼ Ictrl /C0 Isubstrate
Ictrl
(1)
where Ictrl and Isubstrate refer to the intensity of the EGFP fluorescent
signal in the control wells without substrate and the substrate-
containing wells, respectively. The EGFP signal intensities are normal-
ized to the median mCherry signal in a group of four wells to account
for small differences in pipette volume from the 96-tip pipetting head
or incomplete transfer of the liquid from the filter plate to the receiver
plate during centrifugation. The BI represents the fraction of the
EGFP-CBM construct bound to the substrate in the wells, allowing
comparison of the relative binding strengths of the proteins at
the 0.5μM concentration used. The mean BI from each of the three
wells containing substrate was reported for that particular protein on
that substrate. Error bars representing the variance between the
points retained after data curation are shown in the raw data and
results files inDataset S2, Supporting Information.
Several controls were used to ensure data quality during the HU
assays. mCherry was added to every well at the same concentration,
allowing for the correction of volume discrepancies by comparing its
fluorescence intensity (575/620 nm band pass filter) to the median
fluorescence intensity for that group. Signals not within 80– 120%
of the median value of the four wells were discarded and not used
to determine the binding intensity. If one of the three test wells was
discarded from the data analysis, either the average of two values or a
single replicate was used as the reported BI. Purified EGFP protein
was randomly distributed in the 96-well plates used to fill the
384-well filter plates, allowing for the determination of EGFP binding
to each substrate and serving as the threshold above which a CBM
was considered a binder to a particular substrate. Additionally, four
known PET hydrolase enzymes, IsPETase, LCC ICCG, PHL7, and
TfCut2[12,54,58,59], were analyzed for their BI on each of the substrates
as controls.
Structural Analysis of CBMs
The structure of each of the CBMs expressed in the study was mod-
eled using AlphaFold2.[60] These models were structurally aligned
using the sequence-independent and structure-based super algo-
rithm in Pymol2, with 5 cycles, each having a 2.0 Å refinement
cut-off for identified atom pairs. This structural alignment allowed
easy comparison of 2D projections of the surface features[53,61– 64]
of the CBM models, including electrostatic potential and hydropho-
bicity, which were visualized using the SURFMAP software.[65] The
electrostatic potential maps were visualized through calculation of
the potential at pH 7.5. The individual 2D projections of the CBM sur-
faces were inspected manually.
Benchmarking HTP Binding Results Using Pulldown Assay
To benchmark the results obtained in the holdup assay, 24 of the
EGFP-CBM proteins analyzed in the holdup assay were also tested
using a pulldown assay. The proteins were produced and purified
as described in Section 2.7. Four milligrams of each substrate in
100 μL of HTP binding buffer were added to 96-well low-binding
microtiter plates, along with 100 μL of EGFP-CBM fusion protein,
to a final protein concentration of 0.5μM. Control wells without pro-
tein were also included. The plate was shaken for 15 min at 25 °C and
300 rpm in a thermomixer (Eppendorf, Germany) and then spun at
1000 rpm for 5 min in a centrifuge. Next, 150μL of the supernatant
was transferred to a new 96-well low-binding microtiter plate and
centrifuged again. Then, 100μL was transferred to a microtiter plate
suitable for reading in a spectrofluorimeter. The concentration of
unbound protein was determined by fluorescence using an FP-
8500 Spectrofluorimeter equipped with an FMP-825 plate reader
(JASCO Corporation, Japan) with excitation at 450 nm and emission
at 510 nm. BI was calculated in the same way as in the holdup assay.
Langmuir Isotherms
The affinity of the proteins used in the mixed substrate assays for PET
was determined by a pulldown assay. A dilution series between
ChemSusChem 2025, 18, e202500468 (10 of 12) © 2025 The Author(s). ChemSusChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
ChemSusChem
Research Article
doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202500468
10 nM and maximum 1000 nM of each protein in assay buffer was
mixed with 50 mg of PETCP in 300μL volume in a nonbinding micro-
titer plate (In Vitro, Denmark). The samples were incubated for 1 h at
50 °C in a thermomixer (Eppendorf, Germany) and then spun at
3000 g for 5 min, and the supernatant was moved to a new plate.
The amount of unbound protein was determined using a BCA assay
kit (Thermofisher, USA), specifically mixing working reagent and
supernatant in a 1:1 ratio followed by incubation at 37 °C for 2 h
before reading absorbance at 562 nm in a spectrophotometer
(Epoch Biotek, USA). The amount of bound protein in each well
was calculated by subtracting the unbound from the total protein
added, and the dissociation constant (Kd) was determined by fitting
Equation (3) to the data.
½BP/C138¼ ½FP/C138 ⋅ Bmax
Kd þ½ FP/C138 (2)
where [BP] is the coverage of protein on the substrate (nmol/g), [FP] is
the concentration of unbound protein (nM), andBmax is the amount
of proteins required to fully saturate the surface of the substrate. For
the isotherms, the concentration of bound protein was expressed as
nmol g/C0 1. A minimum of seven points were used to produce each
binding isotherm for Kd and Bmax determinations, and assays were
run in triplicate.
PET Degradation in a Mixed Substrate Assay
Four CBMs, which demonstrated strong binding and selectivity in the
holdup assay, were used to produce fusion enzymes with the PET-
degrading enzyme LCCICCG.[9,10] Details of the LCCICCG fusion enzymes
are provided in Table S5, Supporting Information, with sequences in
Table S6, Supporting Information. They were produced and purified
as described in the supplemental materials and methods. The activity
of these enzymes, along with LCCICCG alone, on amorphous PET pow-
der was assayed with increasing amounts of PS or avicel added as
“impurities” to the reaction mixture. Assays were performed in 96-
well low-binding microtiter plates in a 200μL volume with an enzyme
concentration of 300 nM. A total solid mass of 50 mg was maintained,
with PS or avicel replacing PET with 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% of
impurity. The microtiter plates were shaken at 1000 rpm and 50 °C
for 1 h and then centrifuged at 1000 rpm for 5 min. Next, 150μL
of the supernatant was transferred to a new 96-well low-binding
microtiter plate and centrifuged again. Then, 100μL was transferred
to a new UV microtiter plate. The absorbance of degradation prod-
ucts was measured at 240 nm using a spectrophotometer (Epoch
BioTek, USA), and the concentration was calculated using a standard
curve. Activities were calculated and normalized to the mass of PET
substrate under the specific assay conditions. These activities were
then normalized to the activity of the enzyme on PET alone and plot-
ted against the percentage of impurity in the mixture.
Additional Materials and Methods can also be found in the
Supporting Information.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Prof. Bernard Henrissat for his invaluable
help in providing sequences of the CBMs, his expert advice on the
bioinformatic approaches, and his valuable feedback on the
manuscript.
We would also like to thank Bo Pilgaard for his help in pre-
paring the AlphaFold2 models of the CBMs used in this study.
We would like to thank laboratory technician trainee Sabrina
Rostved for her help in the expression and purification of proteins
for the pulldown assays.
This work was supported by the Danish Independent
Research Council [grant number: 1032-00273B]. Furthermore,
the gene synthesis work (proposal:10.46936/10.25585/60008756)
conducted by the U.S. Department of Energy Joint Genome
Institute (https://ror.org/04xm1d337), a DOE Office of Science
User Facility, was supported by the Office of Science of the
U.S. Department of Energy operated under Contract No.
DE-AC02-05CH11231. The project leading to this publication
has received funding from France 2030, the French Government
program managed by the French National Research Agency
(ANR-16-CONV-0001) and from Excellence Initiative of Aix-
Marseille University - A*MIDEX. J.F.M. was funded by Consejo
Nacional de Humanidades Ciencias y Tecnologias (CONAHCYT)
“Becas al Extranjero Convenios GOBIERNO FRANCES 2021 - 1” grant
795494. J.F.M. recieved funding from“Espoirs de la Recherce” pro-
gram managed by the French Fondation pour la Rescherche
Medicale (FDT202404018637). Finally, we would like to thank the
French Infrastructure for Integrated Structural Biology (FRISBI)
(Grant ANR-10-INSB-05-01) for funding the equipment at AFMB.
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Data Availability Statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available in
the supplementary material of this article.
Disclaimer Notice
This document contains results from work performed under the
auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science,
Biological and Environmental Research Program and by the
University of California, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory,
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory and Los Alamos
National Laboratory. Neither CONTRACTOR, DOE, the U.S.
Government, nor any person acting on their behalf: (a) make
any warranty or representation, express or implied, with respect
to the information contained in this document; or (b) assume any
liabilities with respect to the use of, or damages resulting from
the use of any information contained in the document.
Keywords: high-throughput screening · plastic waste
degradation · protein-substrate interactions
[1] C. A. Choy, B. H. Robison, T. O. Gagne, B. Erwin, E. Firl, R. U. Halden,
J. A. Hamilton, K. Katija, S. E. Lisin, C. Rolsky, K. S. Van Houtan,Sci. Rep.
2019, 9, 7843.
[2] M. C. M. Blettler, K. M. Wantzen,Water. Air. Soil Pollut.2019, 230, 174.
[3] I. A. Isangedighi, G. S. David, O. I. Obot,Anal. Nanoplastics Microplastics
Food, CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, USA2020, 15.
[4] World Economic Forum, Ellen MacArthur Foundation and McKinsey &
Company, Ellen MacArthur Found. 2016, 120, https://www.ellen
macarthurfoundation.org/the-new-plastics-economy-rethinking-the-future-
of-plastics.
ChemSusChem 2025, 18, e202500468 (11 of 12) © 2025 The Author(s). ChemSusChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
ChemSusChem
Research Article
doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202500468
[5] N. Singh, D. Hui, R. Singh, I. P. S. Ahuja, L. Feo, F. Fraternali,Compos. Part B
Eng. 2017, 115, 409.
[6] N. Mohanan, Z. Montazer, P. K. Sharma, D. B. Levin,Front. Microbiol.2020,
11, 580709.
[7] J. Y. Jang, K. Sadeghi, J. Seo,Polym. Rev. 2022, 62, 860.
[8] M. Sclavons, V. Carlier, R. Legras,Polym. Eng. Sci.1999, 39, 789.
[9] Carbios, “Our ambitions to accelerate the circularity of plastics,” can be
found under https://www.carbios.com/wp-content/uploads/2023/12/
carbios_rdd2022_ven.pdf, 2022 (Accessed: June 2025).
[10] A. Singh, N. A. Rorrer, S. R. Nicholson, E. Erickson, J. S. DesVeaux,
A. F. T. Avelino, P. Lamers, A. Bhatt, Y. Zhang, G. Avery, L. Tao,
A. R. Pickford, A. C. Carpenter, J. E. McGeehan, G. T. Beckham, Joule
2021, 5, 2479.
[11] V. Tournier, S. Duquesne, F. Guillamot, H. Cramail, D. Taton, A. Marty,
I. André, Chem. Rev. 2023, 123, 5612.
[12] S. Yoshida, K. Hiraga, T. Takehana, I. Taniguchi, H. Yamaji, Y. Maeda,
K. Toyohara, K. Miyamoto, Y. Kimura, K. Oda,Science 80-.2016, 351, 1196.
[13] H. S. Auta, C. U. Emenike, S. H. Fauziah,Environ. Pollut. 2017, 231, 1552.
[14] R. Mor, A. Sivan,Biodegradation 2008, 19, 851.
[15] U. Anand, S. Dey, E. Bontempi, S. Ducoli, A. D. Vethaak, A. Dey, S. Federici,
Environ. Chem. Lett.2023, 21, 1787.
[16] B. Nowak, J. Pająk, J. Karcz, B. Nowak, J. Pająk, J. Karcz,Scannning Electron
Microscopy, IntechOpen, London2012.
[17] E. Butnaru, R. N. Darie-Nit¸˘a, T. Zaharescu, T. Balaeş,C .T ˘anase, G. Hitruc,
F. Doroftei, C. Vasile,Radiat. Phys. Chem.2016, 125, 134.
[18] H. P. Austin, M. D. Allen, B. S. Donohoe, N. A. Rorrer, F. L. Kearns,
R. L. Silveira, B. C. Pollard, G. Dominick, R. Duman, K. El Omari,
V. Mykhaylyk, A. Wagner, W. E. Michener, A. Amore, M. S. Skaf,
M. F. Crowley, A. W. Thorne, C. W. Johnson, H. L. Woodcock,
J. E. McGeehan, G. T. Beckham,Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.2018, 115, E4350.
[19] E. Santacruz-Juárez, R. E. Buendia-Corona, R. E. Ramírez, C. Sánchez,
J. Hazard. Mater.2021, 411, 125118.
[20] P. C. F. Buchholz, G. Feuerriegel, H. Zhang, P. Perez-Garcia, L. L. Nover,
J. Chow, W. R. Streit, J. Pleiss, Proteins Struct. Funct. Bioinforma. 2022,
90, 1443.
[21] H. J. Gilbert, J. P. Knox, A. B. Boraston,Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol.2013, 23, 669.
[22] A. P. Rennison, P. Westh, M. S. Møller,Sci. Total Environ.2023, 870, 161948.
[23] J. Weber, D. Petrovi´c, B. Strodel, S. H. J. Smits, S. Kolkenbrock, C. Leggewie,
K. E. Jaeger,Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2019, 103, 4801.
[24] R. Graham, E. Erickson, R. K. Brizendine, D. Salvachúa, W. E. Michener, Y. Li,
Z. Tan, G. T. Beckham, J. E. McGeehan, A. R. Pickford,Chem. Catal. 2022,
2, 2644.
[25] D. Ribitsch, E. H. Acero, A. Przylucka, S. Zitzenbacher, A. Marold,
C. Gamerith, R. Tscheließnig, A. Jungbauer, H. Rennhofer, H. Lichtenegger,
H. Amenitsch, K. Bonazza, C. P. Kubicek, I. S. Druzhinina, G. M. Guebitz,
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2015, 81, 3586.
[26] L. Dai, Y. Qu, J. W. Huang, Y. Hu, H. Hu, S. Li, C. C. Chen, R. T. Guo,
J. Biotechnol. 2021, 334, 47.
[27] Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, G. Li, X. Fu, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Tian, J. Wu,Shengwu
Gongcheng Xuebao/Chinese J. Biotechnol.2022, 38, 217.
[28] A. Munzone, M. Pujol, M. Badjoudj, M. Haon, S. Grisel, A. Magueresse,
S. Durand, J. Beaugrand, J. G. Berrin, B. Bissaro,Chem. Bio. Eng.2024, 1, 863.
[29] M. Gollan, G. Black, J. Munoz-Munoz,BMC Biotechnol. 2023, 23, 18Wor.
[30] E. Drula, M. L. Garron, S. Dogan, V. Lombard, B. Henrissat, N. Terrapon,
Nucleic Acids Res.2022, 50, D571.
[31] D. Ribitsch, A. O. Yebra, S. Zitzenbacher, J. Wu, S. Nowitsch, G. Steinkellner,
K. Greimel, A. Doliska, G. Oberdorfer, C. C. Gruber, K. Gruber, H. Schwab,
K. Stana-Kleinschek, E. H. Acero, G. M. Guebitz,Biomacromolecules 2013,
14, 1769.
[32] I. Janajreh, I. Adeyemi, S. Elagroudy,Sustain. Energy Technol. Assessments
2020, 39, 100684.
[33] A. B. Boraston, D. N. Bolam, H. J. Gilbert, G. J. Davies,Biochem. J. 2004,
382, 769.
[34] V. M. R. Pires, P. M. M. Pereira, J. L. A. Brás, M. Correia, V. Cardoso, P. Bule,
V. D. Alves, S. Najmudin, I. Venditto, L. M. A. Ferreira, M. J. Romão,
A. L. Carvalho, C. M. G. A. Fontes, D. M. Prazeres,J. Biol. Chem. 2017,
292, 4847.
[35] M. S. Møller, S. El Bouaballati, B. Henrissat, B. Svensson,J. Biol. Chem.2021,
296, 100638.
[36] N. Georgelis, N. H. Yennawar, D. J. Cosgrove,Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A.
2012, 109, 14830.
[37] P. J. Simpson, H. Xie, D. N. Bolam, H. J. Gilbert, M. P. Williamson,J. Biol.
Chem. 2000, 275, 41137.
[38] R. N. Waduge, S. Xu, E. Bertoft, K. Seetharaman,Starch - Stärke2013, 65,3 9 8 .
[39] Y. Wang, Y. Tian, S. J. Christensen, A. Blennow, B. Svensson, M. S. Møller,
Food Hydrocoll. 2024, 146, 109162.
[40] R. Vincentelli, K. Luck, J. Poirson, J. Polanowska, J. Abdat, M. Blémont,
J. Turchetto, F. Iv, K. Ricquier, M. L. Straub, A. Forster, P. Cassonnet,
J. P. Borg, Y. Jacob, M. Masson, Y. Nominé, J. Reboul, N. Wolff,
S. Charbonnier, G. Travé,Nat. Methods 2015, 12, 787.
[41] G. Gogl, B. Zambo, C. Kostmann, A. Cousido-Siah, B. Morlet, F. Durbesson,
L. Negroni, P. Eberling, P. Jané, Y. Nominé, A. Zeke, S. Østergaard,
É. Monsellier, R. Vincentelli, G. Travé,Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 5472.
[42] M. Goebel-Stengel, A. Stengel, Y. Taché, J. R. Reeve,Anal. Biochem.2011,
414, 38.
[43] A. A. Salmeán, A. Guillouzo, D. Duffieux, M. Jam, M. Matard-Mann,
R. Larocque, H. L. Pedersen, G. Michel, M. Czjzek, W. G. T. Willats,
C. Hervé, Sci. Reports 2018, 8, 2500.
[44] A. B. Bertelsen, C. M. Hackney, C. N. Bayer, L. D. Kjelgaard, M. Rennig,
B. Christensen, E. S. Sørensen, H. Safavi-Hemami, T. Wulff, L. Ellgaard,
M. H. H. Nørholm,Microb. Biotechnol. 2021, 14, 2566.
[45] N. R. Gilkes, R. A. Warren, R. C. Miller, D. G. Kilburn,J. Biol. Chem.1988,
263, 10401.
[46] T. Nakamura, S. Mine, Y. Hagihara, K. Ishikawa, T. Ikegami, K. Uegaki,J. Mol.
Biol. 2008, 381, 670.
[47] E. Morag, A. Lapidot, D. Govorko, R. Lamed, M. Wilchek, E. A. Bayer,
Y. Shoham, Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1995, 61, 1980.
[48] Y. Kikkawa, M. Fukuda, T. Kimura, A. Kashiwada, K. Matsuda, M. Kanesato,
M. Wada, T. Imanaka, T. Tanaka,Biomacromolecules 2014, 15, 1074.
[49] L. W. Tjoelker, L. Gosting, S. Frey, C. L. Hunter, H. Le Trong, B. Steiner,
H. Brammer, P. W. Gray,J. Biol. Chem.2000, 275, 514.
[50] J. Arnling Bååth, K. Jensen, K. Borch, P. Westh, J. Kari,JACS Au2022, 2, 1223.
[51] O. Yaniv, G. Fichman, I. Borovok, Y. Shoham, E. A. Bayer, R. Lamed,
L. J. W. Shimon, F. Frolow, Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D Biol. Crystallogr.
2014, 70, 522.
[52] S. Cai, X. Zheng, X. Dong,J. Bacteriol. 2011, 193, 5199.
[53] W. C. Wimley, S. H. White,Nat. Struct. Biol.1996, 3, 842.
[54] V. Tournier, C. M. Topham, A. Gilles, B. David, C. Folgoas, E. Moya-Leclair,
E. Kamionka, M. L. Desrousseaux, H. Texier, S. Gavalda, M. Cot, E. Guémard,
M. Dalibey, J. Nomme, G. Cioci, S. Barbe, M. Chateau, I. André,
S. Duquesne, A. Marty,Nature 2020, 580, 216.
[55] A. P. Rennison, A. Prestel, P. Westh, M. S. Møller,Enzyme Microb. Technol.
2024, 180, 110479.
[56] L. Hou, E. L. W. Majumder,Materials Basel. 2021, 14, 503.
[57] N. J. Saez, R. Vincentelli,Methods Mol. Biol.2014, 1091, 33.
[58] C. Sonnendecker, J. Oeser, P. K. Richter, P. Hille, Z. Zhao, C. Fischer,
H. Lippold, P. Blázquez-Sánchez, F. Engelberger, C. A. Ramírez-Sarmiento,
T. Oeser, Y. Lihanova, R. Frank, H. Jahnke, S. Billig, B. Abel, N. Sträter,
J. Matysik, W. Zimmermann,ChemSusChem 2022, 15, e202101062.
[59] C. Roth, R. Wei, T. Oeser, J. Then, C. Föllner, W. Zimmermann, N. Sträter,
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2014, 98, 7815.
[60] J. Jumper, R. Evans, A. Pritzel, T. Green, M. Figurnov, O. Ronneberger,
K. Tunyasuvunakool, R. Bates, A. Žídek, A. Potapenko, A. Bridgland,
C. Meyer, S. A. A. Kohl, A. J. Ballard, A. Cowie, B. Romera-Paredes,
S. Nikolov, R. Jain, J. Adler, T. Back, S. Petersen, D. Reiman, E. Clancy,
M. Zielinski, M. Steinegger, M. Pacholska, T. Berghammer, S. Bodenstein,
D. Silver, O. Vinyals, A. W. Senior, K. Kavukcuoglu, P. Kohli, D. Hassabis,
Nature 2021, 596, 583.
[61] E. Jurrus, D. Engel, K. Star, K. Monson, J. Brandi, L. E. Felberg, D. H. Brookes,
L. Wilson, J. Chen, K. Liles, M. Chun, P. Li, D. W. Gohara, T. Dolinsky,
R. Konecny, D. R. Koes, J. E. Nielsen, T. Head-Gordon, W. Geng,
R. Krasny, G. W. Wei, M. J. Holst, J. A. McCammon, N. A. Baker,Protein
Sci. 2018, 27, 112.
[62] J. Kyte, R. F. Doolittle,J. Mol. Biol.1982, 157, 105.
[63] E. D. Levy, J. Mol. Biol.2010, 403, 660.
[64] M. Mezei, J. Mol. Graph. Model.2003, 21, 463.
[65] H. Schweke, M. H. Mucchielli, N. Chevrollier, S. Gosset, A. Lopes,J. Chem.
Inf. Model. 2022, 62, 1595.
[66] S. Sulaiman, S. Yamato, E. Kanaya, J.-J. Kim, Y. Koga, K. Takano, S. Kanaya,
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2012, 78, 1556.
Manuscript received: March 5, 2025
Revised manuscript received: June 16, 2025
Version of record online: July 14, 2025
ChemSusChem 2025, 18, e202500468 (12 of 12) © 2025 The Author(s). ChemSusChem published by Wiley-VCH GmbH
ChemSusChem
Research Article
doi.org/10.1002/cssc.202500468