Citation: Sales, J.C.S.; de Castro,
A.M.; Ribeiro, B.D.; Coelho, M.A.Z.
Post-Consumer Poly(ethylene
terephthalate) (PET)
Depolymerization by Yarrowia
lipolytica: A Comparison between
Hydrolysis Using Cell-Free
Enzymatic Extracts and Microbial
Submerged Cultivation. Molecules
2022, 27, 7502. https://doi.org/
10.3390/molecules27217502
Academic Editors: Ana Paula Tavares
and Valéria de Carvalho
Santos Ebinuma
Received: 18 September 2022
Accepted: 1 November 2022
Published: 3 November 2022
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
molecules
Article
Post-Consumer Poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET)
Depolymerization by Yarrowia lipolytica: A Comparison
between Hydrolysis Using Cell-Free Enzymatic Extracts and
Microbial Submerged Cultivation
Julio Cesar Soares Sales 1, Aline Machado de Castro 2
 , Bernardo Dias Ribeiro 3
 and Maria Alice
Zarur Coelho 3, *
1 Departamento de Bioquímica, Instituto de Química, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro,
Av. Athos da Silveira Ramos, 149. Ilha do Fundão, Rio de Janeiro 21941-909, Brazil
2 Divisão de Biotecnologia, Centro de Pesquisa e Desenvolvimento, PETROBRAS,
Av. Horácio Macedo, 950. Ilha do Fundão, Rio de Janeiro 21941-915, Brazil
3 Departamento de Engenharia Bioquímica, Escola de Química, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro,
Av. Athos da Silveira Ramos, 149. Ilha do Fundão, Rio de Janeiro 21941-909, Brazil
* Correspondence: alice@eq.ufrj.br
Abstract: Several microorganisms have been reported as capable of acting on poly(ethylene tereph-
thalate) (PET) to some extent, such as Yarrowia lipolytica, which is a yeast known to produce var-
ious hydrolases of industrial interest. The present work aims to evaluate PET depolymerization
by Y. lipolyticausing two different strategies. In the ﬁrst one, biocatalysts were produced during
solid-state fermentation (SSF-YL), extracted and subsequently used for the hydrolysis of PET and
bis(2-hydroxyethyl terephthalate) (BHET), a key intermediate in PET hydrolysis. Biocatalysts were
able to act on BHET, yielding terephthalic acid (TPA) (131.31 µmol L−1), and on PET, leading to a
TPA concentration of 42.80 µmol L−1 after 168 h. In the second strategy, PET depolymerization was
evaluated during submerged cultivations of Y. lipolyticausing four different culture media, and the
use of YT medium ((w/v) yeast extract 1%, tryptone 2%) yielded the highest TPA concentration after
96 h (65.40 µmol L−1). A ﬁnal TPA concentration of 94.3 µmol L−1 was obtained on a scale-up in
benchtop bioreactors using YT medium. The conversion obtained in bioreactors was 121% higher
than in systems with SSF-YL. The results of the present work suggest a relevant role ofY. lipolytica
cells in the depolymerization process.
Keywords: Yarrowia lipolytica; lipase; plastics; Biocatalysis
1. Introduction
The world production of plastics continues to increase year by year; until 2017, it was
estimated that the production reached 8300 million metric tons, and by 2050, 12,000 mega-
tons (Mt) will accumulate in the environment and landﬁlls [ 1]. Serious environmental
problems are caused by plastic accumulation in terrestrial and marine ecosystems, which
incur microplastic formation [2]. The increase in marine pollution was also strongly im-
pacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, as it required the use of various personal protective
equipment made from plastic resins [3]. Bondaroff & Cooke (2020) [4] pointed to an entry of
1.56 billion masks into the oceans in 2020, resulting in an accumulation of another 6240 tons
in the marine system. It is estimated that about 5 trillion pieces of plastic are in the oceans,
which is equivalent to approximately 270 tons [5].
In an attempt to mitigate the volume of waste generated, several recycling processes
have been studied and implemented on an industrial scale, such as mechanical, chemical re-
cycling and even pyrolysis [6]. However, of all plastic waste generated worldwide between
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules27217502 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/molecules
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 2 of 17
1950 and 2015, only 9% was recycled and 60% was disposed of in landﬁlls or the environ-
ment [1]. Considering the various plastic resins currently produced (e.g., polyethylene,
polypropylene and poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET)), biotechnology presents a promis-
ing route to deal with post-consumer waste [ 7]. This route is based on biodegradation
using microorganisms and/or microbial enzymes in order to obtain monomers or other
molecules of interest with greater added values [8,9]. Regarding post-consumer plastics
biodegradation technologies, PET is the polymer that presents the greatest maturities in
relation to the proposed technologies [10].
Since the ﬁrst PET hydrolase, a cutinase, was reported in 2005, several microbial
enzymes have been reported for PET biodepolymerization to obtain its monomers (e.g., li-
pases, esterases, cutinases and p-nitrobenzyl esterases) [11–15]. In 2016, Yoshida et al. [16]
reported the isolation of a bacterium from plastic waste capable of producing an enzyme
with a high afﬁnity for PET, deﬁned as PETase (EC 3.1.1.101). Other microorganisms have
been reported to be able to act during PET depolymerization, including Yarrowia lipolyt-
ica [17,18]. Y. lipolyticais a nonconventional yeast widely studied for its intense secretory
activity and ability to produce several biomolecules of industrial interest (e.g., organic acids,
lipases, esterases and proteases) [19,20]. One of the major products ofY. lipolyticaare lipases;
the production of these enzymes by the yeast is reported either by submerged cultures
or by solid-state fermentation (SSF) [19,21]. One of the great appeals of the SSF, which is
characterized by the absence or near absence of free water in the system, is linked to the
possibility of using residues and/or by-products from the agroindustry as a cultivation
medium to obtain various biomolecules, directly impacting the associated costs to the
process [22,23].
In this context, the present work aims to evaluate the application of enzymes produced
by Y. lipolyticain SSF in the biodepolymerization of PET and compare it with depolymeriza-
tion by submerged cultures containing Y. lipolyticacells and its secreted enzymes, aiming
to understand the dynamics of the process and draw new perspectives on the use of this
yeast for PET depolymerization.
2. Results and Discussion
2.1. Hydrolysis Using Cell-Free Enzymatic Extracts
In these hydrolysis assays using cell-free enzymatic extracts, two different substrates
were evaluated, PC-PET and BHET, a key intermediate in PET hydrolysis. The biocatalysts
used in this step were produced by Y. lipolyticathrough solid-state fermentation (SSF) in
media containing soybean bran and post-consumer PET (PC-PET) (20 wt%), as previously
deﬁned by Sales et al. [18]. Another enzyme used in the process was Lipase B from Candida
antarctica (CALB), which is already reported in the literature as an enzyme of interest in
the hydrolysis of BHET [24]. Figure 1 presents the product concentration values obtained
during PET and BHET hydrolysis.
Based on the results obtained during BHET hydrolysis using CALB (Figure 1a), it is
possible to verify the high efﬁciency of this enzyme in hydrolyzing this substrate, being
possible to observe a high conversion after 1 h of reaction. Complete hydrolysis can be
found after 24 h of processing, as seen in the molar fractions (χ) presented in Table 1.
These biocatalysts have already been employed by Castro et al. [13] to reverse mono-
(hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (MHET) accumulation during a PET depolymerization reac-
tion catalyzed by Humicola insolenscutinase. The authors reported complete hydrolysis to
TPA of high MHET concentrations (~7000 µmol L−1) after 24 h.
When analyzing biocatalysts produced by Y. lipolyticain SSF (Figure 1b), it is observed
that, after 168 h, there is still a nonhydrolyzed substrate (440 µmol L−1), and the MHET
concentration increases concomitantly with the decrease in BHET. In other words, the
process leads to MHET as the primary hydrolysis product, as shown in the molar fraction
values in Table 1. The TPA concentration remains unchanged between 1 h and 168 h.
A similar proﬁle of BHET biodegradation was observed by Qiu et al. (2020) using an
isolated strain of Enterobacter sp. (HX1). The authors reported that the microorganism
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 3 of 17
could produce an esterase that acts during the hydrolysis of BHET; however, it is ﬁrst
hydrolyzed to MHET and not directly to TPA. In addition, they reported a half-life of BHET
(500 mg L−1) of approximately 60 h. The present work presents a concentration below half
of the initial one already in 48 h.
Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 19 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Enzymatic hydrolysis of BHET using: ( a) CALB and (b) SSF-YL and PC -PET using: ( c) 
CALB and (d) SSF-YL at 37 ° C and 180 rpm. 
Based on the results obtained during BHET hydrolysis using CALB (Figure 1a), it is 
possible to verify the high efficiency of this enzyme in hydrolyzing this substrate, being 
possible to observe a high conversion after 1 h of reaction. Complete hydrolysis c an be 
found after 24 h of processing, as seen in the molar fractions (χ) presented in Table 1. 
Table 1. Molar fractions after 168 h of reaction using BHET and PC-PET as hydrolysis substrates at 
37 ° C and 180 rpm. 
Assay χtpa χbhet χmhet 
CALB + BHET 1 0 0 
SSF-YL + BHET 0.084 0.284 0.632 
These biocatalysts have already been employed by Castro et al. [13] to reverse mono-
(hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (MHET) accumulation during a PET depolymerization reac-
tion catalyzed by Humicola insolens cutinase. The authors reported complete hydrolysis 
to TPA of high MHET concentrations (~7000 µmol L−1) after 24 h. 
When analyzing biocatalysts produced by Y. lipolytica in SSF (Figure 1b), it is ob-
served that, after 168 h, there is still a nonhydrolyzed substrate (440 µmol L−1), and the 
MHET concentration increases concomitantly with the decrease in BHET. In other words, 
the process leads to MHET as the primary hydrolysis product, as shown in the molar frac-
tion values in Table 1. The TPA concentration remains unchanged between 1 h and 168 h. 
Figure 1. Enzymatic hydrolysis of BHET using: (a) CALB and (b) SSF-YL and PC-PET using: (c) CALB
and (d) SSF-YL at 37 ◦C and 180 rpm.
Table 1. Molar fractions after 168 h of reaction using BHET and PC-PET as hydrolysis substrates at
37 ◦C and 180 rpm.
Assay χtpa χbhet χmhet
CALB + BHET 1 0 0
SSF-YL + BHET 0.084 0.284 0.632
The increased MHET concentration throughout the process may be since MHET acts
as a possible competitive inhibitor for Y. lipolyticaenzymes. The inhibition phenomenon
is already reported for other biocatalysts used in the enzymatic hydrolysis of PET, such
as the cutinase from Thermobiﬁda fusca [ 25]. One of the alternatives proposed in the
literature is the use of multienzymatic systems that allow an efﬁcient hydrolysis of MHET
and prevent its accumulation in the reaction medium [ 24]. Costa et al. [ 17] observed
a very different behavior in submerged cultivations of Y. lipolyticaIMUFRJ 50682 with
the addition of BHET (500 mg L−1). Although the authors reported MHET as the major
product, the total consumption of BHET was observed close to 48 h, which may be related
to cellular metabolism. The consumption of this substrate may be associated with previous
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 4 of 17
extracellular hydrolysis and the entry of the products into cellular metabolism or with a
prior uptake followed by hydrolysis catalyzed by intracellular enzymes.
When analyzing biocatalysts performance in the hydrolysis of PET-PC, it is observed
that the catalysis performed by CALB leads to the release of a single aromatic product,
TPA. This may be due to the high speciﬁcity of CALB in converting BHET and MHET
intermediates into TPA. The results agree with those pointed out by Castro et al. (2017) [13],
who showed very low values of TPA and MHET during PC-PET hydrolysis reactions
catalyzed by CALB. From Figure 1d, it is possible to analyze the performance of biocatalysts
produced by Y. lipolyticawhen PC-PET was used as a substrate. Although both systems
show low PET to TPA conversions, using the pool of enzymes produced by Y. lipolyticaled
to higher concentrations of hydrolysis products at the end of the reaction. Table 2 presents
the conversion and molar fraction values of the PC-PET assays.
Table 2. Conversion and molar fractions after 168 h of reaction using PC-PET as the hydrolysis
substrates at 37 ◦C and 180 rpm.
Assay χtpa χbhet χmhet Conversion (%)
CALB + PC-PET 1 0 0 0.65
SSF-YL + PC-PET 0.618 0.182 0.201 1.64
The TPA concentration using SSF-YL after 168 h is almost three times higher when
compared to assays catalyzed by CALB. In addition to TPA, MHET and BHET were also
formed during the reaction. However, TPA was the primary product from 24 h onwards
and remained until the end, presenting a molar fraction of 0.618 in 168 h. Processes that
lead to high molar fractions of monomers are interesting for the technology downstream;
such molecules can be recovered and used directly in the polymerization process.
2.2. PC-PET Depolymerization in Submerged Cultivations
2.2.1. Depolymerization in Flasks
In addition to evaluating the depolymerization of PC-PET using enzymes produced
by Y. lipolyticain SSF, depolymerization tests by submerged fermentation were also carried
out. From these assays, which, in addition to enzymes, contain Y. lipolyticacells, it was
possible to investigate the role of the microorganism in the process. For this, four media
with different compositions (YP , YT, YPD and YTD) were chosen to evaluate the impact of
the media components on yeast metabolism during the process. Figure 2 shows the growth
proﬁles in the different assays.
From the cell growth data presented in Figure 2, accelerated growth can be observed,
resulting in high cell concentrations within 20 h of the process. This may result from an
increase in mass transfer associated with such cultures caused by a decreased working
volume, commonly from 200 mL to 100 mL in 500-mL ﬂasks. In addition, similar behaviors
can be inferred for pairs of medium with and without glucose. Those without sugar, a
readily assimilable carbon source, showed a drop after 18 h of cultivation. This may be
linked to a depletion of nutrients and a low synthesis of reserves, such as glycogen, in
such media. Bhutada et al. [26] evaluated glycogen synthesis by Y. lipolyticaunder different
nutritional stress conditions. The authors reported glycogen synthesis is carried out in the
exponential growth phase and a greater synthesis in conditions where the limitation is tied
to nitrogen and not carbon. Synthesis under such conditions was almost three times higher
than under glucose shortages. The drop in cell concentration may also be associated with
cell adhesion to the polymer surface, leading to an underestimation of the actual values
of cell quantiﬁcation. In a previous work (unpublished data), a SEM analysis showed the
adhesion of Y. lipolyticacells to the polymer surface.
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 5 of 17
Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 19 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Growth of Y. lipolytica IMUFRJ 50682 in different media containing PET-PC (500 mg/L) at 
28 ° C and 250 rpm for 96 h. 
From the cell growth data presented in Figure 2, accelerated growth can be observed, 
resulting in high cell concentrations within 20 h of the process. This may result from a n 
increase in mass transfer associated with such cultures caused by a decreased working 
volume, commonly from 200 mL to 100 mL in 500 -mL flasks. In addition, similar behav-
iors can be inferred for pairs of medium with and without glucose. Those without suga r, 
a readily assimilable carbon source, showed a drop after 18 h of cultivation. This may be 
linked to a depletion of nutrients and a low synthesis of reserves, such as glycogen, in 
such media. Bhutada et al. [26] evaluated glycogen synthesis by Y. lipolytica under differ-
ent nutritional stress conditions. The authors reported glycogen synthesis is carried out in 
the exponential growth phase and a greater synthesis in conditions where the limitation 
is tied to nitrogen and not carbon. Synthesis under such conditions was almost three times 
higher than under glucose shortages. The drop in cell concentration may also be associ-
ated with cell adhesion to the polymer surface, leading to an underestimation of the actual 
values of cell quantification. In a previous work (unpublished data), a SEM analysis 
showed the adhesion of Y. lipolytica cells to the polymer surface. 
Quite different behavior can be observed in cultures with the presence of glucose. 
After 18 h, the cell concentration increases and begins to stabilize around 48 h. From Y. 
lipolytica growth data in the different media, it was possible to determine the gro wth pa-
rameters, such as the specific growth rate (µ), generation time (tg), maximum cell concen-
tration (Xmax) and biomass productivity (Qx). These parameters are presented in Table 3. 
Table 3. Growth parameters of Y. lipolytica IMUFRJ 50682 in different media at 28 ° C and 250 rpm. 
Assay µ (h−1) tg (h) Xmax (g L−1) Qx (g L−1 h−1) 
YP 0.271 2.56 10.45 0.580 
YT 0.262 2.65 10.08 0.560 
YPD 0.302 2.29 20.54 0.716 
YTD 0.304 2.28 17.03 0.618 
As can be seen in Table 3, the highest values of µ are observed in media containing 
glucose. As the µ values are lower in media without glucose, the generation times are 
Figure 2. Growth of Y. lipolyticaIMUFRJ 50682 in different media containing PET-PC (500 mg/L) at
28 ◦C and 250 rpm for 96 h.
Quite different behavior can be observed in cultures with the presence of glucose. After
18 h, the cell concentration increases and begins to stabilize around 48 h. From Y. lipolytica
growth data in the different media, it was possible to determine the growth parameters,
such as the speciﬁc growth rate ( µ), generation time (t g), maximum cell concentration
(Xmax) and biomass productivity (Qx). These parameters are presented in Table 3.
Table 3. Growth parameters of Y. lipolyticaIMUFRJ 50682 in different media at 28 ◦C and 250 rpm.
Assay µ (h−1) t g (h) X max (g L−1) Q x (g L−1 h−1)
YP 0.271 2.56 10.45 0.580
YT 0.262 2.65 10.08 0.560
YPD 0.302 2.29 20.54 0.716
YTD 0.304 2.28 17.03 0.618
As can be seen in Table 3, the highest values of µ are observed in media containing
glucose. As the µ values are lower in media without glucose, the generation times are
longer for these conditions. These data are in accordance with what was observed by Costa
et al. [17] during Y. lipolyticaIMUFRJ 50682 cultures targeting the degradation of PC-PET in
the presence and absence of glucose. However, the behavior had only been evaluated in
media containing peptone as a nitrogen source.
The biodegradation process was also monitored to produce several enzymes through-
out the cultures. Figure 3 presents the values of lipolytic activity during the 96 h of
the assay.
From Figure 3, it can be inferred that lipase production by Y. lipolyticawas higher in
media that did not contain glucose. This is possibly related to the repression of sugar in the
production of lipases. Higher phosphorylation activities directly impact the expression of
the Lip2 gene [27]. Furthermore, it is observed that the nitrogen source plays a fundamental
role in the production of lipases by Y. lipolytica. Both sources (peptone and tryptone) are
widely reported in the literature as components of the lipase production medium. However,
Fickers et al. [28] reported tryptone as a more adequate source for the production of this
enzyme, which is conﬁrmed in the present work. In fact, the high production of lipases
in the YTD medium, which has glucose and high phosphorylation activity, was probably
modulated by the presence of tryptone. It is essential to mention that, as well as a sustained
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 6 of 17
cell concentration observed, this medium also showed the production of lipases up to 48 h
of culture, being the only medium to present lipolytic activity after 24 h. Despite the intense
secretion of lipases in the YTD medium, the highest productivity of the assay was observed
in the YT medium, which reached 115 U L−1 h−1 in 6 h of cultivation.
Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 19 
 
 
longer for these conditions. These data are in accordance with what was observed by 
Costa et al. [17] during Y. lipolytica IMUFRJ 50682 cultures targeting the degradation of 
PC-PET in the presence and absence of glucose. However, the behavior had only been 
evaluated in media containing peptone as a nitrogen source. 
The biodegradation process was also monitored to produce several enzymes 
throughout the cultures. Figure 3 presents the values of lipolytic activity during the 96 h 
of the assay. 
 
Figure 3. Lipolytic activity during PC -PET biodepolymerization by submerged cultures of Y. lipo-
lytica IMUFRJ 50682 at 28 ° C and 250 rpm for 96 h. 
From Figure 3, it can be inferred that lipase production by Y. lipolytica was higher in 
media that did not contain glucose. This is possibly related to the repression of sugar in 
the production of lipases. Higher phosphorylation activities directly impact the expres-
sion of the Lip2 gene [27 ]. Furthermore, it is observed that the nitrogen source plays a 
fundamental role in the production of lipases by Y. lipolytica. Both sources (peptone and 
tryptone) are widely reported in the literature as components of th e lipase production 
medium. However, Fickers et al. [28] reported tryptone as a more adequate source for the 
production of this enzyme, which is confirmed in the present work. In fact, the high pro-
duction of lipases in the YTD medium, which has glucose and  high phosphorylation ac-
tivity, was probably modulated by the presence of tryptone. It is essential to mention that, 
as well as a sustained cell concentration observed, this medium also showed the produc-
tion of lipases up to 48 h of culture, being the only  medium to present lipolytic activity 
after 24 h. Despite the intense secretion of lipases in the YTD medium, the highest produc-
tivity of the assay was observed in the YT medium, which reached 115 U L −1 h−1 in 6 h of 
cultivation. 
In addition to verifying the production of lipases, the esterase activity of the medium 
was also quantified. The production of esterases over 96 h of cultivation is shown in Figure 4. 
Figure 3. Lipolytic activity during PC-PET biodepolymerization by submerged cultures ofY. lipolytica
IMUFRJ 50682 at 28 ◦C and 250 rpm for 96 h.
In addition to verifying the production of lipases, the esterase activity of the medium
was also quantiﬁed. The production of esterases over 96 h of cultivation is shownin Figure 4.
When observing the esterase production throughout the culture, it can be seen that,
unlike lipases, these enzymes are produced throughout the culture in the four evaluated
media. This may be associated with an inductive effect of the polymer and its ester bonds.
The reports on the production of esterase (Lip7) from Y. lipolyticain submerged cultures are
related to the use of tryptone as the main source of nitrogen [29,30]. High productivities
were obtained in the media without a readily assimilable carbon source, the highest being
in the tryptone medium (YT): 286 U L−1 h−1 in 4 h of the process. The intense secretion of
enzymes may be linked to the possible attempt to use PET as a carbon source by cells. In
fact, a signiﬁcant increase in esterase activity was observed simultaneously as the beginning
of the decline in cell concentration due to possible nutrient depletion.
Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 19 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Esterase activity during PC-PET biodepolymerization by submerged cultures of Y. lipolyt-
ica IMUFRJ 50682 at 28 ° C and 250 rpm for 96 h. 
When observing the esterase production throughout the culture, it can be seen that, 
unlike lipases, these enzymes are produced throughout the culture in the four evaluated 
media. This may be associated with an inductive effect of the polymer and its ester bonds. 
The reports on the production of esterase (Lip7) from Y. lipolytica in submerged cultures 
are related to the use of tryptone as the main source of nitrogen [29,30]. High productivi-
ties were obtained in the media without a readily assimilable carbon source, the highest 
being in the tryptone medium (YT): 286 U L−1 h−1 in 4 h of the process. The intense secretion 
of enzymes may be linked to the possible attempt to use PET as a carbon source by cells. 
In fact, a significant increase in esterase activity was observed simultaneously as the be-
ginning of the decline in cell concentration due to possible nutrient depletion. 
In addition to lipases and esterases, the production of proteases throughout the pro-
cess was also evaluated. Figure 5 shows the values of proteolytic activity over the cultivation. 
 
Figure 5. Protease activity during PC-PET biodepolymerization by submerged cultures of Y. lipolyt-
ica IMUFRJ 50682 at 28 ° C and 250 rpm for 96 h. 
Figure 4. Esterase activity during PC-PET biodepolymerization by submerged cultures of Y. lipolytica
IMUFRJ 50682 at 28 ◦C and 250 rpm for 96 h.
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 7 of 17
In addition to lipases and esterases, the production of proteases throughout the process
was also evaluated. Figure 5 shows the values of proteolytic activity over the cultivation.
Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 19 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Esterase activity during PC-PET biodepolymerization by submerged cultures of Y. lipolyt-
ica IMUFRJ 50682 at 28 ° C and 250 rpm for 96 h. 
When observing the esterase production throughout the culture, it can be seen that, 
unlike lipases, these enzymes are produced throughout the culture in the four evaluated 
media. This may be associated with an inductive effect of the polymer and its ester bonds. 
The reports on the production of esterase (Lip7) from Y. lipolytica in submerged cultures 
are related to the use of tryptone as the main source of nitrogen [29,30]. High productivi-
ties were obtained in the media without a readily assimilable carbon source, the highest 
being in the tryptone medium (YT): 286 U L−1 h−1 in 4 h of the process. The intense secretion 
of enzymes may be linked to the possible attempt to use PET as a carbon source by cells. 
In fact, a significant increase in esterase activity was observed simultaneously as the be-
ginning of the decline in cell concentration due to possible nutrient depletion. 
In addition to lipases and esterases, the production of proteases throughout the pro-
cess was also evaluated. Figure 5 shows the values of proteolytic activity over the cultivation. 
 
Figure 5. Protease activity during PC-PET biodepolymerization by submerged cultures of Y. lipolyt-
ica IMUFRJ 50682 at 28 ° C and 250 rpm for 96 h. 
Figure 5. Protease activity during PC-PET biodepolymerization by submerged cultures of Y. lipolytica
IMUFRJ 50682 at 28 ◦C and 250 rpm for 96 h.
When analyzing the values of proteolytic activity, it is observed that the media that
presented carbon source limitations showed an intense secretion of proteases from the
beginning. This may be related to the possible assimilation of proteolysis products by
Y. lipolyticaas a carbon source. Interestingly, the medium that presented the lowest produc-
tion of proteases during the tests, YTD, was the medium during which the most prolonged
lipase production was observed. Therefore, the enzymes showed greater stability associ-
ated with lower proteolytic activity. Another important observation was that, even with
high proteolytic activity since the beginning of the culture, the media without glucose
maintained esterase activity throughout the process. The phenomenon may be associated
with the fact that Y. lipolyticaesterase is a glycosylated enzyme, similar to Lip2, which
confers greater resistance to proteolysis. Furthermore, Lip7 is a cell-bound enzyme, and as
it is naturally immobilized in the cell wall, there is possible greater stability in the presence
of proteases [29].
As a result of the metabolic activity of Y. lipolytica, an alkalinization of pH is observed
throughout the PET depolymerization process presented in Figure 6. A strong parallel can
be established with the proteolytic activity, since the increase is more discreet in the media
with less activity, such as the YPD and YTD. The process is intensiﬁed under conditions
where there is no addition of glucose and is a result of the high release of amine groups
during proteolysis.
To verify the yield of the biodepolymerization process and the products generated,
the supernatant was evaluated for its content of PET hydrolysis products. In the tests
shown in Figure 7, where molar concentrations of hydrolysis products are shown, it is
observed that the media containing tryptone and no glucose added led to the highest
TPA concentration value after 96 h: 65.4 µmol L−1. This is probably a result of the high
enzymatic activities obtained throughout the cultivation. In fact, a steep increase in the
concentration of TPA was observed during the initial phase of cultivation, where there was
intense secretion of both esterases and lipases, which were only produced for up to 20 h in
this medium. From the analysis of Figure 7a,b, it seems that the cultivation in YT medium
led to a concentration of TPA almost 20% higher than the same process conducted with YP ,
the second best, after 96 h. In addition to TPA, the other hydrolysis products also showed
higher concentrations simultaneously.
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 8 of 17
Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 19 
 
 
When analyzing the values of proteolytic activity, it is observed that the media that 
presented carbon source limitations showed an intense secretion of proteases from the 
beginning. This may be related to the possible assimilation of proteolysis products by Y. 
lipolytica as a carbon source. Interestingly, the medium that presented the lowest produc-
tion of proteases during the tests, YTD, was the medium during which the most prolonged 
lipase production was observed. Therefore, the enzymes showed greater stability associ-
ated with lower proteolytic activity. Another important observation was that, even with 
high proteolytic activity since the beginning of the culture, t he media without glucose 
maintained esterase activity throughout the process. The phenomenon may be associated 
with the fact that Y. lipolytica esterase is a glycosylated enzyme, similar to Lip2, which 
confers greater resistance to proteolysis. Furthermore , Lip7 is a cell -bound enzyme, and 
as it is naturally immobilized in the cell wall, there is possible greater stability in the pres-
ence of proteases [29]. 
As a result of the metabolic activity of Y. lipolytica, an alkalinization of pH is observed 
throughout the PET depolymerization process presented in Figure 6. A strong parallel can 
be established with the proteolytic activity, since the increase is more discreet in the media 
with less activity, such as the YPD and YTD. The process is intensified under con ditions 
where there is no addition of glucose and is a result of the high release of amine groups 
during proteolysis. 
 
Figure 6. pH variations during PC-PET biodepolymerization by submerged cultures of Y. lipolytica 
IMUFRJ 50682 at 28 ° C and 250 rpm for 96 h. 
To verify the yield of the biodepolymerization process and the products generated, 
the supernatant was evaluated for its content of PET hydrolysis products. In the tests 
shown in Figure 7, where molar concentrations of hydrol ysis products are shown, it is 
observed that the media containing tryptone and no glucose added led to the highest TPA 
concentration value after 96 h: 65.4 µmol L −1. This is probably a result of the high enzy-
matic activities obtained throughout the cultiva tion. In fact, a steep increase in the con-
centration of TPA was observed during the initial phase of cultivation, where there was 
intense secretion of both esterases and lipases, which were only produced for up to 20 h 
in this medium. From the analysis of Figure 7a,b, it seems that the cultivation in YT me-
dium led to a concentration of TPA almost 20% higher than the same process conducted 
Figure 6. pH variations during PC-PET biodepolymerization by submerged cultures of Y. lipolytica
IMUFRJ 50682 at 28 ◦C and 250 rpm for 96 h.
TPA concentrations obtained in the YT trials were almost ﬁve times higher than those
reported by Costa et al. [17] in the PET-PC biodepolymerization assays using Y. lipolytica
IMUFRJ 50682 through submerged cultivation. The reason for the increase is probably
related to the higher enzymatic activity observed in the media of the present work when
compared to the media used by the authors: YP . In addition, smaller particle sizes were used
(0.15–0.50 mm), which resulted in a larger contact surface, facilitating the biodepolymeriza-
tion process. The investigation of the particle size effect on PET depolymerization reactions
was also carried out by Castro et al. [ 31] using cutinase from H. insolens. The authors
reported an increase from 4.2 to 20.3 mM/day in the TPA release rate when decreasing the
particle size from values greater than 1.4 mm to values smaller than 0.21 mm.
A parallel can be drawn between the TPA concentrations obtained in the submerged
assays with YT medium and in the assay using the biocatalysts produced in SSF (SSF-YL).
At 96 h, the concentration of TPA in the YT medium was two times higher than that obtained
with the biocatalysts produced in SSF. The conversion obtained at 96 h (2.52%) was 53%
higher than that obtained using SSF-YL at 168 h. This may reveal that the microorganism
plays a key role in biodepolymerization. It is worth remembering that two mechanisms
of assimilation of hydrophobic compounds are reported for Y. lipolytica[32]: mediated
transport, which consists of the production of biosurfactants; and direct transport, which
consists of cell adhesion to the substrate. Therefore, for an effective biodepolymerization by
enzymes, some other factors seem to be relevant. To verify this, it is necessary to investigate
cell adhesion to the plastic, the possible production of biosurfactants and other proteins
that may be involved in the process.
Media with glucose (YPD and YTD) showed lower TPA concentration values than
those without sugar. Even the YTD medium showed higher enzymatic activities than the
YP; for example, these values were lower after 96 h. It is important to point out that the
yeast may have consumed part of the hydrolysis products generated as a carbon source, as
seen in the drop in TPA concentration between 18 and 20 h in Figure 7b. Costa et al. (2020)
reported the consumption of TPA by Y. lipolyticain a rich medium containing yeast extract
(1% w/v) and peptone (2% w/v).
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 9 of 17
Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 19 
 
 
with YP, the second best, after 96 h. In addition to TPA, the other hydrolysis products also 
showed higher concentrations simultaneously. 
 
Figure 7 . Hydrolysis products of PC -PET obtained during submerged cultivation of Y. lipolytica  
IMUFRJ 50682 in (a) YP, (b) YT, (c) YPD and (d) YTD medium at 28 ° C and 250 rpm for 96 h. 
TPA concentrations obtained in the YT trials were almost five times higher than those 
reported by Costa et al. [17] in the PET-PC biodepolymerization assays using Y. lipolytica 
IMUFRJ 50682 through submerged cultivation. The reason for the increase is prob ably 
related to the higher enzymatic activity observed in the media of the present work when 
compared to the media used by the authors : YP. In addition, smaller particle sizes were 
used (0.15–0.50 mm), which resulted in a larger contact surface, facilitating the biodepol-
ymerization process. The investigation of the particle size effect on PET depolymerization 
reactions was also carried out by Castro et al. [31 ] using cutinase from H. insolens. The 
authors reported an increase from 4.2 to 20.3 mM/day in the TPA release rate when de-
creasing the particle size from values greater than 1.4 mm to values smaller than 0.21 mm. 
A parallel can be drawn between the TPA concentrations obtained in the submerged 
assays with YT medium and in the assay using the biocatalysts produced in SSF (SSF-YL). 
Figure 7. Hydrolysis products of PC-PET obtained during submerged cultivation of Y. lipolytica
IMUFRJ 50682 in (a) YP , (b) YT, (c) YPD and (d) YTD medium at 28 ◦C and 250 rpm for 96 h.
In addition to the HPLC analyses, the ATR-FTIR analysis was performed to verify the
changes in the material after treatment in different media. Figure 8 presents the spectra
obtained during the analyses.
Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 19 
 
 
At 96 h, the concentration of TPA in the YT medium was two times higher than that ob-
tained with the biocatalysts produced in SSF. The conversion obtained at 96 h (2.52%) was 
53% higher than that obtained using SSF -YL at 168 h. This may reveal that the microor-
ganism plays a key role in biodepolymerization. It is worth remembering that two mech-
anisms of assimilation of hydrophobic compounds are reported for Y. lipolytica [32]: me-
diated transport, which consists of the production of biosurfactants; and direct transport, 
which consists of cell adhesion to the substrate. Therefore, for an effective biodepolymer-
ization by enzymes, some other factors seem to be relevant. To verify this, it is necessary 
to investigate cell adhesion to the plastic, the possible production of biosurfactants and 
other proteins that may be involved in the process. 
Media with glucose (YPD and YTD) showed lower TPA concentration values than 
those without sugar. Even the YTD medium showed higher enzymatic activities than the 
YP; for example, these values were lower after 96 h. It is important to point out that the 
yeast may have consumed part of the hydrolysis products generated as a carbon source, 
as seen in the drop in TPA concentration between 18 and 20 h in Figure 7b. Costa et al. 
(2020) reported the consumption of TPA by Y. lipolytica in a rich medium containing yeast 
extract (1% w/v) and peptone (2% w/v). 
In addition to the HPLC analyses, the ATR-FTIR analysis was performed to verify 
the changes in the material after treatment in different media. Figure 8 presents the spectra 
obtained during the analyses. 
 
Figure 8. ATR-FTIR spectrum before and after biodepolymerization during submerged cultures of 
Y. lipolytica IMUFRJ 50682 at 28 ° C and 250 rpm for 96 h. 
The ATR-FTIR spectra presented in Figure 8 show characteristic bands of PET, such 
as the one near 1730 cm −1 (C=O stretch), the one near 1240 cm −1 (C-C-O stretch) and the 
one near 1040 cm−1 (O-C-C stretch). Concerning biological treatment, an increase in trans-
mittance in these regions can be noted in all conditions evaluated compared to PET with-
out treatment. This effect is desired, since ester bonds are cleaved in the biodepolymeri-
zation process. 
Figure 8. ATR-FTIR spectrum before and after biodepolymerization during submerged cultures of
Y. lipolyticaIMUFRJ 50682 at 28 ◦C and 250 rpm for 96 h.
The ATR-FTIR spectra presented in Figure 8 show characteristic bands of PET, such
as the one near 1730 cm −1 (C=O stretch), the one near 1240 cm −1 (C-C-O stretch) and
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 10 of 17
the one near 1040 cm−1 (O-C-C stretch). Concerning biological treatment, an increase in
transmittance in these regions can be noted in all conditions evaluated compared to PET
without treatment. This effect is desired, since ester bonds are cleaved in the biodepolymer-
ization process.
Ioakeimidis et al. (2016) [33] evaluated the biodegradation of PET in marine environ-
ments and adopted FTIR as the process monitoring technique. The authors report decreases
in absorbance in regions related to the ester group (C=O, C-C-O and O-C-C stretch) and also
in the area close to 730 cm−1. This region is related to the C-H bond in the aromatic domain.
It is essential to mention that changes in this region were also observed in all conditions
evaluated in the present work, with the highest increase in transmittance observed in the
YTD medium (~9%). In this condition, it was also possible to observe the highest increases
related to C=O and C-C-O stretching: 7 and 8%, respectively.
Sammon et al. (2000) [34], in a study evaluating the hydrolysis of PET ﬁlms using KOH
(1%), showed changes in the FTIR spectrum very similar to the present work. The authors
also pointed out an increase in absorption in the region between 2800 and 3000 cm −1
related to the aliphatic domain’s C–H bonds. This is probably due to the decrease in the
polymer chain size, which results in a greater number of ethylene glycol terminals. A
reduction of transmittance values in this region was observed in biological treatments with
Y. lipolytica, which may evidence a decrease in chain size caused by the biodepolymerization
process. The results obtained in ATR-FTIR were in line with those observed in the other
analyses, where PET hydrolysis products and hydrolytic enzymes were observed during
the cultivation. Interestingly, the medium that presented the most signiﬁcant changes in
FTIR (YTD) was not the same, showing the highest concentrations of hydrolysis products
after 96 h. This may be related to the consumption of these molecules by Y. lipolyticato
maintain the cell metabolism.
2.2.2. Depolymerization in Bioreactors
From the results obtained in the biodepolymerization assays in the ﬂasks, the YT
condition was chosen to be evaluated on a larger scale, in benchtop bioreactors. This
condition was determined, because it presented the highest values of enzymatic activity
and also the highest conversion values. The YT medium in the bioreactors showed a similar
growth proﬁle to that observed in the ﬂasks, reaching its highest cell concentration at 20 h
(10.3 g L −1). The cell concentration and pH data obtained in the bioreactor are shown
in Figure 9.
There was a lag phase during the ﬁrst two hours of cultivation, followed by the
beginning of the exponential. The µ value obtained for the cultivation was lower than
that observed in the shaken ﬂasks, 0.150 h −1, which may reﬂect the low agitation of the
system. After 20 h of cultivation, a decrease in cell concentration was also noticed, which
may be related to the adhesion of the cells to the polymer surface, leading to a drop in the
optical density recorded. The cell adhesion of Y. lipolyticaIMUFRJ 50682 on the surface
of PET has already been reported in the literature [35]. The cell adhesion to the polymer
may be due to the high hydrophobicity of the cell wall of this strain of Y. lipolytica[36]. In
addition, the drop in optical density observed may be linked to cell death due to nutrient
depletion. Regarding the pH values presented, the same pattern of alkalinization of the
medium, as compared to the investigations in shake ﬂasks, was observed over 96 h due to
the metabolic activity.
Quantiﬁcation of the enzymatic activities during the cultivation was also performed
in these assays, since the biodepolymerization was associated with the secretion of hydro-
lases by the yeast. The enzymatic activities obtained during the 96-h process are shown
in Figure 10.
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 11 of 17
Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 19 
 
 
Ioakeimidis et al. (2016) [33] evaluated the biodegradation of PET in marine environ-
ments and adopted FTIR as the process monitoring technique. The authors report de-
creases in absorbance in regions related to the ester group (C=O, C-C-O and O-C-C stretch) 
and also in the area close to 730 cm−1. This region is related to the C-H bond in the aromatic 
domain. It is essential to mention that changes in this region were also observed in all 
conditions evaluated in the present work, with the highest increase in transmittance ob-
served in the YTD medium (~9%). In this condition, it was also possible to observe the 
highest increases related to C=O and C-C-O stretching: 7 and 8%, respectively. 
Sammon et al. (2000) [34 ], in a study evaluating the hydrolysis of PET films using 
KOH (1%), showed changes in the FTIR spectrum very similar to the present work. The 
authors also pointed out an increase in absorption in the region between 2800 and 3 000 
cm−1 related to the aliphatic domain’s C–H bonds. This is probably due to the decrease in 
the polymer chain size, which results in a greater number of ethylene glycol terminals. A 
reduction of transmittance values in this region was observed in biological treatments 
with Y. lipolytica, which may evidence a decrease in chain size caused by the biodepoly-
merization process. The results obtained in ATR-FTIR were in line with those observed in 
the other analyses, where PET hydrolysis produ cts and hydrolytic enzymes were ob-
served during the cultivation. Interestingly, the medium that present ed the most signifi-
cant changes in FTIR (YTD) was not the same, showing the highest concentrations of hy-
drolysis products after 96 h. This may be related  to the consumption of these molecules 
by Y. lipolytica to maintain the cell metabolism. 
2.2.2. Depolymerization in Bioreactors 
From the results obtained in the biodepolymerization assays in the flasks, the YT 
condition was chosen to be evaluated on a larger scale, in benchtop bioreactors. This con-
dition was determined, because it presented the highest values of enzymatic activity and 
also the highest conversion values. The YT medium in the bioreactors showed a similar 
growth profile to that observed in  the flasks, reaching its highest cell concentration at 20 
h (10.3 g L−1). The cell concentration and pH data obtained in the bioreactor are shown in 
Figure 9. 
 
Figure 9. Y. lipolytica IMUFRJ 50682 growth and pH variation in the bioreactors (450 rpm, 1 vvm 
and 28 ° C) containing YT medium + PC-PET (500 mg/L) over 96 h. 
Figure 9. Y. lipolyticaIMUFRJ 50682 growth and pH variation in the bioreactors (450 rpm, 1 vvm and
28 ◦C) containing YT medium + PC-PET (500 mg/L) over 96 h.
Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 19 
 
 
There was a lag phase during the first two hours of cultivation , followed by the be-
ginning of the exponential. The µ value obtained for the cultivation was lower tha n that 
observed in the shaken flasks, 0.150 h−1, which may reflect the low agitation of the system. 
After 20 h of cultivation, a decrease in cell concentration was also noticed, which may be 
related to the adhesion of the cells to the polymer surface, leading to a drop in the optical 
density recorded. The cell adhesion of Y. lipolytica IMUFRJ 50682 on the surface of PET 
has already been reported in the literature [35]. The cell adhesion to the polymer may be 
due to the high hydrophobicity of the cell wall of this strain of Y. lipolytica [36]. In addition, 
the drop in optical density observed may be linked to cell death due to nutrient depletion. 
Regarding the pH values presented, the same pattern of alkalinization of the medium, as 
compared to the investigations in shake flasks, was observed over 96 h due to the meta-
bolic activity. 
Quantification of the enzymatic activities during the cultivation was also performed 
in these assays, since the biodepolymerization was associated with the secretion of hydro-
lases by the yeast. The enzymatic activities obtained during the 96-h process are shown in 
Figure 10. 
 
Figure 10. Enzymes production by Y. lipolytica IMUFRJ 50682 in bioreactors (450 rpm, 1 vvm and 28 
° C) containing YT medium + PC-PET (500 mg/L) over 96 h. 
As seen in Figure 10, lipase production was already during the first 6 h of cultivation. 
The absence of a readily assimilable carbon source may be related to this early lipase pro-
duction. In other studies, the production of lipase by Y. lipolytica IMUFRJ 50682 was asso-
ciated with the almost complete depletion of glucose, used as a carbon source in the cul-
ture medium [37]. The production of lipases was not sustained after 18 h of cultivation, 
where there was no detection of lipolytic activity in the medium, as could already be ob-
served in the flask assays. 
Esterase production occurs after two hours of cultivation and is maintained for 96 h. 
The main esterase of Y. lipolytica (Lip7) is an enzyme adhered to the cell wall during all 
growth phases, so its activity detected in the supernatant tends to be underestimated. The 
maintenance of esterase activity throughout the cultivation, by a possible induction by 
ester bonds in the polymer structure, is of great importance for the continuity of the bio-
depolymerization process and the increase in the concentration of hydrolysis products. 
Figure 10. Enzymes production by Y. lipolyticaIMUFRJ 50682 in bioreactors (450 rpm, 1 vvm and
28 ◦C) containing YT medium + PC-PET (500 mg/L) over 96 h.
As seen in Figure 10, lipase production was already during the ﬁrst 6 h of cultivation.
The absence of a readily assimilable carbon source may be related to this early lipase
production. In other studies, the production of lipase by Y. lipolyticaIMUFRJ 50682 was
associated with the almost complete depletion of glucose, used as a carbon source in the
culture medium [37]. The production of lipases was not sustained after 18 h of cultivation,
where there was no detection of lipolytic activity in the medium, as could already be
observed in the ﬂask assays.
Esterase production occurs after two hours of cultivation and is maintained for 96 h.
The main esterase of Y. lipolytica(Lip7) is an enzyme adhered to the cell wall during all
growth phases, so its activity detected in the supernatant tends to be underestimated.
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 12 of 17
The maintenance of esterase activity throughout the cultivation, by a possible induction
by ester bonds in the polymer structure, is of great importance for the continuity of the
biodepolymerization process and the increase in the concentration of hydrolysis products.
In addition to the presence of lipases and esterases, the production of proteases is also
observed after 6 h of cultivation, which intensiﬁes after 18 h. The intensiﬁcation of protease
production may be associated with a depletion of readily assimilable nitrogen sources and
the absence of carbon sources. Furthermore, the secretion of proteases by Y. lipolyticais
associated with pH. It can be seen that the pH values presented in Figure 9 are all above
6.5 after two hours of cultivation, and alkaline protease secretion is induced at values above
6.5 [38]. The proteolytic activity may have affected the activity of other enzymes present in
the medium.
The investigation of PET hydrolysis products was performed by HPLC, and the
concentrations are shown in Figure 11.
Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 19 
 
 
In addition to the presence of lipases and esterases, the production of proteases is 
also observed after 6 h of cultivation, which intensifies after 18 h. The intensification of 
protease production may be associated with a depletion of readily assimilable n itrogen 
sources and the absence of carbon sources. Furthermore, the secretion of proteases by Y. 
lipolytica is associated with pH. It can be seen that the pH values presented in Figure 9 are 
all above 6.5 after two hours of cultivation, and alkaline protea se secretion is induced at 
values above 6.5 [38]. The proteolytic activity may have affected the activity of other en-
zymes present in the medium. 
The investigation of PET hydrolysis products was performed by HPLC, and the con-
centrations are shown in Figure 11. 
 
Figure 11. PET hydrolysis products obtained during Y. lipolytica cultivation in bioreactors (450 rpm, 
1 vvm and 28 ° C) containing YT medium + PC-PET (500 mg/L) for 96 h. 
From Figure 11, it can be seen that the enzymes produced by Y. lipolytica were able 
to act in the PET biodepolymerization process, as observed in the preliminary tests. There 
was an increase in the concentration of  the PET aromatic monomer terephthalic aci d, 
reaching a concentration above 94 µmol L−1 in 96 h. Other important information that can 
be extracted from Figure 11 is that TPA remains the primary product during cultivation. 
The higher TPA concentration values led to an increase in the obtained conve rsion of al-
most 44% when compared to the result s obtained in the shake flask assays. This may be 
related to an even greater decrease in particle size caused by the shearing phenomenon 
caused by the bioreactor impellers, thus increasing the contact surface.  The reduction in 
particle size caused by the action of the impellers was observed by Kadic et al. [39] during 
the hydrolysis of sugarcane bagasse by cellulases in benchtop bioreactors. The authors 
reported a significant increase in the presence of smaller  particles concomitant with the 
increase in agitation, which went from 100 rpm to 300 rpm. 
MHET, the hydrolysis intermediate, was detected at low concentrations (~2 mg/L) , 
and BHET was not detected. The quantification of the metabolites associated with Y. lipo-
lytica was also performed in a refractive index detector, where it was possible to observe 
the presence of trehalose in the culture medium. The production of trehalose, a compatible 
solute, by Y. lipolytica during the process may be associated with nutritional scarcity dur-
ing cultivation. 
Figure 11. PET hydrolysis products obtained during Y. lipolyticacultivation in bioreactors (450 rpm,
1 vvm and 28 ◦C) containing YT medium + PC-PET (500 mg/L) for 96 h.
From Figure 11, it can be seen that the enzymes produced by Y. lipolyticawere able to
act in the PET biodepolymerization process, as observed in the preliminary tests. There was
an increase in the concentration of the PET aromatic monomer terephthalic acid, reaching
a concentration above 94 µmol L−1 in 96 h. Other important information that can be
extracted from Figure 11 is that TPA remains the primary product during cultivation. The
higher TPA concentration values led to an increase in the obtained conversion of almost
44% when compared to the results obtained in the shake ﬂask assays. This may be related
to an even greater decrease in particle size caused by the shearing phenomenon caused
by the bioreactor impellers, thus increasing the contact surface. The reduction in particle
size caused by the action of the impellers was observed by Kadic et al. [ 39] during the
hydrolysis of sugarcane bagasse by cellulases in benchtop bioreactors. The authors reported
a signiﬁcant increase in the presence of smaller particles concomitant with the increase in
agitation, which went from 100 rpm to 300 rpm.
MHET, the hydrolysis intermediate, was detected at low concentrations (~2 mg/L),
and BHET was not detected. The quantiﬁcation of the metabolites associated with Y. lipoly-
tica was also performed in a refractive index detector, where it was possible to observe
the presence of trehalose in the culture medium. The production of trehalose, a compati-
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 13 of 17
ble solute, by Y. lipolyticaduring the process may be associated with nutritional scarcity
during cultivation.
To evaluate the biodepolymerization process and consolidate the results obtained by
HPLC, other analyses were performed on the material after the biological treatment, such
as ATR-FTIR. Figure 12 presents the results obtained by this technique.
From the ATR-FTIR analysis shown in Figure 12, it is observed, as in the tests in
the ﬂasks, that the same proﬁle of bands are characteristic of PET (close to 1730 cm−1, at
1240 cm−1, at 1040 cm−1 and 730 cm−1) [33,40]. Regarding the impact after cultivation in a
bioreactor, the same proﬁle of modiﬁcations in the polymer can be noted. The increase in
transmittance in the regions close to 1730 cm−1, 1240 cm−1, 1040 cm−1 and 730 cm−1 were
4, 5, 5 and 6%, respectively.
Molecules 2022, 27, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 19 
 
 
To evaluate the biodepolymerization process and consolidate the results obtained by 
HPLC, other analyses were performed on the material after the biological treatment, such 
as ATR-FTIR. Figure 12 presents the results obtained by this technique. 
 
Figure 12. ATR-FTIR spectrum before (black line) and after (red line) the biodepolymerization pro-
cess during Y. lipolytica cultivation in bioreactors (450 rpm, 1 vvm and 28 ° C) containing YT + PC-
PET (500 mg/L) for 96 h. 
From the ATR-FTIR analysis shown in Figure 12, it is observed, as in the tests in the 
flasks, that the same profile of bands are characteristic of PET (close to 1730 cm−1, at 1240 
cm−1, at 1040 cm−1 and 730 cm−1) [33,40]. Regarding the impact after cultivation in a biore-
actor, the same profile of modifications in the polymer can be noted. The increase in trans-
mittance in the regions close to 1730 cm −1, 1240 cm−1, 1040 cm−1 and 730 cm−1 were 4, 5, 5 
and 6%, respectively. 
3. Materials and Methods 
3.1. Materials 
Soybean bran was purchased from Caramuru Alimentos ( Itumbiara, Goiás, Brazil). 
Post-consumer PET (PC -PET) was obtained from a plastic industrial recycling plant lo-
cated in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil) and gently provided by PETROBRAS (Rio de Janeiro, Bra-
zil). Materials were ground in a knives mill (TE-648, Tecnal), and only particles below 1.18 
mm were used in the cultivations. 
Terephthalic acid (TPA) and bis(2 -hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (BHET) were pur-
chased from Sigma -Aldrich. Mono-(hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (MHET) was obtained 
from the hydrolysis of BHET using Humicola insolens cutinase [24]. 
Lipase B from Candida antarctica was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 
3.2. Microorganism 
A wild strain of Yarrowia lipolytica (IMUFRJ 50682) isolated from an estuary in Gua-
nabara Bay (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) [41] was used. Cells were stocked at 4 ° C in YPD agar 
medium ((w/v) 1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, 2% dextrose and 3% agar). Prior to the fer-
mentation process, cells were grown in YPD (Yeast extract –Peptone–Dextrose) medium 
((w/v) 1% yeast extract, 2% peptone and 2% dextrose) for 72  h in a rotary shaker at 28 ° C 
and 160 rpm. 
  
Figure 12. ATR-FTIR spectrum before (black line) and after (red line) the biodepolymerization process
during Y. lipolyticacultivation in bioreactors (450 rpm, 1 vvm and 28 ◦C) containing YT + PC-PET
(500 mg/L) for 96 h.
3. Materials and Methods
3.1. Materials
Soybean bran was purchased from Caramuru Alimentos (Itumbiara, Goiás, Brazil).
Post-consumer PET (PC-PET) was obtained from a plastic industrial recycling plant located
in Rio de Janeiro (Brazil) and gently provided by PETROBRAS (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil).
Materials were ground in a knives mill (TE-648, Tecnal), and only particles below 1.18 mm
were used in the cultivations.
Terephthalic acid (TPA) and bis(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (BHET) were purchased
from Sigma-Aldrich. Mono-(hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (MHET) was obtained from the
hydrolysis of BHET using Humicola insolenscutinase [24].
Lipase B from Candida antarcticawas purchased from Sigma-Aldrich.
3.2. Microorganism
A wild strain of Yarrowia lipolytica(IMUFRJ 50682) isolated from an estuary in Guan-
abara Bay (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) [41] was used. Cells were stocked at 4 ◦C in YPD agar
medium ((w/v) 1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, 2% dextrose and 3% agar). Prior to the
fermentation process, cells were grown in YPD (Yeast extract–Peptone–Dextrose) medium
((w/v) 1% yeast extract, 2% peptone and 2% dextrose) for 72 h in a rotary shaker at 28 ◦C
and 160 rpm.
3.3. Solid-State Fermentation (SSF) and Hydrolysis Using Cell-Free Enzymatic Extracts
SSF was conducted in tray-type reactors containing 10 g of substrate. As a sub-
strate, a mixture of soybean bran and PC-PET (20 wt%) was used, as previously deﬁned
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 14 of 17
by Sales et al. [18]. Moisture was adjusted using an emulsion of water and soybean oil
(1.5 wt%) once optimized by Souza et al. [42]. The medium was inoculated with 0.71 mg
cells/g substrate, as previously set by Farias et al. [43]. Bioreactors were incubated for 14 h
in a Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) Incubator Chamber (TECNAL, Piracicaba, Brazil)
at 28 ◦C under saturated moisture (99%), as set by Souza et al. [42].
Biocatalysts recovery was made using phosphate buffer (50 mM) at pH 7.0. Fifty
milliliters of buffer were added to the fermented solid and then placed in a rotary shaker
at 37 ◦C and 200 rpm for 20 min. Samples were manually pressed with gauze to remove
larger particles and then centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 5 min to remove cells and smaller
particles. The crude enzymatic extract was stored at −20 ◦C for later analysis.
Post-consumer PET (PC-PET) and BHET, a key intermediate in PET hydrolysis, were
used as the substrates for enzymatic hydrolysis. Biocatalysts produced through SSF (SSF-
YL) and Candida antarcticaLipase B (CALB) were used in these reactions. Assays were
conducted in 10-mL Erlenmeyer ﬂasks, with 4 mL of working volume, containing 46 U of
esterase activity at 37 ◦C and 180 rpm for 168 h.
3.4. Submerged Cultivation in Flasks (SCF) and Submerged Cultivation in Bioreactors (SCB)
SCF was conducted in 500-mL Erlenmeyer ﬂasks using 100 mL of medium. Four
different media were tested in biodepolymerization tests: YP ((w/v) 1% yeast extract, 2%
peptone); YPD ((w/v) 1% yeast extract, 2% peptone and 2% dextrose); YT ((w/v) 1% yeast
extract, 2% tryptone) and YTD (( w/v) 1% yeast extract, 2% tryptone and 2% dextrose)
containing 0.5 g L−1 of PC-PET in each one. Initial cell concentrations were set for 1 g L−1,
and the assays were incubated in a rotary shaker at 28 ◦C and 250 rpm for 96 h.
SCB was conducted in 0.5-L bioreactors (Multifors, INFORS HT) equipped with two
Rushton impellers containing 0.45 L of YT medium ((w/v) 1% yeast extract, 2% tryptone)
and 0.5 g L−1 of PC-PET. Assay conditions were set for 28◦C, 450 rpm and 1 vessel volumes
per minute (vvm).
3.5. Analytical Methods
3.5.1. Biomass Quantiﬁcation, pH and Growth Parameters
Biomass quantiﬁcation in submerged cultivations was done in a spectrophotometer at
570 nm, and the optical density values were converted in g of dry weight cell L−1 using a
factor obtained through a dry weight cell curve. pH values were obtained using a bench
pH meter (TECNAL, Piracicaba, Brazil).
Speciﬁc growth rate (µ) was obtained by the slope of the exponential growth portion
in the semi-log plot, and the maximum cell concentration (X max) was the highest cell
concentration observed during cultivation. Biomass productivity (Q x) was obtained by
dividing the cell concentration by the time, and the generation time ( tg) was obtained
using Equation (1).
tg = ln2
µ (1)
3.5.2. Enzymes Activities
Lipase activity was determined by spectrophotometry through the analysis of the
absorbance variation during the hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl laurate (p-NPL) (0.56 mM) to
p-nitrophenol (p-NP) at 410 nm, as reported by Pereira-Meirelles et al. [44]. One enzyme
unit (U) was deﬁned as the amount of enzyme capable of catalyzing the release of 1 µmol
of p-nitrophenol per minute under the assay conditions.
Esterase activity was determined by spectrophotometry through the analysis of the
absorbance variation during the hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl butyrate (p-NPB) (2.5 mM)
to p-nitrophenol (p-NP) at 410 nm, as reported by Carniel et al. [ 24]. One enzyme unit
(U) was deﬁned as the amount of enzyme capable of catalyzing the release of 1 µmol of
p-nitrophenol per minute under the assay conditions.
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 15 of 17
Protease activity was determined by an adapted methodology of the protocol proposed
by Charney & Tomarelli [ 45]. Azocasein was used as a substrate for protease activity
determination. The protocol consisted of azocasein hydrolysis for 40 min, followed by the
precipitation of nonhydrolyzed proteins using trichloroacetic acid (TCA) (15% w/v) and
centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 15 min. Absorbance evaluation was done on a microplate
reader (SpectraMax m2e, Molecular Devices) at 428 nm by ﬁlling the microplate with 100µL
of KOH 6 N and the later addition of 100 µL of the supernatant. One enzyme unit (U)
was deﬁned as the amount of enzyme capable of promoting an increase of 0.01 unit in
absorbance per minute under the reaction conditions.
3.5.3. PET Hydrolysis Products Quantiﬁcation
The PET hydrolysis products (TPA, BHET and MHET) were quantiﬁed using High-
Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) in a Shimadzu Nexera LC-40 (Shimadzu,
Kyoto, Japan). It used an Agilent Eclipse Plus C18 (5 µm, 4.6 × 250 mm) column, a UV
detector at 254 nm and an analysis temperature of 30 ◦C. A gradient mixture of acetonitrile
and formic acid (0.05%) was used as a mobile phase with a ﬂow rate of 0.5 mL min −1. The
injection volume was set to 10 µL.
Mole fraction evaluation of the samples ( χi, where i = TP A, MHET and BHET) was
calculated using Equation (2). This equation considers the moles ratio of each component
(n) and the sum of the moles of these three components.
χi = ni
nTPA + nMHET + nBHET
(2)
3.5.4. ATR-FTIR (Attenuated Total Reﬂectance—Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectroscopy)
The ATR-FTIR spectra of the polymers before and after the biodepolymerization
process were obtained with the Shimadzu spectrometer model IRTracer-100 (Shimadzu,
Japan). Spectra were acquired between 400 and 4100 cm−1 at a resolution of 4 cm−1.
4. Conclusions
The results obtained in the present work revealed that the yeast Y. lipolyticaproved
to be a potential microorganism to act in the biodepolymerization of PET. The application
of enzymes produced in SSF could act in the enzymatic hydrolysis of BHET and PC-PET
during 168 h of hydrolysis.
Biodepolymerization assays in submerged cultures of Y. lipolyticain four different
media effectively converted PC-PET. The media containing tryptone (YT and YTD) showed
the intense secretion of hydrolytic enzymes, such as lipases and esterases. The highest
concentration of TPA after 96 h was that of YT medium: 65.4 µmol L−1. This condition was
scaled to the benchtop bioreactors, and a 121% higher concentration of TPA was observed
after 96 h: 94.31 µmol L−1.
From the results presented in this work, it is clear that submerged systems are better
for the biodepolymerization of PC-PET by Y. lipolytica. It is still necessary to investigate the
possible mechanisms associated with the process, such as the production of biosurfactants,
proteins and the cell adhesion proﬁles in different media. Another essential factor to
be understood is the possible steps involved in the assimilation of PET monomers. In
addition, strategies to maintain the enzymatic activity and cell concentration throughout
the process should be investigated, as well as better media formulations to minimize the
associated costs.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.C.S.S., A.M.d.C., B.D.R. and M.A.Z.C.; methodology ,
J.C.S.S., A.M.d.C., B.D.R. and M.A.Z.C.; formal analysis, J.C.S.S.; investigation, J.C.S.S.; resources, B.D.R.
and M.A.Z.C.; data curation, J.C.S.S.; writing—original draft preparation, J.C.S.S.;writing—review and
editing, J.C.S.S., A.M.d.C., B.D.R. and M.A.Z.C.; supervision, A.M.d.C., B.D.R. and M.A.Z.C.; project
administration, M.A.Z.C. and funding acquisition, B.D.R. and M.A.Z.C. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 16 of 17
Funding: This research was funded by Brazilian research funding agencies: Conselho Nacional de
Desenvolvimento Cientíﬁco e Tecnológico (CNPq), Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de
Nível Superior (CAPES) and Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (FAPERJ).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: PETROBRAS has patent applications in this ﬁeld.
References
1. Geyer, R.; Jambeck, J.R.; Law, K.L. Production, Use, and Fate of All Plastics Ever Made.Sci. Adv.2017, 3, e1700782. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
2. Thushari, G.G.N.; Senevirathna, J.D.M. Plastic Pollution in the Marine Environment.Heliyon 2020, 6, e04709. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Shams, M.; Alam, I.; Mahbub, M.S. Plastic Pollution during COVID-19: Plastic Waste Directives and Its Long-Term Impact on the
Environment. Environ. Adv.2021, 5, 100119. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Phelps Bondaroff, T.; Cooke, S. Masks on the Beach: The Impact of COVID-19 on Marine Plastic Pollution. OceansAsia 2020, 1–79.
5. Eriksen, M.; Lebreton, L.C.M.; Carson, H.S.; Thiel, M.; Moore, C.J.; Borerro, J.C.; Galgani, F.; Ryan, P .G.; Reisser, J. Plastic Pollution
in the World’s Oceans: More than 5 Trillion Plastic Pieces Weighing over 250,000 Tons Aﬂoat at Sea.PLoS ONE2014, 9, e111913.
[CrossRef]
6. Solis, M.; Silveira, S. Technologies for Chemical Recycling of Household Plastics–A Technical Review and TRL Assessment. Waste
Manag. 2020, 105, 128–138. [CrossRef]
7. Wei, R.; Zimmermann, W. Microbial Enzymes for the Recycling of Recalcitrant Petroleum-Based Plastics: How Far Are We?
Microb. Biotechnol.2017, 10, 1308–1322. [CrossRef]
8. Mohanan, N.; Montazer, Z.; Sharma, P .K.; Levin, D.B. Microbial and Enzymatic Degradation of Synthetic Plastics.Front. Microbiol.
2020, 11, 580709. [CrossRef]
9. Vollmer, I.; Jenks, M.J.F.; Roelands, M.C.P .; White, R.J.; Van Harmelen, T.; De Wild, P .; Van Der Laan, G.P .; Meirer, F.; Keurentjes,
J.T.F.; Weckhuysen, B.M. Beyond Mechanical Recycling: Giving New Life to Plastic Waste. Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 2020,
59, 15402–15423. [CrossRef]
10. Sales, J.C.S.; Santos, A.G.; de Castro, A.M.; Coelho, M.A.Z. A Critical View on the Technology Readiness Level (TRL) of Microbial
Plastics Biodegradation. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol.2021, 37, 116. [CrossRef]
11. Ronkvist, Å.M.; Xie, W.; Lu, W.; Gross, R.A. Cutinase-Catalyzed Hydrolysis of Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate).Macromolecules 2009,
42, 5128–5138. [CrossRef]
12. Ribitsch, D.; Heumann, S.; Trotscha, E.; Acero, E.H.; Greimel, K.; Leber, R.; Birner-Gruenberger, R.; Deller, S.; Eiteljoerg, I.;
Remler, P .; et al. Hydrolysis of Polyethyleneterephthalate by P-Nitrobenzylesterase from Bacillus Subtilis.Biotechnol. Prog.2011,
27, 951–960. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. de Castro, A.M.; Carniel, A.; Junior, J.N.; da Conceição Gomes, A.; Valoni, É. Screening of Commercial Enzymes for Poly(Ethylene
Terephthalate) (PET) Hydrolysis and Synergy Studies on Different Substrate Sources.J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol.2017, 44, 835–844.
[CrossRef]
14. Barth, M.; Honak, A.; Oeser, T.; Wei, R.; Belisário-Ferrari, M.R.; Then, J.; Schmidt, J.; Zimmermann, W. A Dual Enzyme System
Composed of a Polyester Hydrolase and a Carboxylesterase Enhances the Biocatalytic Degradation of Polyethylene Terephthalate
Films. Biotechnol. J.2016, 11, 1082–1087. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Müller, R.-J.J.; Schrader, H.; Profe, J.; Dresler, K.; Deckwer, W.-D.D. Enzymatic Degradation of Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate):
Rapid Hydrolyse Using a Hydrolase from T. Fusca. Macromol. Rapid Commun.2005, 26, 1400–1405. [CrossRef]
16. Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Takehana, T.; Taniguchi, I.; Yamaji, H.; Maeda, Y.; Toyohara, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Kimura, Y.; Oda, K. A
Bacterium That Degrades and Assimilates Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate). Science 2016, 351, 1196–1199. [CrossRef]
17. da Costa, A.M.; de Oliveira Lopes, V .R.; Vidal, L.; Nicaud, J.-M.; de Castro, A.M.; Coelho, M.A.Z. Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate)
(PET) Degradation by Yarrowia lipolytica: Investigations on Cell Growth, Enzyme Production and Monomers Consumption.
Process Biochem.2020, 95, 81–90. [CrossRef]
18. Sales, J.C.S.; de Castro, A.M.; Ribeiro, B.D.; Coelho, M.A.Z. Improved Production of Biocatalysts by Yarrowia lipolyticaUsing
Natural Sources of the Biopolyesters Cutin and Suberin, and Their Application in Hydrolysis of Poly (Ethylene Terephthalate)
(PET). Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng.2021, 44, 2277–2287. [CrossRef]
19. Coelho, M.A.Z.; Amaral, P .F.F.; Belo, I.Yarrowia lipolytica: An Industrial Workhorse; Formatex Research Center: Badajoz, Spain,
2010; pp. 930–944.
20. Wierzchowska, K.; Zieniuk, B.; Fabiszewska, A. Use of Non-Conventional YeastYarrowia lipolyticain Treatment or Upgradation of
Hydrophobic Industry Wastes. Waste Biomass Valorization2022, 13, 757–779. [CrossRef]
21. Nascimento, F.V .D.; Lemes, A.C.; de Castro, A.M.; Secchi, A.R.; Coelho, M.A.Z. A Temporal Evolution Perspective of Lipase
Production by Yarrowia lipolyticain Solid-State Fermentation. Processes 2022, 10, 381. [CrossRef]
22. Pandey, A. Solid-State Fermentation. Biochem. Eng. J.2003, 13, 81–84. [CrossRef]
Molecules 2022, 27, 7502 17 of 17
23. Ravindran, R.; Hassan, S.; Williams, G.; Jaiswal, A. A Review on Bioconversion of Agro-Industrial Wastes to Industrially
Important Enzymes. Bioengineering 2018, 5, 93. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Carniel, A.; Valoni, É.; Nicomedes, J.; da Conceiç ão Gomes, A.; de Castro, A.M. Lipase from Candida antarctica(CALB) and
Cutinase from Humicola insolensAct Synergistically for PET Hydrolysis to Terephthalic Acid. Process Biochem.2017, 59, 84–90.
[CrossRef]
25. Barth, M.; Oeser, T.; Wei, R.; Then, J.; Schmidt, J.; Zimmermann, W. Effect of Hydrolysis Products on the Enzymatic Degradation of
Polyethylene Terephthalate Nanoparticles by a Polyester Hydrolase from Thermobiﬁda Fusca. Biochem. Eng. J.2015, 93, 222–228.
[CrossRef]
26. Bhutada, G.; Kavšˇ cek, M.; Ledesma-Amaro, R.; Thomas, S.; Rechberger, G.N.; Nicaud, J.M.; Natter, K. Sugar versus Fat:
Elimination of Glycogen Storage Improves Lipid Accumulation in Yarrowia lipolytica. FEMS Yeast Res.2017, 17, fox020. [CrossRef]
27. Fickers, P .; Nicaud, J.M.; Destain, J.; Thonart, P . Involvement of Hexokinase Hxk1 in Glucose Catabolite Repression of LIP2
Encoding Extracellular Lipase in the Yeast Yarrowia lipolytica. Curr. Microbiol.2005, 50, 133–137. [CrossRef]
28. Fickers, P .; Nicaud, J.M.; Gaillardin, C.; Destain, J.; Thonart, P . Carbon and Nitrogen Sources Modulate Lipase Production in the
Yeast Yarrowia lipolytica. J. Appl. Microbiol.2004, 96, 742–749. [CrossRef]
29. Fickers, P .; Fudalej, F.; Le Dall, M.T.; Casaregola, S.; Gaillardin, C.; Thonart, P .; Nicaud, J.M. Identiﬁcation and Characterisation of
LIP7 and LIP8 Genes Encoding Two Extracellular Triacylglycerol Lipases in the YeastYarrowia lipolytica. Fungal Genet. Biol.2005,
42, 264–274. [CrossRef]
30. Liu, W.-S.; Pan, X.-X.; Jia, B.; Zhao, H.-Y.; Xu, L.; Liu, Y.; Yan, Y.-J. Surface Display of Active Lipases Lip7 and Lip8 fromYarrowia
lipolytica on Saccharomyces Cerevisiae. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.2010, 88, 885–891. [CrossRef]
31. De Castro, A.M.; Carniel, A.; Stahelin, D.; Junior, L.S.C.; de Angeli Honorato, H.; de Menezes, S.M.C. High-Fold Improvement of
Assorted Post-Consumer Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) (PET) Packages Hydrolysis UsingHumicola insolensCutinase as a Single
Biocatalyst. Process Biochem.2019, 81, 85–91. [CrossRef]
32. FICKERS, P .; BENETTI, P .; WACHE, Y.; MARTY, A.; MAUERSBERGER, S.; SMIT, M.; NICAUD, J. Hydrophobic Substrate
Utilisation by the Yeast Yarrowia lipolytica, and Its Potential Applications. FEMS Yeast Res.2005, 5, 527–543. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Ioakeimidis, C.; Fotopoulou, K.N.; Karapanagioti, H.K.; Geraga, M.; Zeri, C.; Papathanassiou, E.; Galgani, F.; Papatheodorou, G.
The Degradation Potential of PET Bottles in the Marine Environment: An ATR-FTIR Based Approach. Sci. Rep.2016, 6, 23501.
[CrossRef]
34. Sammon, C.; Yarwood, J.; Everall, N. An FT–IR Study of the Effect of Hydrolytic Degradation on the Structure of Thin PET Films.
Polym. Degrad. Stab.2000, 67, 149–158. [CrossRef]
35. Botelho, A.; Penha, A.; Fraga, J.; Barros-Timmons, A.; Coelho, M.A.; Lehocky, M.; Štˇ epánková, K.; Amaral, P .Yarrowia lipolytica
Adhesion and Immobilization onto Residual Plastics. Polymers 2020, 12, 649. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Amaral, P .F.F.; Lehocky, M.; Barros-Timmons, A.M.V .; Rocha-Leão, M.H.M.; Coelho, M.A.Z.; Coutinho, J.A.P . Cell Surface
Characterization of Yarrowia lipolyticaIMUFRJ 50682. Yeast 2006, 23, 867–877. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Amaral, P .F.F.; de Almeida, A.P .R.; Peixoto, T.; Rocha-Leão, M.H.M.; Coutinho, J.A.P .; Coelho, M.A.Z. Beneﬁcial Effects of
Enhanced Aeration Using Perﬂuorodecalin in Yarrowia lipolyticaCultures for Lipase Production. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
2007, 23, 339–344. [CrossRef]
38. Barth, G.; Gaillardin, C. Yarrowia lipolytica. In Nonconventional Yeasts in Biotechnology; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1996.
39. Kadi´ c, A.; Palmqvist, B.; Lidén, G. Effects of Agitation on Particle-Size Distribution and Enzymatic Hydrolysis of Pretreated
Spruce and Giant Reed. Biotechnol. Biofuels2014, 7, 77. [CrossRef]
40. Chen, Z.; Hay, J.N.; Jenkins, M.J. FTIR Spectroscopic Analysis of Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) on Crystallization.Eur. Polym. J.
2012, 48, 1586–1610. [CrossRef]
41. Hagler, A.N.; Mendonça-Hagler, L.C. Yeasts from Marine and Estuarine Waters with Different Levels of Pollution in the State of
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.1981, 41, 173–178. [CrossRef]
42. Souza, C.E.C.; Farias, M.A.; Ribeiro, B.D.; Coelho, M.A.Z. Adding Value to Agro-Industrial Co-Products from Canola and Soybean
Oil Extraction Through Lipase Production Using Yarrowia lipolyticain Solid-State Fermentation. Waste Biomass Valorization2017,
8, 1163–1176. [CrossRef]
43. Farias, M.A.; Valoni, E.A.; Castro, A.M.; Coelho, M.A.Z. Lipase Production byYarrowia lipolyticain Solid State Fermentation Using
Different Agro Industrial Residues. Ital. Assoc. Chem. Eng.2014, 38, 301–306. [CrossRef]
44. Pereira-Meirelles, F.V .; Rocha-Leão, M.H.M.; Anna, G.L.S. A Stable Lipase from Candida lipolytica: Cultivation Conditions and
Crude Enzyme Characteristics. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol.1997, 63–65, 73–85. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Charney, J.; Tomarelli, R.M. A Colorimetric Method for the Determination of the Proteolytic Activity of Duodenal Juice.J. Biol.
Chem. 1947, 171, 501–505. [CrossRef]