It Is Dangerous to Go Alone: Strategies to Optimize PET Biocatalysis
and Upcycling through Enzymatic Synergism
Bruno Rampanelli Dahmer, Jeferson Camargo de Lima, José Fernando Ruggiero Bachega, Troy Wymore,
and Luis Fernando Saraiva Macedo Timmers*
Cite This: ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
 Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
 Article Recommendations *
sı Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: Current mainstream methods of plastic recycling are
inadequate, producing lower-quality polymers, or are cost-
inefficient, requiring expensive reagents operating under harsh
conditions. Enzymatic biodegradation of poly(ethylene terephtha-
late) (PET) plastic was first extensively described in 2005, and
several PET degrading enzymes have been identified since then.
Recently discovered or developed PET-degrading enzymes are
inhibited by the intermediate reaction product, mono(2-hydrox-
yethyl) terephthalate (MHET). Therefore, the enzymatic con-
version of PET into its original components, terephthalic acid
(TPA) and ethylene glycol (EG), is still inefficient. The synergistic
cooperation between PET hydrolases and enzymes capable of
hydrolyzing released intermediate products can increase reaction
efficiency, reduce separation costs, and enable the full recovery of the basic components of PET for their potential conversion into
value-added chemicals. This review aims to provide an overview of enzymes capable of degrading intermediate products and
potentially solving the heterogeneous product solution problem, their structures and activities, importance, and potential
applications in combination with PET hydrolases.
■
INTRODUCTION
Plastics are virtually integral to modern society due to their
functional properties, biochemical inertness, low production
cost, and broad range of applications. However, their extensive
use has led to significant environmental challenges, fueling a
sustainability crisis. Although the large-scale industrial
production of plastics only started in the 1950s, it has been
estimated that around 7800 Mt of polymer resins and fibers
have been produced since then.
1
The packaging sector
comprises almost half of the total market demand for plastics,
where polyethylene terephthalate (PET) finds one of its main
applications in single use, disposable food and beverage
packaging.
1,2
The very properties that enabled the widespread
adoption of synthetic polymers in lieu of other materials are
also responsible for plastics becoming a critical environmental
problem. Landfills are still the most common destination given
to postconsumer plastics, some of which may erode over a long
period of time and release microparticles into the environment.
Traditional recycling methods, primarily mechanical and
chemical, have limitations, including quality degradation and
high energy consumption.
3,4
Conversely, biological recycling of plastic waste operates
under less severe conditions of temperature and pressure,
making it a promising alternative for sustainable plastic waste
management. Biocatalytic conversion depolymerizes the plastic
substrates in monomers and oligomers that could be used as
feedstock for recycling or production of new plastics, or the
synthesis of added-value substances.
5
The enzymatic biodegradation of synthetic plastics is
dependent on the types of covalent bonds present along the
polymeric chains and the abundance of similar, specific bonds
found in natural polymeric substrates. Plastics that contain
hydrolyzable bonds, such as polyesters, polyamide oligomers,
and ester-based polyurethane, are highly susceptible to
hydrolytic attack. Esters are prevalent in natural biopolymers,
such as in lipid- and phenol-based barriers on the surface of
plant cells, like cutin and suberin.
6
Likely due to its similarity
with naturally occurring biopolymers, the fossil-based polymer
PET is the most extensively studied plastic concerning its
enzymatic biodegradation. Most of the enzymes capable of
degrading PET (and therefore termed PET hydrolases) are
promiscuous α/β-hydrolases of the carboxylic ester hydrolases
superfamily (EC 3.1.1), including esterases (EC 3.1.1.1),
Received: March 5, 2025
Revised: July 10, 2025
Accepted: August 5, 2025
Published: October 1, 2025
Reviewhttp://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf
© 2025 The Authors. Published by
American Chemical Society
46218
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0
This article is licensed under CC-BY 4.0

lipases (EC 3.1.1.3), and cutinases (EC 3.1.1.74). Ideonella
sakaiensis (Is), a bacterium capable of utilizing PET as its sole
carbon source, produces two enzymes, IsPETase (EC
3.1.1.101) and IsMHETase (EC 3.1.1.102). These enzymes
can break the ester bonds along the polymeric chain, releasing
bis(2-hydroxyethyl)-terephthalate (BHET), mono-(2-hydrox-
yethyl) terephthalate (MHET), terephthalic acid (TPA) and
ethylene glycol (EG) (Figure 1).
PET hydrolases usually possess shallow and open active sites
that are able to accommodate bulky polyester chains, such as
PET. However, this architecture renders them less efficient at
cleaving low-molecular-weight intermediate products (espe-
cially MHET) and susceptible to product inhibition, broadly
understood here as competitive or nonproductive binding of
hydrolysis products.
7
As such, the heterogeneous products
yielded from biocatalytic breakdown of PET plastic represent a
bottleneck to PET recondensation or the synthesis of high-
value derivatives. Incorporating auxiliary carboxylesterases with
a preference for shorter acyl chain esters, such as MHET and
BHET, can assist PET hydrolases by accelerating intermediate
turnover and can further enable the recycling, upcycling, or full
biological conversion of postconsumer PET plastic. Therefore,
exploring the biotechnological and industrial applications of
the PET enzymatic biodegradation process may benefit from a
better understanding of the complementary roles played by
PET hydrolases and BHET/MHET-hydrolyzing enzymes.
Thus, this review is centered on exploring the structural and
functional properties of several enzymes known to mediate the
catalysis of PET-derived oligomers, mainly BHET and MHET,
and the potential applications that result from their synergy
with PET hydrolases. Additionally, the review explores recent
efforts to elucidate and tailor the metabolic pathways of natural
or engineered microorganisms for uptake, assimilation, or
conversion of PET waste-derived substances into value-added
materials.
■
BHET AND MHET HYDROLYTIC ENZYMES
This section presents a selection of enzymes with reported or
proposed activity toward PET hydrolysis intermediates, chosen
based on both established biochemical evidence and functional
potential inferred from structural or mechanistic traits. While
some enzymes included in this review have been formally and
directly characterized for their activity toward soluble PET
depolymerization intermediates, others (though not originally
classified as such) are included based on biochemical
characteristics, inferred substrate preference, or literature-
reported activity patterns that suggest a promising potential
role in intermediate turnover. As such, we selected enzymes
that either: (i) have been directly described as MHET/BHET
hydrolases, or (ii) exhibit traits consistent with intermediate-
specific activity, such as low TPA/MHET yield from PET but
comparatively better turnover of short-chain oligoesters. In this
section, we seek to highlight some of these enzymes, outlining
their defining features. Table 1, at the end of this section, also
summarizes and offers a comparative overview of the auxiliary
enzymes included in this review.
Candida Antarctica Lipase B (CaLipB). CaLipB is a
highly promiscuous, multipurpose enzyme with various
industrial applications and organic synthesis in the food,
cosmetic, pharmaceutical, and chemical industries, thanks to its
high activity, broad substrate specificity, tolerance to a wide pH
range, ability to function in both aqueous and organic
environments, and thermal stability.
8−11
Uppenberg et al.
12,13
solved the first crystallographic structures of CaLipB. The
enzyme is monomeric and belongs to the α/β-hydrolase
superfamily, composed by 317 amino acid residues arranged in
a core structure comprising a central, mostly parallel, seven-
stranded β-sheet surrounded by α-helixes. Its fold exhibits a
stable scaffold for the conserved Ser-His-Asp catalytic triad of
serine hydrolases; however, the serine hydrolase consensus
sequence around the catalytic Ser105 differs in CaLipB, from
the GxSxG motif to TWSQG. His244 and Asp187, which are
stabilized by an oxyanion hole (Thr40 and Gln106), make up
the remaining residues of the catalytic site. The binding site of
CaLipB is further divided into two compartments with
different affinities: the first accommodates the acyl moiety of
esters while the latter binds to alcohols.
12,14
The presence of a lid domain covering the active site of
CaLipB was a contentious topic of discussion due to a lack of
structural evidence and of interfacial activation. Stauch et al.
15
reported crystallographic structures of CaLipB in open and
closed conformations, showing that α-helix
5
and α-helix
10
are
responsible for the latter through a combination of effects
stemming from properties of the substrate, media, and the
amino acid composition of the lid region. In its open
conformation, α-helix
5
shows a series of aliphatic residues
along the channel leading to the active site of CaLipB; in the
closing of the binding site, α-helix
5
undergoes a conformational
change and unfolds into an unstructured loop resulting in a salt
bridge between Asp145 and Lys290, which brings in α-helix
10
Figure 1. General biocatalysis of PET to TPA and EG through the
intermediates BHET and MHET. Generally, some PET hydrolases
are capable of fully degrading PET to TPA and EG, but product
inhibition or the slower rate of hydrolysis of intermediate products
leads to their accumulation in the system. BHET and MHET
hydrolytic enzymes can more efficiently break down intermediate
products resulting from PET degradation.
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46219
Table 1. Summary and Comparative Overview of Auxiliary BHET/MHET Hydrolytic Enzymes
Enzyme Activity Toward BHET/MHET
Reaction
Temp.
(°C) Notes Reference
CaLipB K
M
= 13.3 ± 4.3 mM, k
cat
= 0.89 ± 0.15 s
−1
(BHET, pH 7);
50−60 Thermostable. Highly promiscuous lipase with broad applications in industry (food, cosmetics, pharmaceutical). pH-
dependent regioselectivity: BHET > MHET at pH 7; MHET > BHET at pH 5.
16,17
K
M
= 23.8 ± 8.8 mM, k
cat
= 1.25 ± 0.29 s
−1
(MHET, pH 5).
TaEst1 Not quantified. 60−75 Thermostable. Pentamutant (TaEst1_5M) with enhanced activity and substrate range. 21,24
Tf Ca Preference for BHET over 2PET; relative
K
A
= 0.085 mg/mL, relative
k
τ
= 0.35 min
−1
.
50−60 Thermostable. Engineered variant with improved activity. Enhanced MHET and BHET hydrolysis via I69W/V376A variant
(2.6-fold and 3.3-fold higher, respectively).
28,31
TtCE Not quantified. 80 Thermophilic. Active across broad temperature ranges and pH levels. Potentially suitable for harsh industrial conditions.
Shown to synergistically degrade PET in combination with LCC, with pure TPA and EG yields ∼30−100% higher.
34,37,75
Bs2Est K
M
= 8.84 mM, k
cat
= 2.10 × 10
5
s
−1
(BHET)
30 Industrially robust source organisms. Generally thermostable. 45
K
M
= 5.10 mM, k
cat
= 6.46 s
−1
(MHET)
BsCE K
M
= 0.77 ± 0.08 mM, k
cat
= 13 ± 0.80 s
−1
(BHET);
50 49,76
K
M
= 1.3 ± 0.51 mM,
k
cat
= 0.056 ± 0.015 s
−1
(MHET).
BsEst (PET-86) &
ChryBHETase
(PET-29)
K
M
= 0.1 ± 0.02 mM, k
cat
= 37.7 ± 1.98 s
−1
(BsEst);
30−60 Both showed high substrate preference for BHET over aliphatic esters. Thermostable variants with up to 3.5-fold improved
catalytic efficiency and up to 7.0-fold improvement in TPA production compared to seven benchmark PET hydrolases alone.
74
K
M
= 0.08 ± 0.03 mM,
k
cat
= 102.2 ± 5.18 s
−1
(ΔBsEst);
K
M
= 0.09 ± 0.02 mM, k
cat
= 6.85 ± 0.53 s
−1
(ChryBHETase);
K
M
= 0.12 ± 0.03 mM,
k
cat
= 12.88 ± 1.24 s
−1
(ΔChryBHETase);
IsMHETase K
M
= 0.0073 mM, k
cat
= 31 s
−1
(MHET,
WT).
30−40 Canonical MHET hydrolase, but thermolabile above 44 °C. 55,56
K
M
= 1.45 mM, k
cat
= 3.205 s
−1
(BHET,
R411K/S416A/F424I triple mutant).
IsMHETase
R411K/S416A/F424I
variant with BHETase activity.
Mle046 No detectable activity toward, or inhibition
by, BHET.
20−40 Broad temperature range: mesophilic but cold-active enzyme. Marine adapted. 67
For MHET, K
M
= 2.638 ± 0.797 mM,
k
cat
= 80.9 ± 15.8 s
−1
.
MarCE Not quantified. Predicted through molecular
docking with BHET.
30 Structurally similar to Tf Ca, with two lid domains. Marine adapted. 72
KL-MHETase K
M
= 4.56 mM, k
cat
= 21.43 s
−1
(MHET). 50 Computationally designed thermostable enzyme. Tested in a large reaction system (100 g/L), with 90% PET
depolymerization when fused to FAST-PETase.
69
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46220
and closes the active site, thus hindering substrate accessibility
and preventing catalysis.
There is no definite consensus regarding its activity against
PET polymer. Evidence for the involvement of CaLipB in PET
biocatalysis was initially described by Carniel et al.,
16
when the
authors screened 10 commercial lipases using BHET as a
model substrate. Both the BHETase and MHETase functions
of CaLipB were identified in synergic combination with the
PET hydrolytic activity of Humicola insolens cutinase (HiCut).
The combination of these two enzymes resulted in a 7.7-fold
increase in TPA yield from PET after 14 days of reaction at 50
or 60 °C.
Initial screenings revealed very little hydrolytic activity of
CaLipB toward pretreated PET. However, it displays notable
dual BHETase and MHETase functions. While Carniel et al.
16
evaluated the hydrolysis of MHET by CaLipB at neutral pH,
S
́
widerek et al.
17
employed hybrid quantum chemical/
molecular mechanics (QC/MM) molecular dynamics simu-
lations, complemented by experimental Michaelis−Menten
kinetics, to explore how the pH-dependent ionization state of
CaLipB significantly influences the binding and subsequent
hydrolysis of either substrate: CaLipB actually hydrolyzes
BHET more efficiently at pH 7 (K
M
= 13.3 ± 4.3 mM, k
cat
=
0.89 ± 0.15 s
−1
) compared to the slower hydrolysis of MHET
(K
M
= 15.1 ± 3.2 mM, k
cat
= 0.14 ± 0.011 s
−1
), while it shows
a higher preference the latter at pH 5 (K
M
= 23.8 ± 8.8 mM,
k
cat
= 1.25 ± 0.29 s
−1
for MHET, K
M
= 22.5 ± 9.6 mM, k
cat
=
0.52 ± 0.07 s
−1
for BHET). Hence, under acidic conditions,
the enzyme predominantly yields TPA. Conversely, alkaline
conditions favor the accumulation of MHET due to the
selective hydrolysis of only one ester linkage in BHET. Under
acidic conditions, the ionization states and protonation of
several CaLipB residues form a neutral hydrogen bond
network that enables the binding of both BHET and MHET,
allowing for the double hydrolysis of BHET to yield two
molecules of EG and one TPA. At pH values above 7, these
ionization states and some conformational plasticity of the
active site (particularly key distances such as Ser105-His224
and Ser105-Asp134, which can compromise the proton
transfer required to activate Ser105 for hydrolysis) destabilize
the CaLipB:MHET complex and explain the observed
selectivity of the enzyme.
The promising experimental behavior, robustness, and
flexible selectivity of CaLipB on top of its extensive commercial
and industrial applications may allow for the development of
engineered variants with enhanced activity regarding the
enzymatic catalysis of PET degradation intermediates.
Thermobifida alba AHK119 Esterase 1 (TaEst1). The
genus Thermobif ida typically contains two tandem cutinase
genes.
18
Thermobifida alba produces two distinct cutinases
from different genes, designated as est1 and est119.
19
Est119,
which has been reclassified as cutinase 2, was initially
characterized as a polyester-hydrolyzing esterase from T.
alba.
20
More recently, it has been demonstrated that Est1
also possesses the ability to degrade ester-type plastics.
21
Although the two cutinases from T. alba exhibit different
activities and thermostabilities, they share 95% identity and
98% similarity. Notably, Est1 displays approximately twice the
activity compared to Est119.
TaEst1 is an enzyme derived from the thermophilic
actinomycete T. alba, commonly found in compost environ-
ments. TaEst1 is notable for its ability to hydrolyze a wide
range of esters and polyesters, making it crucial for polymer
degradation and chemical synthesis. Its thermal stability, with
an optimal activity range of 60 to 75 °C, suggests it could be
valuable in industrial processes, particularly for recycling
plastics and producing chemical intermediates.
21
Although crystallization studies of TaEst1 have been
reported,
22
the crystal structure has not been deposited in
the PDB. Consequently, structural details are based on the
AlphaFold DB model (AF ID: D4Q9N1). TaEst1 adopts a
typical α/β-hydrolase fold, featuring 12 α-helices and 9 β-
strands arranged into two homodimers. This fold includes a
central β-sheet surrounded by α-helices, which provides
structural stability and functionality.
23
The enzyme’s active
site contains a catalytic triad of Ser165, Asp211, and His243,
essential for hydrolyzing substrates.
Efforts to optimize the activity and stability of TaEst1
included rational engineering through site-directed muta-
genesis, targeting residues near to catalytic triad and regions
Figure 2. Structure of Tf Ca. (A) Crystallographic structure of Tf Ca showing its hydrolase domain (white) and its two lid domains (LidA and LidB,
purple and blue, respectively); (B) Binding mode of MHETA (green) in the active site of Tf Ca; (C) Binding mode of BHET (green) in the active
site of Tf Ca.
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46221
associated with substrate interaction. To enhance thermo-
stability and catalytic performance, Est1 mutants were
engineered, yielding notable results. The Est1 (A68 V/
T253P) double mutant (Est1DM) exhibited higher enzymatic
activity than both the wild-type Est1 and Est119, maintaining
over 70% of its activity after 30 min and over 50% after 60 min
at 338 K. Est1DM also demonstrated a broad substrate
specificity, effectively degrading both aliphatic and aliphatic-co-
aromatic polyesters, including PET film.
19
Further mutation
screening identified the Est1_5 M variant (mutations: N213M,
T215P, S115P, Q93A, L91W), which achieved a remarkable
90.84% degradation of commercial PET bottles within 72 h�a
65-fold increase over the wild type.
24
These findings
underscore the potential of Est1 mutants in developing
efficient enzymes for PET degradation and addressing plastic
pollution.
Thermobifida fusca KW3 Carboxylesterase (TfCa).
Hydrolases of both natural and synthetic polyesters have
been described in several moderate thermophilic actino-
mycetes.
25
Members of the Thermobif ida genus are frequently
isolated as habitants in compost and are major degraders of
plant cell wall.
26
When grown on PET fibers-supplemented
media, T. fusca produces a carboxylesterase (Tf Ca) comprising
approximately 497 amino acid residues with a molecular mass
of 50 kDa.
27
Tf Ca is a monomeric enzyme build from three
domains: a central domain that adopts the canonical α/β
hydrolase fold with a central β-sheet surrounded by α-helices,
and two lid domains (Figure 2A).
28
Unlike lipases, which preferentially hydrolyze water-
insoluble long-chain triglycerides, carboxylesterases typically
cleave short-chain acylglycerols and p-nitrophenyl esters.
29
Consequently, Tf Ca has been shown to exhibit catalytic
activity against short and medium-chain esters like PET
oligomers and intermediate products, being capable of
degrading cyclic PET trimers at an optimum temperature of
60 °C with a K
m
of 0.5 mM.
27,30
Belisa ́rio-Ferrari et al.
31
developed a turbidimetric assay to analyze the enzymatic
hydrolysis of PET model substrates (2PET and BHET) and
validated it with the hydrolysis reaction carried out by Tf Ca.
The enzyme showed a clear preference for the less bulky esters
in intermediate products, as Tf Ca exhibited a 3.5-fold higher
k
cat
and 2-fold higher K
M
toward BHET than 2PET.
A variant of Tf Ca has been developed by von Haugwitz et
al.
28
through structure-guided rational engineering of residues
located in the binding site of the enzyme. Fourteen residues
within 5 Å of the ligands were substituted with alanine, with
R428A and V376A showing higher activity than the wild-type
enzyme, while I69A and M189A were completely inactive and
were subjected instead to saturation mutagenesis. The I69W
mutant showed double the activity of WT Tf Ca, likely due to
more favorable interactions with the aromatic moiety of the
substrate. A combination of these identified mutations led the
authors to Tf Ca
I69W/V376A
, which had 2.6-fold and 3.3-fold
higher hydrolytic activities on MHET and BHET, respectively.
The authors also obtained crystallographic structures of WT
Tf Ca bound to a nonhydrolyzable MHET analogue
(MHETA) containing an amide bond in place of the ester
bond in the original molecule, preventing its hydrolysis by
estereolytic enzymes, and BHET. The BHET-bound structure
was also made inactive via the E319L mutation, enabling its
crystallization. In the binding modes of both complexes, the
ligands are located at the bottom of a very hydrophobic deep
active site cleft (Figure 2B and C). Three hydrogen bonds are
formed in the active site of Tf Ca with the amide bond and the
hydroxyl end of MHETA, while the side chains of phenyl-
alanine residues (Phe323 and Phe377) are involved in
stabilizing the aromatic ring in the TPA moiety of the
substrate, analogous to the binding mode of the same substrate
in IsMHETase (Phe495 and Phe415). Molecular dynamics
simulations of enzyme-ligand complexes also revealed a higher
propensity for MHET to remain in the substrate binding
pocket of IsMHETase than Tf Ca, indicating that the latter
indeed has a lower affinity for MHET than IsMHETase.
28
Thermus thermophilus Carboxylesterase (TtCE). T.
thermophilus is an obligate aerobic bacterium, originally
isolated from a hot spring in Japan, that exhibits optimal
growth at high temperatures, specifically between 70 and 80
°C.
32,33
The carboxylesterase from T. thermophilus (TtCE) is a
thermophilic enzyme notable for its exceptional thermal
stability. It exhibits enzymatic activity over a broad temper-
ature range (19.7−80 °C) and functions effectively in neutral
to alkaline pH conditions (4.0−9.3). TtCE can hydrolyze ester
bonds in a variety of substrates, showing a preference for
medium-chain esters (C10) and high activity on short-chain
substrates.
34
The combination of its exceptional thermal
stability and ability to operate across a wide range of
temperatures and pH levels makes the TtCE a promising
candidate for biotechnological applications, particularly in
processes that require enzymes to function under extreme
conditions.
To date, no experimentally resolved structure of TtCE is
available; however, one study has employed comparative
modeling to investigate structural aspects of an esterase from
T. thermophilus HB27.
35
However, two predicted models have
been deposited in the AlphaFold database (AF ID: AF-
A0A7R7TF72-F1-v4, sourced from T. thermophilus, and AF-
H9ZPJ1-F1-v4, from T. thermophilus JL-18). TtCE adopts the
classic α/β-hydrolase fold, characterized by 10 parallel β-sheets
and 13 α-helices arranged in a barrel-like configuration. The
predicted active site contains the canonical Ser-His-Asp
catalytic triad (S75, H203, and D175). These structural
insights, particularly the presence of the canonical Ser-His-Asp
catalytic triad, enhance our understanding of TtCE’s evolu-
tionary adaptations, contributing to the knowledge of lipolytic
enzymes from thermophilic organisms in high-temperature
environments.
Experimental analysis with T. thermophilus revealed the
presence of two lipolytic enzymes with molecular weights of 34
kDa and 62 kDa in both intracellular and extracellular
fractions, with the 34 kDa enzyme being the predominant
form. The 34 kDa esterase from T. thermophilus HB27
exhibited optimal catalytic activity at pH 8.5 and 80 °C,
showing a preference for medium-chain fatty acid esters, such
as p-nitrophenyl esters with C10 chains. The enzyme displayed
a half-life of 135 min at 85 °C, indicating high thermal stability.
Enzymatic activity was assessed through zymography and
colorimetric assays, utilizing p-nitrophenyl esters as substrates.
Analyses revealed retention of 75 to 100% of activity after 30
min at 80 °C, highlighting its suitability for biotechnological
applications under alkaline and high-temperature condi-
tions.
35,36
To date, there have been no studies focused on protein
engineering aimed at enhancing the stability or activity of this
enzyme. In summary, the characterization of the 34 kDa
lipolytic enzyme from T. thermophilus HB27, with its optimal
activity at elevated temperatures and alkaline pH, underscores
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46222
its significant role in the enzymatic landscape of thermophilic
organisms.
37
The enzyme’s remarkable thermal stability and
substrate specificity further highlight its potential biological
functions. These findings set the stage for future investigations
into the enzyme’s roles in thermophilic environments.
Bacillus subtilis Esterase 2 (Bs2Est). Esterases derived
from Bacillus subtilis play a crucial role in the hydrolysis of
short- and medium-chain fatty acid esters, demonstrating
notable catalytic versatility.
38,39
Bs2Est, an esterase from
Bacillus subtilis DSM402, exhibits remarkable versatility in
the hydrolysis of tertiary alcohols and the removal of carboxyl
protecting groups, making it a valuable enzyme for industrial
applications. With high thermal stability and resistance to pH
variations, Bs2Est shows promise for biocatalytic processes,
such as the enantioselective resolution of acetate esters of
tertiary alcohols and the selective deprotection of peptides.
This versatility underscores its significance in various
biotechnological applications, including biopolymer synthesis
and the development of novel methodologies in organic
chemistry.
40
Although structures for two close homologues are available,
no experimentally resolved structure of Bs2Est has been
reported to date, nor has structural information for Bs2Est
been found in the AlphaFold database. A study investigating
the enzyme’s promiscuous amidase activity used a combination
of experimental assays and molecular modeling to demonstrate
that amide hydrolysis is stabilized by a hydrogen-bond network
involving the Glu188 residue. To evaluate this effect, mutations
were introduced at this position: mutants that retained the
hydrogen-bond network (E188D and E188Q) displayed a
smaller reduction in amidase activity, while mutants unable to
form this network (E188A and E188F) showed a more
pronounced decrease in activity. These findings indicate that
the hydrogen-bond network is critical for transition-state
stabilization, offering a molecular basis for the enzyme’s
promiscuous activity.
41
Furthermore, the E188D variant
converted the trifluoromethyl analog of 3-phenylbut-1-yn-3-yl
acetate with excellent enantioselectivity (E > 100) yielding the
(S)-alcohol with >99% enantiomeric excess.
42
A double
mutant of Bs2Est, E188W/M193C, demonstrated an inversion
in enantioselectivity for acetylated tertiary alcohols, achieving
an E value of 64, compared to an E value greater than 100 for
the E188D mutant;
43
and rapidly hydrolyze n-butyl, n-propyl,
methoxyethyl, and allyl esters.
44
Bs2Est was shown to hydrolyze incompletely converted
products of the glycolysis of waste PET, producing an excess
amount of TPA compared to both BHET and MHET,
suggesting that the enzyme was capable of converting even
PET oligomers (particularly dimers) in the incomplete
glycolysis products solution to TPA, via intermediate
endocleavage of dimeric PET into BHET and MHET, which
were further hydrolyzed into TPA and EG. The solubility of
TPA was shown to have a significant impact on the BHET-
hydrolytic activity of Bs2Est: higher solubility of TPA in
sodium phosphate buffer contributed to higher hydrolytic
activity of Bs2Est at high concentrations of BHET compared to
Tris-HCl buffer. However, in comparison, the MHET-
hydrolytic activity of Bs2Est was considerably slower than
that for BHET. In silico molecular docking analysis revealed
that the ester group of BHET was directly oriented toward the
catalytic Ser189; conversely, the carboxylic group of MHET
formed a hydrogen bond with the same residue leading to an
unfavorable substrate binding position.
45
Overall, these results underscore the potential of engineering
Bs2Est variants to enhance substrate specificity and catalytic
efficiency, especially in regard to finetuning its monoesterase
activity for more efficient MHET hydrolysis comparable to its
BHET hydrolytic capacity.
Bacillus subtilis Carboxylesterase (BsCE). BsCE is a
thermophilic enzyme classified within the esterase and lipase
families. This enzyme catalyzes the hydrolysis of esters with
notable efficiency toward long-chain substrates and exhibits
remarkable thermal stability, making it valuable for industrial
processes requiring extreme conditions. Bacillus subtilis
produces several carboxylesterases that exhibit high enantiose-
lectivity in catalyzing the hydrolysis of esters, such has
carboxylesterase NP (Bacillus subtilis strain Thai I-8), CesA
and CesB (B. subtilis strain 168).
46,47
BsCE exhibits a canonical α/β-hydrolase fold, defined by a
core of eight predominantly parallel β-strands enveloped by 12
α-helices, which provides structural stability essential for its
enzymatic function (PDB IDs: 4CCW and 4CCY). This
enzyme is organized into two principal domains: a central
“core” domain that accommodates the catalytic triad (Ser130-
His274-Glu245) and a “cap” domain that is integral to
substrate recognition and binding. The active site is situated
within a hydrophobic gorge approximately 13 Å deep, where
the catalytic serine resides in a flexible loop enabling the
accommodation of various substrates. Notably, structural
variations in the “cap” domain significantly influence substrate
specificity and enantioselectivity, allowing BsCE to hydrolyze a
diverse array of esters, including the enantioselective hydrolysis
of naproxen methyl ester to produce S-naproxen with an
enantiomeric ratio (E) exceeding 200.
48
As such, the carboxylesterases from B. subtilis exhibit broad
substrate specificity and high catalytic activity toward a diverse
array of esters, including short-chain esters and triacylglycerols.
BsCE was purified and demonstrated maximum activity at 37
°C and pH 8.0, maintaining stability at temperatures up to 55
°C. The activities of carboxylesterases NP, CesA, and CesB
were evaluated using substrates such as ibuprofen and IPG
esters. While CesB (YbfK) displayed moderate enantioselec-
tivity, its specific activity was notably lower compared to
carboxylesterase NP and CesA, which are more effective in the
conversion of naproxen esters. The temperature analysis
revealed that both CesA and carboxylesterase NP reached
peak activity at approximately 30 °C, whereas CesB achieved
its maximum at 40 °C, with rapid inactivation occurring at
temperatures above 55 °C. Additionally, CesB demonstrated
remarkable stability at elevated pH levels, retaining 53% of its
activity at pH 11, thereby underscoring its robustness under
alkaline conditions.
46,47
In a recent comparative study with
three other PET hydrolases (HiCut, Thermobifida fusca
cutinase, and a variant of IsPETase), BsCE was shown
exceptionally capable of hydrolyzing BHET with a specificity
constant relatively comparable to that of natural enzyme−
substrate complexes.
49
To date, only one study has applied this rational engineering
for enhancing BsCE. In that study, site-directed mutagenesis
was employed to produce BsCE variants with enhanced
thermal stability, thereby expanding its catalytic capabilities
and potential applications.
50
To enhance the thermal stability
of BsCE, a chimeric “cap mutant” was developed by
incorporating a 30-amino-acid segment from the moderately
thermostable esterase BsteE. This modification, tested through
CD spectroscopy and pNPA assays, yielded a modest stability
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46223
increase of 4 °C and improved substrate affinity. Additional
mutations (T7P, K18R, S88K, K111E) based on hydrogen
bond networks further elevated stability by up to 11 °C;
however, these alterations significantly reduced catalytic
activity, limiting their suitability as biocatalysts.
Ideonella sakaiensis MHETase (IsMHETase). I. sakaiensis
was first described in 2016, after being isolated from a sample
of PET-contaminated sediments obtained from a PET bottle
recycling unit located in the Sakai region, Japan. It is a Gram-
stain-negative, aerobic, nonspore-forming rod-shaped bacte-
rium capable of utilizing PET as its main carbon source.
51,52
The characterization of I. sakaiensis revealed a distinct
enzymatic machinery for the degradation and assimilation of
PET composed mainly by two enzymes, responsible for the
initial degradation of the polymeric substrate: IsPETase and
IsMHETase. A recent proteomic characterization of I.
sakaiensis exposed to PET revealed that, when comparing
secreted enzymes, IsMHETase was differentially expressed and
in much greater abundance than IsPETase, since MHET is
known to inhibit the depolymerization efficiency of IsPE-
Tase.
53
According to the ESTHER database, IsMHETase belongs to
the Block X of the α/β-hydrolase superfamily, which also
includes bacterial and fungal tannases and ferulic acid
esterases.
23
The 3D structure of IsMHETase was first
described by Palm et al.
54
through molecular replacement
with a close structural homologue, a feruloyl esterase from
Aspergillus oryzae (AoFaeB). In an independent study, Sagong
et al.
55
reported the successful extracellular expression and
crystallographic structure of IsMHETase, as well as a novel
exo-PETase function. Third, Knott et al.
56
also combined
structural, computational, and biochemical approaches to
describe the relationship between IsMHETase structure and
function. Peng et al.
57
used a computational strategy based on
molecular dynamics simulations and Markov State Models to
reveal interesting conformational dynamics of IsMHETase and
describe the relationship between distal regions and active,
catalytic states. Finally, Saunders et al.
58
developed a medium-
throughput colorimetric assay to screen a library of engineered
variants of IsMHETase, aiming to increase its soluble
expression and whole-cell activity through semicontinuous
addition/reversion/recombination of mutations representative
of different conservation thresholds from consensus sequence
alignments.
IsMHETase is an intracellular enzyme composed of nearly
600 amino acid residues and a total molecular mass of
approximately 65 kDa. The surface of the enzyme is
heterogeneous and has an acidic isoelectric potential of 5.11
that well complements that of IsPETase (9.6).
56
The
architecture of IsMHETase includes a lid domain inserted
between β-strand
7
and α-helix
15
(residues Gly251-Thr472) of
the conserved α/β-hydrolase domain (Figure 3A). This lid
domain partially covers the active site and also harbors a Ca
2+
-
binding domain that is highly conserved in feruloyl esterases
(Figure 3B) and may play a role in structural stability, although
it is exceptionally large (even in comparison to its closest
homologues) and contains several additional loops that are
thought to be responsible for substrate specificity and
affinity.
54,56
Sagong et al.
55
point out that, while most if not all
structurally similar enzymes exist as dimers, IsMHETase is a
monomer. The authors highlight that the conformations of the
lid domain involved in AoFaeB dimerization are different from
IsMHETase, which hinder the formation of a dimer but might
be involved in its extracellular exo-PETase activity. The
enzyme also contains five internal disulfide bonds in its
structure, but the monomeric nature of IsMHETase may
ultimately contribute to hinder its thermal stability. The
enzyme has a reported T
m
of 50.61 °C, but its activity rapidly
decreases after 44 °C. One disulfide bridge (Cys224-Cys529)
flanks the catalytic triad (formed by Ser225, His528, and
Asp492) in what is called a CSHDC motif (characteristic of
Figure 3. Structure of IsMHETase. (A) IsMHETase bound to MHET (green), highlighting the lid domain (blue) and catalytic triad (orange); (B)
Close-up of the calcium-binding domain conserved across feruloyl esterases; (C) The concerted movement/dual occupancies of residues Gln410
and Phe415 in the apo form (blue, PDB ID 6QZ4) and ligand-bound form (white, PDB ID 6QZ3); (D) Binding mode of the nonhydrolyzable
MHET analog in the active site of IsMHETase (PDB ID 6QGA); (E) Binding mode of BHET in the active site of IsMHETase (PDB ID 6JTT).
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46224
tannases), and the oxyanion hole comprising the backbone
amide nitrogen atoms of Gly132 and Glu226.
55,59
Much like its sister enzyme IsPETase, IsMHETase does not
exhibit activity against pNP-aliphatic esters or aromatic esters
typically catalyzed by tannase family enzymes, such as ethyl
gallate or ethyl ferulate.
52
The limited substrate preferences of
these enzymes in lieu of the promiscuity in terms of the range
of substrates catalyzed by other PET hydrolases and
homologues, in combination with the origin from which the
bacterium was first isolated and identified, support the notion
that I. sakaiensis gradually developed its enzymes necessary for
PET uptake under evolutionary constraints that shaped its
activity and earned both IsPETase and IsMHETase their own
E.C. numbers.
60,61
Palm et al.
54
elucidated the crystallographic structure of
IsMHETase in complex with MHETA. Subsequently, Sagong
et al.
55
demonstrated that IsMHETase binds to BHET in an
almost identical fashion, suggesting that the activity and
function of this enzyme could extend beyond what was
originally thought. Several mutagenesis assays have also helped
to elucidate important residues involved in substrate
recognition, orientation, and binding. Some of these experi-
ments have focused on increasing the performance of
IsMHETase, while others have aimed at tailoring the active
site toward altered substrates, such as BHET and PET itself, by
improving its affinity and activity for these substrates. These
described mutagenesis studies and others, including their
rationale and results, are summarized in Supplementary Table
1.
An induced-fit binding mechanism seems to be the
consensus for IsMHETase. In fact, molecular dynamics
simulations performed by Knott et al.
56
revealed a concerted
movement of Phe415 and Gln410 upon binding with benzoic
acid (Figure 3C). In the apo form, Phe415 points away from
the active site, but turns almost 180° upon ligand binding and
closes the access to the active site, consolidating the
interactions between protein and substrate.
54−56
Peng et al.
57
further proposed that the motion performed by Phe415 is in
fact part of large-scale structural changes that require a longer
time scale, evidenced by the conformational change undergone
by surrounding loops near this residue, also transitioning
between open/closed states.
Thus, MHET binds tightly to the active site of IsMHETase,
with K
M
and k
cat
values of 0.0073 mM and 31 s
−1
,
respectively.
52,56,62
However, the high affinity and specificity
of IsMHETase for benzoate structural analogues containing a
negative charge in the para position in relation to the
hydrolyzable ester bond can lead to product inhibition by
the formation of TPA.
54
The substrate interacts with the α/β-
hydrolase domain residues Phe495, Gly132, and Ala494 via
hydrophobic contacts, while being surrounded by lid domain
residues Phe415, Leu254, and Trp397. Additionally, the two
oxygen atoms of the free carboxyl moiety of MHET form
contacts with Arg411, which is stabilized by Ser416, Ser419,
and the amide group of Gly258 (Figure 3D).
54
Similar binding
patterns were observed for BHET, as mentioned earlier. The
MHET moiety (which comprises the phenyl ring of the TPA
moiety and the “inner” EG moiety) is stabilized by
hydrophobic contacts, similar to the MHET ligand discussed
(Figure 3E).
55
While both the catalytic triad and the oxyanion hole are
composed of residues of the α/β-hydrolase domain, substrate
specificity seems to be almost entirely conferred by the lid
domain, which is crucial for MHET hydrolysis. Knott et al.
56
constructed a lidless IsMHETase by replacing the lid domain
with the corresponding loop from IsPETase, hypothesizing
Figure 4. Hydrolytic mechanism of IsMHETase, based on the canonical reaction mechanism of serine hydrolases.
65
Upon MHET binding,
histidine prompts the deprotonation of the catalytic serine, activating it for the nucleophilic attack on the carbonyl atom of MHET, resulting in the
first tetrahedral intermediate (TI1) and the formation of an acyl-enzyme intermediate (AEI). As EG leaves the active site, a water molecule is
deprotonated by histidine and a second nucleophilic attack occurs, prompting the formation of a second tetrahedral intermediate (TI2). Its collapse
regenerates the active site for a new reaction cycle. Adapted with permission from ref 65. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46225
that this could confer the enzyme the ability to degrade PET.
However, the lidless IsMHETase was unable to degrade PET
film, and the resulting variant had a k
cat
value 1000-fold lower
than the rate for the wild-type enzyme.
Conversely, Palm et al.
54
also reported that a few mutations
in the binding pocket of IsMHETase increased its catalytic
activity toward BHET. These included dismantling the
hydrogen bond network by replacing Ser416 and Ser419, as
well as providing more space in the distal area of the active site
by replacing Phe424. Combining these observations, Sagong et
al.
55
devised a strategy to develop an IsMHETase variant
capable of degrading PET. For example, the addition of a
R411K mutation could better stabilize the ester bond when
BHET is used as a substrate instead of MHET. Finally, the
authors were able to ultimately develop a IsMHETase variant
(IsMHETase
R411K/S416A/F424I
) that was more active on
IsPETase-treated PET film, confirming its exo-PETase function
and BHET hydrolytic activity (K
M
and k
cat
values of 1.45 mM
and 3.205 s
−1
toward BHET, compared to 0.91 mM and
0.0255 s
−1
for the WT enzyme) while still retaining some
catalytic activity toward MHET.
Mechanism. As the canonical serine hydrolase reaction
mechanism of IsMHETase has been the most extensively
studied in terms of MHET hydrolysis by these enzymes, it
serves as an illustrative description in this text. The reaction
mechanism of IsMHETase has been described using hybrid
QC/MM (quantum chemistry/molecular mechanics) simu-
lations by Knott et al.,
56
Pinto et al.,
63
and Feng et al.,
64
with
relatively good consensus between the authors, with differences
regarding the detection of metastable, transient intermediate
configurations characteristic of serine hydrolases.
The hydrolytic reaction mediated by IsMHETase thus
operates according to the typical mechanism of serine
hydrolases,
65
with two major steps that involve the formation
of an acyl-enzyme intermediate (acylation) followed by the
hydrolytic release of products in the following stage
(deacylation) (Figure 4). The acylation step involves several
consecutive reactions. First, a proton is transferred from the
catalytic Ser225 to His528, followed by a nucleophilic attack
and the formation of an O−C bond between Ser225 and the
carbonyl of MHET. This is followed by the cleavage of the
MHET ester bond, facilitated by the formation of a short-lived
tetrahedral intermediate. Free energy calculations have
estimated free energy barriers for the acylation step of 13.09
± 0.17,
56
9.42 ± 0.13,
63
and 10.7 ± 3.4 kcal/mol.
64
The collapse of the first tetrahedral intermediate then leads
to the release of EG, which had remained in stable interaction
with His528, and the formation of an acyl-enzyme
intermediate.
56,63
The release of EG, which has a high propensity to naturally
and quickly diffuse to the solvent as shown by short classical
molecular dynamics simulations,
56,63
allows access of bulk
waters to the active site and subsequent deprotonation of a
nearby water molecule by His528, followed by the nucleophilic
attack of the water hydroxyl group to the carbonyl group of
MHET, resulting in the formation of a second tetrahedral
intermediate. This nucleophilic attack and the collapse of this
second tetrahedral intermediate then yields TPA. The proton
is transferred from His528 to Ser225, regenerating the active
site for the next catalytic cycle. In all three studies, this
deacylation step was found to be rate-limiting, with free energy
barriers of 19.8 ± 0.10,
56
19.35 ± 0.15,
63
and 25.3 ± 3.40 kcal/
mol.
64
Mle046. Mle046 is a MHETase-like enzyme from an
uncultured bacterium identified in metagenomic data from a
poly(butylene adipate-co-terephthalate) (PBAT)-enriched ma-
rine microbial consortium, most likely belonging to an
Alphaproteobacterial plasmid. Mle046 was found to be
upregulated in the metatranscriptome of their sample through
most of the time series, highly expressed in both film-attached
and free-living microbial communities. The authors describe its
putative role in the degradation of a PBAT-based film, where
periplasmic hydrolases break down the film into oligomers and
monoesters of mono(hydroxybutyl) terephthalate, which is
broken down by Mle046 into terephthalic acid and 1,4-
butanediol, akin to the biological degradation of PET plastic.
66
Mle046 is a mesophilic enzyme sharing approximately 47%
identity with IsMHETase, with a theoretical molecular mass of
approximately 60 kDa. The enzyme rapidly degrades MHET to
TPA and EG at temperatures varying between 20 and 40 °C,
and still retains a considerable amount of activity at a wide
range of temperatures: the enzyme exhibits approximately 50%
activity at 5 °C (making it a cold-active enzyme) and still
retains some activity even at 60 °C, substrate concentrations,
and pH conditions. Mle046 kinetics were shown to follow a
Michaelis−Menten curve with concentrations up to 2.23 mM,
with K
M
and k
cat
values estimated to be 2.63 ± 0.797 mM and
80.9 ± 15.8 s
−1
, respectively, at 30 °C. Although its affinity for
MHET was lower than that of IsMHETase, the turnover rate
of MHET by Mle046 was considerably higher; due to this
discrepancy, the catalytic efficiency of Mle046 is indeed lower
than that of WT IsMHETase, but in similar order of magnitude
to homologous MHET hydrolytic enzymes.
67
Candidatus Bathyarcheota PET46. PET46 is an archaeal
promiscuous feruloyl esterase encoded in a marine Bathy-
archaeota metagenome-assembled genome. This monomeric
enzyme also shares the canonical α/β-hydrolase fold: eight β-
strands connected by seven α-helices comprise the core of the
enzyme, while three α-helices and two antiparallel β-strands
make up the 45 amino acid residues-long lid domain. Despite
low sequence identity, the structure of PET46 superimposes
relatively well with IsPETase and LCC, with the largest
differences being the presence of a lid domain in the former, as
well as extended and truncated loops between β
4
and α
3
and
β
10
and α
10
(which carries the His residue of the catalytic
triad), respectively. The enzyme also lacks a residue equivalent
to Trp185 in IsPETase or Trp190 in LCC, suggesting that the
lid domain of PET46 is responsible for the aromatic clamping
needed for effective substrate binding and stabilization. As
such, Perez-Garcia et al.
68
constructed a lidless variant of
PET46 replacing it for the Trp185-carrying loop from
IsPETase and incubated both the WT, the lidless variant,
and three single-point mutants (A46V, A140I, and K147A) at
30, 60, and 70 °C to assess its PET hydrolytic activity.
WT PET46, as well as the K147A and A46V variants,
degraded all PET trimers to MHET and TPA within the first 3
h of reaction, with the latter producing 3.2 times more
products at 30 °C than the WT enzyme during the first 24 h.
As PET46 is classified as a feruloyl esterase and it was shown
to degrade both BHET and MHET, the authors propose that
the enzyme degrades PET through an exo-PETase mechanism,
where hydrolysis happens at the extremity of the polymer
chain, where the PET trimer is cleaved to MHET units that are
subsequently converted to TPA and EG. The enzyme was
inactive on PET foil, but incubation of 3 μM enzyme with
semicrystalline PET powder released 1624.14 μM aromatic
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46226
products after 3 days at 60 °C, 99% of which was TPA
(corresponding to 3.38% conversion). The PET hydrolytic
activity of PET46 was comparable to that of LCC, but its
BHETase and MHETase functions were remarkably superior.
At 70 °C, PET46 was 40.9 and 215.7% more active on BHET
than IsPETase at 30 °C and LCC at 50 °C, respectively. With
MHET as the substrate, PET46 was up to 27.7 and 86.3%
more active than the reference enzymes.
68
Geobacillus stearothermophilus KL-MHETase (G.
stearothermophilus Est30). KL-MHETase is a computa-
tionally designed MHET hydrolase, based on a search in the
PDB structural database for thermophilic scaffolds with
promiscuous activity toward MHET hydrolysis, followed by
the computational redesign of their active site. Zhang et al.
69
experimentally confirmed the activity of five thermophilic
scaffolds at 50 °C, and selected a carboxylesterase (Est30)
from G. stearothermophilus for in silico redesign as the WT
enzyme showed 1.33 times higher MHET hydrolytic activity
than FAST-PETase, and its PET degradation activity reached
1/7 that of FAST-PETase, indicative of its high specificity
toward MHET.
Est30 is a thermophilic carboxylesterase with optimal
hydrolysis of short acyl ester chains at 70 °C. The enzyme,
comprising approximately 247 amino acid residues, folds into
two domains�the larger core α/β-hydrolase domain compris-
ing seven mostly parallel central β-strands surrounded by six α-
helices, and a smaller lid domain consisting of three α-helices.
The binding domain is located in the interface between both
domains, containing the catalytic triad formed by Ser94-
His223-Asp193 and the oxyanion holes comprising Phe25 and
Leu95. The binding site extends on both sides of the catalytic
serine in a groove located in the interface between the lid and
hydrolase domains and befits a polar ligand.
70
To obtain more active variants of Est30, the active site of the
enzyme was redesigned to stabilize the catalytically productive
transition state conformation of MHET to tightly bind the
carboxyl terminus of the tetrahedral intermediate through the
construction of a hydrogen bonding network. Mutants were
screened, optimized and selected through high-throughput
molecular dynamics simulations, and a total of 14 variants were
selected for experimental validation of their MHET hydrolytic
activities at 50 °C. KL-MHETase (also labeled M8,
Est30
I171K/G130L
) achieved 36-fold higher catalytic activity
than WT Est30, mainly due to an enhanced catalytic rate
(from k
cat
= 1.17 s
−1
to k
cat
= 21.43 s
−1
), as well as its stability
at 50 °C, retaining 75% of its initial activity after 96 h of
incubation, making it most compatible with engineered PET
hydrolytic enzymes such as FAST-PETase.
69,71
The most active variant, M14, included the additional
mutation M127S, but its melting temperature was considerably
lower (63.29 °C) than M8 (67.58 °C). All three mutations are
located in the lid domain of Est30; I117 K and M127S provide
additional hydrogen bonding partners to the carboxyl moiety
of MHET but potentially disrupt the hydrophobic surrounding
environment and thus slightly hinder its thermostability, while
G130L enhances hydrophobic stacking effect with the benzene
ring of MHET to stabilize the substrate in catalytic geometry.
Maribacter sp. Carboxylesterase (MarCE). MarCE is
carboxylic acid hydrolase with a molecular mass of 58 kDa
identified in a Maribacter sp. strain previously isolated from the
marine sponge Stelligera stuposa, shown to possess hydrolytic
activities against polyesters such as tributyrin, polycaprolactone
diol, and polycaprolactone.
72,73
MarCE shares approximately
72.90 and 70.76% similarity to BsEstB and Tf Ca, respectively,
although its mean identity with the latter is relatively low
(27.08%).
Considering the similarity between these enzymes, Carr et
al.
72
performed the molecular docking of BHET into the active
site of an AlphaFold model of MarCE, followed by
superimposition of the predicted structure with a crystallo-
graphic structure of Tf Ca. MarCE is structurally similar to
other α/β-hydrolases, featuring 12 mixed central β-sheets,
although its lid domains are smaller. This mesophilic enzyme
was shown to be active on BHET via incubation with 2 mM of
the substrate at 30 °C for 2 h, yielding 1.28 mM MHET and
0.12 mM TPA.
72
Bacillus subtilis PET-86 (BsEst) and Chryseobacterium
sp. PET-29 (ChryBHETase). Both enzymes were identified
from the environment through enzymatic mining from the
collection and processing of 50 samples from reuse landfills,
including postconsumer PET waste and surrounding soil. In
their comprehensive study, Li et al.
74
used diethyl tereph-
thalate as a model substrate to screen for potential PET-
degrading microorganisms. In vitro characterization of these
two enzymes with PET powder, BHET, and p-nitrophenyl
esters further revealed their preference for BHET as a substrate
compared to aliphatic esters. Furthermore, the BsEst enzyme
identified in this study shares 97.5% identity with Bs2Est and
37.21% with Tf Ca, while ChryBHETase shares 25.55, 24.66,
12.41, and 14.31% with Bs2Est, Tf Ca, IsPETase, and
IsMHETase, respectively.
The authors performed molecular dynamics simulations of
both enzymes in the absence and of BHET (dispersed within
the solvation box) and observed that water molecules tended
to accumulate within the substrate binding cleft between the
lid domain and the α/β-hydrolase domain of both enzymes,
which could possibly block the larger BHET molecule. Based
on this, Li et al.
74
developed variants of BsEst and
ChryBHETase by truncating “barrier regions” and replacing
them with flexible glycine−glycine linkers, and both ΔBsEst
and ΔChryBHETase variants exhibited improved catalytic
activity than their corresponding wild-types: ΔBsEst had a 2-
fold improvement in BHET conversion compared to WT
BsEst, while ΔChryBHETase achieved over 90% TPA yield
from BHET within 12 h, translating into 3.5-fold and 1.5-fold
enhancements in catalytic efficiency, respectively, and meaning
that these enzymes likely cleave BHET into MHET and
MHET into TPA.
74
■
IMPROVING PET DEGRADATION THROUGH
ENZYMATIC COCKTAILS
In recent studies, the synergistic cooperation of functionally
complementary enzymes in the degradation of PET has been
extensively showcased. PET hydrolases generally exhibit
significantly hydrophobic active sites, highly receptive to
polymeric or oligomeric molecules.
77,78
As a result, com-
paratively smaller intermediates still bind tightly to these
enzymes, but the noncatalytic binding pose either slows down
hydrolysis or effectively functionally inhibits the enzymatic
reaction, leading to reduced catalytic turnover.
69
This non-
productive inhibition, distinct from classical allosteric effects,
stems from the inability of a given enzyme to efficiently
convert intermediate products (particularly MHET), resulting
in accumulation of intermediate products and decreasing
polymer-to-monomer conversion yields.
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46227
For instance, although thermophilic cutinases are among the
most efficient PET-degrading enzymes, even the benchmark
LCC (and its engineered variant LCC
ICCG
) do not hydrolyze
MHET at a fast enough rate, leading to its accumulation in the
reaction system and diminished overall depolymerization
rates.
79−81
Arnal et al.
82
compared the catalytic hydrolysis of
four engineered PET hydrolases with an industrial scale-up in
mind. While LCC
ICCG
outperformed HotPETase,
83
FAST-
PETase,
71
and PES-H1
L92F/Q94Y
,
84
depolymerizing 97% of
16.5% (w/w) postconsumer waste PET into TPA and EG in
24 h at 68 °C, the authors note that 79% depolymerization was
achieved in just 6 h, highlighting that most of the remaining
time was devoted to the slower hydrolysis of MHET. Barth et
al.
85
also found binding constants of 0.568 L·mmol
−1
for
MHET and 0.550 L·mmol
−1
for BHET as “competitive
inhibitors” of Tf Cut2, but a significantly lower degradability
of MHET. Thus, by incorporating an enzyme that can remove
the intermediate product MHET from the system, it is possible
to alleviate the observed functional inhibition of PET
conversion systems mainly caused by the accumulation of
intermediate products.
Although hydrolysis of BHET by Tf Ca is 500 times faster
than that of MHET,
28
immobilized Tf Ca has been used in
conjunction with free Thermobifida fusca KW3 cutinase
(Tf Cut2) and LCC at 60 °C over a reaction time of 24 h.
86
While 60 °C was shown to be the optimal temperature for the
hydrolysis of PET trimers, the enzyme rapidly loses activity in
these conditions.
27
Immobilization of Tf Ca on SulfoLink resin,
therefore, should supposedly increase its stability in dual
enzyme systems for a longer period of time. The inclusion of
immobilized Tf Ca in the reaction system resulted in a 2.4-fold
higher release of products from the degradation of amorphous
PET film in combination with LCC than with Tf Cut2, or a 91
and 104% increase in the total amounts of products (as the
sum of BHET, MHET, and TPA) released in combination
with Tf Cut2 and LCC, respectively. Amounts of MHET in the
reaction system were observed to decrease proportionally to
the amount of immobilized Tf Ca, while BHET contributed
only 1% of the total amount of hydrolysis products.
86
von
Haugwitz et al.
28
also incubated both WT Tf Ca and the
engineered variant Tf Ca WA with a thermostable penta
mutant of IsPETase
87
in dual enzyme systems to degrade PET
nanoparticles, crystalline PET powder, and amorphous PET
film at 45 °C. When only the IsPETase variant was used,
MHET was the main product independently from the initial
amount of PET nanoparticles, but the inclusion of WT Tf Ca
or Tf Ca WA enabled the full conversion of MHET into TPA.
For each type of PET-based substrate (nanoparticles, powder,
and film), final TPA yield increased by 8.3, 14, and 11-fold
when Tf Ca was used in combination with the IsPETase penta
mutant.
28
To evaluate the efficiency of the synergistic cooperation of
both I. sakaiensis enzymes, Knott et al.
56
conducted a study
comparing the overall activity of free IsPETase, IsMHETase,
and chimeric IsPETase:IsMHETase proteins in two-enzyme
systems. While overall degradation rates scaled with IsPETase
loading, the mere inclusion of IsMHETase in the reaction
system results in a significant improvement of depolymeriza-
tion, even without increasing the IsPETase loading. The degree
of improvement in depolymerization was found to be
proportional to the amount of IsMHETase added to the
reaction system. Furthermore, IsPETase:IsMHETase chimeric
proteins, connected by glycine-serine peptide linkers of varying
lengths, also exhibited even greater performance than the free
enzymes in mixed reaction systems, outperforming IsPETase,
and demonstrating higher catalytic activity toward MHET,
likely due to the greater availability of nearby catalytic sites
arising from the proximity between the MHET released in the
first step and the linked IsMHETase, and the promotion of
substrate channeling.
As a semicrystalline thermoplastic polymer, PET contains
both crystalline and amorphous regions, characterized by
highly ordered, uniformly packed molecules and randomly
arranged molecular chains, respectively. Previous research has
indicated that enzymatic hydrolysis of the amorphous regions
of PET is highly favored by PET hydrolases due to amplified
chain mobility.
88
The application of thermophilic and
engineered thermostable enzymes over mesophilic counter-
parts is also seen as favored due to the enhanced mobility of
PET polymer chains at the glass transition temperature (T
g
),
resulting in higher degradation rates.
89
To enhance the
performance of the PET degradation process, Chen et al.
90
utilized the SpyTag/SpyCatcher system
91
to coimmobilize a
thermostable variant of IsPETase, named DuraPETase, and
WT IsMHETase in calcium phosphate nanocrystals. The
DuraPETase variant has a reported melting temperature 31 °C
higher than WT IsPETase and exhibits a 300-fold increase in
semicrystalline PET degradation at mild temperatures.
92
The
authors reported similar results to those observed by Knott et
al.:
56
the coimmobilized enzymes showed higher degradation
efficiency than the free two-enzyme system, and immobiliza-
tion also helped to maintain the stability and activity of the
enzymes for a longer period of time. The PET degradation
efficiencies of the coimmobilized system were 9.7 and 5.2-fold
higher than those of the free enzyme system at 40 and 50 °C
after 6 days, respectively. At 40 °C, all the MHET released by
DuraPETase was hydrolyzed into TPA. At 50 °C and higher,
however, a significant accumulation of MHET was reported
due to both WT IsMHETase inability to match the
degradation efficiency of DuraPETase at higher temperatures
and its poor tolerance to elevated temperatures, highlighting
the need for further studies into the development of
thermostable IsMHETase variants for practical biotechnolog-
ical applications.
Aside from temperature conditions in which enzymatic
degradation reactions are carried out, the pretreatment of PET
via amorphization to reduce the degree of crystallinity of the
polymer is also believed to be a way to improve the efficiency
of said process. A study conducted by Tarazona et al.
93
offers
an approach to evaluate how mechanisms such as surface
amorphization, the plasticizing effects of water on the
polymeric substrate, and the difference between the T
g
on
the surface layer in comparison to the T
g
in the polymer bulk
can affect the biocatalysis process mediated by PET hydrolases.
The authors also studied the synergism between a IsPETase
triple mutant
87
and IsMHETase
W397A
. Among their findings,
the authors describe that the addition of IsMHETase
W397A
increases the degradation of thin PET films by approximately
20%, and the reaction proceeds five times faster at 50 °C in
comparison to the two-enzyme system at 40 °C. However, the
enzymes denatured rapidly at 60 °C.
The authors also reinforce that two of the main factors
affecting the depolymerization rates of PET polymer are the
deposition of deactivated enzymes on its surface blocking
further degradation of the PET film and product inhibition.
The addition of MHET hydrolytic enzymes mitigates the latter
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46228
for the most part, but the development of systems focused on
continuous removal of released products and inactivated
enzymes�or extending their activity, such as through
immobilization�seems to be an interesting avenue.
Han et al.
94
constructed an engineered bacteria using cell-
surface display of several PET hydrolases using different
anchor proteins for the hydrolytic treatment of PET plastics.
Cell-surface display of proteins involves the fusion of the
terminus of a protein of interest with an anchoring protein,
95
so that the target protein will be expressed on the cell
membrane. The codisplayed IsMHETase and recently
developed FAST-PETase variant
71
system, using PgsA anchor
protein on the surface of Escherichia coli, exhibited the highest
PET hydrolysis rate. Notably, the order of the fused proteins
C-terminus end also had influence on the makeup of hydrolysis
products, with either FAST-PETase or IsMHETase located on
the C-terminus leading to higher PET hydrolysis and MHET
hydrolysis, respectively, likely due to enzyme contact with the
substrate. Nevertheless, corroborating previous findings, the
authors point out that regardless of which enzyme was located
on the C-terminal, the combined FAST-PETase:IsMHETase
system showed higher hydrolytic capabilities than the PET
hydrolase alone due to the alleviation of the decline in
hydrolysis caused by the release and accumulation of the
reaction product.
Zhang et al.
69
also combined FAST-PETase
71
with the
computationally designed KL-MHETase for the depolymeriza-
tion of postconsumer bottle grade PET powder over 24 h of
reaction at 50 °C at various enzyme concentrations. The
authors observed that the sum of products from the conversion
of PET scaled with FAST-PETase loading, but the
concentration of TPA in total products depended on KL-
MHETase loading; however, efficient conversion of PET
decreased with increased KL-MHETase loading due to the
latter blocking the substrate-binding cleft of FAST-PETase.
Nevertheless, maximum TPA yield was found on a 2:6 ratio
between KL-MHETase and FAST-PETase loading. Similarly
to the dual-enzyme system constructed by Knott et al.,
56
the
authors engineered fusion enzymes connected by flexible
glycine and serine linkers of varying lengths (20, 28, and 36
residues) as well a rigid linker (4 residues) to covalently link
the C-terminal of KL-MHETase to the N-terminal of FAST-
PETase. The PET degradation activity of these fusion enzymes
was significantly dependent on the linking order between
enzymes, the specific amino acid sequence of the linkers, and
their lengths. The composition of TPA in the final products
increased to 99.5% with a 36 residues-long linker (KL36F),
1.47-fold higher than when FAST-PETase was used alone.
Increasing the size of PET powder also increased its
conversion rate, and the catalytic rate of the fusion enzyme
KL36F was 52.6-fold higher than that of FAST-PETase with
regard to MHET hydrolysis. The authors also compared the
performance of FAST-PETase and the fusion enzyme in higher
concentrations and volume of PET. The purity of TPA again
exceeded 99%, while MHET concentration in the single
enzyme system reached up to 20 mM (5 times higher), leading
to accumulation and stagnant conversion of PET due to
product inhibition. In summary, these studies show that
controlling the complex structure of dual enzyme systems
through the introduction of a peptide linker between enzymes
can alleviate effects from steric hindrance and protein−protein
interactions.
Li et al.
74
combined engineered variants ΔBsEst and
ΔChryBHETase with several thermophilic PET hydrolases,
including DepoPETase, FAST-PETase, DuraPETase, Thermo-
PETase, LCC, and LCC
ICCG
, as well as the mesophilic WT
IsPETase. In all cases, dual enzyme systems resulted in
substantially higher release of TPA compared to PET
hydrolases alone, where significant accumulation of BHET
and MHET could be detected even after 96 h at 60 °C.
Specifically, as the authors point out, the DepoPETase-ΔBsEst,
FAST-PETase-ΔBsEst, and FAST-PETase-ΔChryBHETase
combinations yielded 1.8, 2.0, and 1.6-fold more TPA than
any of the IsPETase variants in single-enzyme systems.
Lu et al.
96
developed a sequential reaction system using a
previously engineered variant of Thermobifida alba AHK119
cutinase
19
(muEst1) in combination with KL-MHETase. First,
PET was fully depolymerized by muEst1 at 65 °C for 48 h,
followed by 12 h of KL-MHETase-mediated degradation of
released intermediate products at a temperature of 50 °C, so
that both enzymes could operate at their optimal temperatures.
Therefore, multistage cascade reactions could also be
considered to overcome the challenges of different reactions
conditions of PET and BHET/MHET hydrolases to the in
tandem use of synergistic enzymes.
■
MICROBIAL METABOLISM OF PET DEGRADATION
PRODUCTS
To develop biotechnological methods for the upcycling of PET
and other materials, it is essential to understand the pathways
through which bacteria can convert complex, recalcitrant
substrates into metabolites. This involves elucidating the
structures and characterizing the biochemical mechanisms and
pathways involved in the process.
97
As discussed throughout
this review, the depolymerization of PET typically yields
soluble intermediates. These lower molecular weight products
can cross the bacterial cell wall and diffuse into the periplasm
or cytoplasm, where specific hydrolases can further catalyze
their conversion into the fundamental PET monomers: TPA
and EG.
52
Although TPA is similar to plant-derived aromatic
compounds, it is not a very common substrate used for
bacterial growth. I. sakaiensis was found to harbor a gene
cluster significantly similar to two gene clusters identified in
Comamonas sp. E6,
52
which has served as an archetypal
degrader of plastic-derived monomers, and has been shown to
be capable of utilizing phthalate isomers as sole carbon and
energy sources.
98
This gene cluster in I. sakaiensis corresponds
to two sets of protein homologues in Comamonas sp. E6 that
contribute to the TPA to protocatechuic acid (PCA)
conversion pathway, namely the tphR transcription factor,
the tphC TPA periplasmic binding receptor, the tphA1
reductase and tphA2A3 oxygenase components of terephthalic
acid dioxygenase (TPADO), and the 1,2-dihydroxy-3,5-cyclo-
hexadiene-1,4-dicarboxylate (DCD) dehydrogenase.
99
As
shown in Scheme 1, TPA resulting from the cleavage of
MHET is transported to the cytoplasm where TPADO,
together with its cognate reductase, dihydroxylate and
dearomatize TPA into DCD. Zinc-dependent DCD dehydro-
genase then decarboxylates the substrate to ultimately yield
PCA.
97
There are three characterized pathways for the further
degradation of PCA depending on the location of the initial
ring-opening oxidation before it can be assimilated into the
tricarboxylic acid cycle by organisms catabolizing aromatic
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46229
compounds, namely the 3,4-ortho, 2,3-meta, and 4,5-meta
cleavage pathways (Scheme 2).
100
Yoshida et al.
52
further
describe the presence of a set of genes whose products share
52 and 60% identity with the α- and β-subunits of PCA 3,4-
dioxygenase (pcaHG) from Pseudomonas putida, suggesting
that the metabolism of PCA by I. sakaiensis might follow the
same route, with pcaHG starting the conversion of PCA to 3-
carboxy-cis,cis-muconate (β-carboxymuconate) which con-
verges to β-ketoadipate and ultimately yields succinate and
acetyl-CoA.
101
Conversely, the para-cleavage pathway of PCA initiated by
2,3-dioxygenase (PraA) begins with the conversion of PCA
into 5-carboxy-2-hydroxymuconate-6-semialdehyde
(5CHMS), followed by decarboxylation and dehydrogenation
by 5CHMS decarboxylase (PraH) and HMS dehydrogenase
(PraB), to yield pyruvate and acetyl-CoA.
102
Similarly, in the
4,5-cleavage pathway, PCA is first converted to 4-carboxy-2-
hydroxymuconate-6-semialdehyde (4CHMS) by 4,5-dioxyge-
nase (PmdAB), and is then spontaneously converted to an
intramolecular hemiacetal form before undergoing oxidation
by 4CHMS dehydrogenase to produce 2-pyrone-4,6-dicarbox-
ylate (PDC), and ultimately yields pyruvate and oxaloace-
tate.
103,104
EG is a natural product that can be metabolized by many
microorganisms via two distinct pathways. In acetogens and in
a few anaerobic organisms, EG is first dehydrated to
acetaldehyde likely by the PduC subunit of 1,2-propanediol
dehydrogenase, which is either reduced using nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide (NADH) or oxidized in a CoA-
dependent reaction by propionaldehyde dehydrogenase
(PduP), thereby transferring electrons onto NAD
+
, and
disproportionating aldehyde into ethanol and acetyl-CoA.
105
Ethanol can then be oxidated to acetate in a second step, and
this pathway is linked to adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and
NADH production (Scheme 3A).
106
In contrast, in the
pathway of bacteria such as P. putida and I. sakaiensis, EG is
oxidized into glycolaldehyde by a set of periplasmic
pyrroloquinoline quinone alcohol dehydrogenases (PedE and
PedH, as well as XoxF in I. sakaiensis), which is further
oxidized by an aldehyde dehydrogenase (PedI) into glycolate.
The latter is then converted into glyoxylate by a glycolate
oxidase (GlcDEF).
107
Finally, glyoxylate can be converted into
glycerate and then pyruvate (Scheme 3B), which is then
converted into acetyl-CoA by enzymes of the pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex before entering the tricarboxylic acid
cycle.
108,109
■
APPROACHES FOR THE VALORIZATION AND
UPCYCLING OF PET WASTE
In different industries, genes of heterologous enzymes are
being introduced into microbial hosts with increased frequency
and, depending on the complexity of the metabolic pathway or
the target product, they can enable the up-cycling and
production of valued-added substances from cheap or recycled
feedstock.
110
Loll-Krippleber et al.
111
developed a whole-cell
biocatalyst using the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a chassis
for the expression of IsMHETase and the conversion of
MHET into TPA and EG, without the need to purify the
expressed MHET hydrolytic enzyme. Further direct biode-
gradation of PET by artificial microbial consortia has also been
explored using synthetic biology. A four-species microbial
consortium was constructed with two engineered B. subtilis
strains that could secrete heterologous PETase and MHETase
from I. sakaiensis, accompanied by TPA and EG-uptaking
Rhondococcus jostii RHA1 and P. putida KT2440, respectively.
The use of microbial consortia can reduce the metabolic
burden compared to the utilization of a single microorganism
and alleviate effects resulting from product inhibition, as shown
by a 17.6% improvement in PET film weight loss compared to
the two engineered B. subtilis species alone within 3 days.
112
Moreover, Moog et al.
113
successfully expressed IsPETase
using the marine microalga Phaeodactylum tricornutum and
found that the secreted engineered IsPETase was able to
maintain its PET depolymerizing activity in a saltwater-based
environment even at low mesophilic temperatures, which could
serve as a proof of concept and potentially pave the way for
bioremediation of microplastics present in polluted waters.
The recent discovery of marine PET, BHET, and MHET
hydrolases could also reinforce this idea given the complex
marine environment.
66,68,72,113
Strains of P. putida (GO16, GO19) and P. frederikbergensis
GO23 have been studied for their ability to metabolize EG and
TPA derivatives. Their role in the upcycling of PET into the
biodegradable polymer polyhydroxyalkanoate (PHA) has been
demonstrated before.
114
In that study, waste PET was
pyrolyzed to produce TPA (while the remaining fractions
were incinerated for energy recovery), which served as
feedstock for bacterial growth and production of PHA. This
polymer is a range of diverse polyesters of (R)-3-
hydroxyalkanoic acids, typically produced by specific Gram-
positive or Gram-negative bacteria in the form of cytoplasmic
inclusions as a way to store carbon under specific growth
conditions or as a response to a range of environmental
stresses.
115
The intrinsic properties displayed by PHA-based
plastic films have attracted interest to a range of applications,
including food packaging.
116
Fujiwara et al.
117
reported the identification of a gene cluster
in I. sakaiensis encoding enzymes highly similar to those
produced by Cupriavidus necator H16, known for producing
and accumulating great quantities of poly(3-hydroxybutyrate)
(PHB).
118
The gene cluster comprising phaC, phaA, and phaB
(encoding PHA synthase, β-ketothiolase, and acetoacetyl-CoA
reductase, respectively) is crucial for converting acetyl-CoA
into PHAs. After optimization of cultivation conditions of I.
sakaiensis, the bacteria was shown to accumulate PHA from
PET up to 48 ± 5% of dry cell weight, equivalent to a PHA
titer of 0.75 ± 0.09 g/L, mostly in the form of methyl 3-
hydroxybutyrate and trace amounts of 3-hydroxyvalerate.
117
Scheme 1. Conversion of TPA to PCA
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46230
Similarly, Werner et al.
119
used a set of sequential genetic
engineering efforts in P. putida KT2440 to design a whole-cell
biocatalyst to enable the conversion of PET hydrolysis
products into β-ketoadipate through the incorporation of a
TPA catabolism pathway sourced from Comamonas sp. E6 and
a transporter from R. jostii. The authors depolymerized PET
into BHET via chemocatalytic glycolysis using EG and
titanium butoxide and constructed a P. putida strain expressing
both IsPETase and IsMHETase (strain RC038) to further
enzymatically convert BHET into TPA and EG. As mentioned
earlier, P. putida strains metabolize PCA through the 3,4-
cleavage pathway. By deleting the pcaIJ genes (generating
strain AW165) that encode the two subunits of 3-oxoadipate-
CoA-transferase, the authors enabled the accumulation of β-
ketoadipate, which can be reacted with hexamethyl diamide to
produce a polyamide analogous to nylon-6,6 with higher
Scheme 2. PCA Metabolism through the 2,3-meta (Green), 3,4-ortho (Blue), and 4,5-meta Cleavage Pathways
a
a
5CHMS, 5-carboxy-2-hydroxymuconate-6-semialdehyde; HMS, 2-hydroxymuconate-6-semialdehyde; HMA, 2-hydroxymuconate; OCA, 4-
oxolacrotonate; HPD, 2-hydroxypenta-2,4-dienoate; HOV, 4-hydroxy-2-oxovalerate; βCM, β-carboxymuconate; CML, carboxymuconolactone;
ML, muconolactone; βKAP, β-ketoadipic acid; 3OA-CoA, 3-oxoadipyl-CoA; 4CHMS, 4-carboxy-2-hydroxymuconate-6-semialdehyde; PDC, 2-
pyrone-4,6-dicarboxylate; OMA, 4-oxalomesaconate (keto and enol forms); CHA, 4-carboxy-4-hydroxy-2-oxoadipate.
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46231
molecular weight, glass transition temperature, and melting
temperature than nylon-6,6 produced from adipic acid under
similar conditions.
119,120
However, medium supplementation with glucose was
necessary to support cell growth. The previous engineered P.
putida strain was further optimized via the combined
heterologous expression of the dcaAKIJP operon (encoding
initial uptake and activation steps for dicarboxylates) from
Acinetobacter baylyi and deletion of genes encoding native
repressors of phenylacetate catabolism (PaaX) and β-oxidation
reactions (PsrA).
121
The resulting P. putida strain (AW162)
was able to selectively grow on mixed polystyrene, high-density
polyethylene, and PET plastic monomers derived from metal-
promoted oxidation and utilized both the aromatic and
aliphatic substrates during growth. Similarly, the deletion of
pcaIJ genes in strain AW162 (resulting in strain AW307) also
enabled the production of PHA by cultivation in nitrogen-
limited medium.
122
Also inspired by the metabolic pathway present in I.
sakaiensis, Sadler et al.
123
developed an in vivo enzymatic
pathway for the production of vanillin through the micro-
biological fermentation of TPA by an engineered Escherichia
coli strain expressing enzymes comprising two pathways,
divided in two plasmids. The first plasmid encoded TPADO
and DCD dehydrogenase from Comamonas sp., while the
second plasmid encoded a carboxylic acid reductase from
Nocardia iowensis and a single-point mutant catechol O-
methyltransferase with improved stereoselectivity from Rattus
norvegicus. Initial PET hydrolysis was mediated by LCC, and
authors reported up to 79% conversion of released TPA into
vanillin through the biotechnological vanillin production
pathway, equating 785 μM. One of the main limiting
conditions for TPA conversion was cell permeability, as E.
coli lacks a TPA transporter to import the substrate into the
cytosol; the use of n-butanol and a pH condition of 5.5 were
successful in improving the diffusion of TPA to the cellular
interior. Furthermore, while LCC is indeed capable of releasing
TPA directly, we hypothesize that the heterogeneous product
solution arising from the slower hydrolysis of MHET by this
enzyme could be remediated with the incorporation of
corresponding MHET hydrolytic enzymes, potentially increas-
ing final TPA and vanillin yields.
Besides the given examples, the usage of whole-cell
biocatalysts engineered to express the metabolic enzymes
necessary for the bioconversion of TPA has enabled the
conversion of this substrate into added-value products such as
gallic acid, pyrogallol, catechol, and muconic acid from
PCA.
45,124
Conversely, besides its application as a precursor of PET,
EG has direct uses mainly as an antifreeze agent, but EG holds
promise as an alternative carbon source or feedstock for the
microbial synthesis of several products. For example, EG can
undergo fermentation by Gluconobacter oxidans KCCM 40109
to yield glycolic acid, a common exfoliant with widespread use
in the cosmetic industry.
124
Like TPA, metabolic engineering efforts have also allowed
the production of PHA from EG. Although P. putida KT2440
harbors the genetic framework necessary to metabolize EG, it
is not able to naturally do it efficiently. Franden et al.
125
elucidated the metabolic pathway to enable its growth on EG
via the overexpression of glyoxylate carboligase (gcl) in
combination with other genes in proximity transcribed as an
operon (hydroxypyruvate isomerase (hyi), tartronate semi-
aldehyde reductase (glxR), hydroxypyruavte reductase (ttuD),
and pyruvate kinase (pykF)). The resulting strain (MFL185)
showed increased growth rate and biomass yield on EG with
little accumulation of glycolate and undetectable levels of
glycolaldehyde. Furthermore, as a proof of concept, the
engineered strain was cultured in nitrogen-limited conditions
in M9 medium supplemented with 100 mM of EG as the only
carbon source, and the authors confirmed the production of
medium-chain-length PHA at a yield of 0.06 g of mcl-PHA per
g of substrate.
EG can also be used as a carbon substrate for the production
of aromatic chemicals. Using a previously engineered O
2
-
tolerant E. coli variant (conferred by the introduction of two
point mutations on 1,2-propanediol oxidoreductase (fucO))
with improved growth on EG and overexpression of
glycolaldehyde dehydrogenase (aldA) for more efficient
oxidation of EG to glycolate as a basis for further genetic
modifications,
126
Panda et al.
127
deleted two genes (ΔtyrR and
ΔpheA) to alleviate the repression on L -tyrosine production
and stop L -phenylalanine (a byproduct) formation, respec-
tively. Additional introduction of a plasmid overexpressing the
feedback-resistant operon aroG and feedback-resistant tyrA
allowed the efficient transformation of EG into L -tyrosine,
outperforming the standard sugar feedstock glucose under the
same optimized fermentation conditions. Furthermore, com-
parable titers of L -tyrosine were obtained using EG derived
Scheme 3. EG Metabolism in Microbes
a
a
(A) Anaerobic catabolism of EG in the acetogenic bacterium
Acetobacterium woodi; (B) Sequential oxidation of EG to glycolate.
For reference, the metabolic pathways in P. putida and E. coli are
depicted in red and orange, respectively. Genes in the glycerate
pathway are colored brown.
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46232
from acid hydrolysis of PET waste bottles to that yielded by
the utilization of commercial EG.
■
SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK
PET hydrolytic enzymes can conventionally be classified as
either true PET hydrolases or PET surface-modifying enzymes
based on the extent of (bulk) polymer degradation they can
achieve. In this classification, thermophilic cutinases comprise
most of the former group, while the latter can still generally
partially degrade PET. We hypothesize that these enzymes can
find applications in PET biodegradation by further degrading
released oligomeric molecules, remediating the heterogeneous
products profile of PET hydrolases and increasing overall
reaction efficiency by mitigating intermediate product
inhibition, as well as enabling the recovery of the original
building blocks of PET plastic.
The synergistic cooperation of complementary PET hydro-
lases and MHET/BHET hydrolases, whether through free
enzyme systems or approaches like enzyme immobilization and
fusion proteins, has demonstrated significant improvements in
PET depolymerization efficiency. However, the development
of thermostable enzyme variants and the refinement of dual-
enzymes systems hold promise for creating more efficient and
scalable would likely be necessary to keep these enzymes on
par with thermophilic, highly effective PET hydrolases in terms
of performance.
Furthermore, in the past decade, much effort has been
directed to develop PET biodegradation systems. Quite a few
start-up enterprises have been established, such as CARBIOS
(France) and BreakPET (Mexico), providing the enzymatic
degradation of PET as an alternative to conventional recycling
methods. The elucidation of full enzymatic pathways for the
assimilation of PET building blocks into bacterial metabolism
has taken us a stage further, enabling the utilization of
microorganisms to potentially generate sustainable chemicals
and materials out of plastic waste via strategies such as
metabolic engineering, synthetic biology, and precision
fermentation.
Given the ubiquitous presence of plastic waste in the
environment as a major marker of the Anthropocene, concern
over the mismanagement of postconsumer plastic waste has
grown rapidly. Recent developments in alternative recycling
methods such as enzymatic biocatalysis are encouraging, but
further research is still necessary. Upcycling of PET waste into
high-value materials or substances is inspiring, and could bring
a true circular, sustainable economy of PET that could very
well bring revolutionary change.
■
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068.
Mutagenesis assays using IsMHETase (PDF)
■
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
Luis Fernando Saraiva Macedo Timmers − Graduate
Program in Biotechnology, Universidade do Vale do Taquari
− Univates, Lajeado 95900-000 RS, Brazil; Graduate
Program in Medical Sciences, Universidade do Vale do
Taquari − Univates, Lajeado 95900-000 RS, Brazil;
orcid.org/0000-0003-0399-5376;
Phone: +555137147000; Email: luis.timmers@univates.br
Authors
Bruno Rampanelli Dahmer − Graduate Program in
Biotechnology, Universidade do Vale do Taquari − Univates,
Lajeado 95900-000 RS, Brazil
Jeferson Camargo de Lima − Graduate Program in
Biotechnology, Universidade do Vale do Taquari − Univates,
Lajeado 95900-000 RS, Brazil
José Fernando Ruggiero Bachega − Department of
Pharmacosciences, Universidade Federal de Cie ̂ncias da
Sau ́de de Porto Alegre, Porto Alegre 90050-170 RS, Brazil
Troy Wymore − Department of Chemistry, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6243,
United States
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
Author Contributions
All authors have given approval to the final version of the
manuscript.
Funding
The Article Processing Charge for the publication of this
research was funded by the Coordenacao de Aperfeicoamento
de Pessoal de Nivel Superior (CAPES), Brazil (ROR identifier:
00x0ma614).
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
■
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was financed in part by the Coordination for the
Improvement of Higher Education Personnel�Brazil
(CAPES) [Finance Code: 001] and University of Vale do
Taquari - Univates.
■
REFERENCES
(1) Geyer, R.; Jambeck, J. R.; Law, K. L. Production, Use, and Fate
of All Plastics Ever Made. Sci. Adv. 2017, 3 (7), No. e1700782.
(2) Plastics - the Facts 2022 • Plastics Europe. Plastics Europe.
https://plasticseurope.org/knowledge-hub/plastics-the-facts-2022/
(accessed 2023−11−07).
(3) Ragaert, K.; Delva, L.; Van Geem, K. Mechanical and Chemical
Recycling of Solid Plastic Waste. Waste Manage. 2017, 69, 24−58.
(4) Shamsuyeva, M.; Endres, H.-J. Plastics in the Context of the
Circular Economy and Sustainable Plastics Recycling: Comprehensive
Review on Research Development, Standardization and Market.
Compos. Part C Open Access 2021, 6, No. 100168.
(5) Gao, R.; Pan, H.; Lian, J. Recent Advances in the Discovery,
Characterization, and Engineering of Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate)
(PET) Hydrolases. Enzyme Microb. Technol. 2021, 150, No. 109868.
(6) Chow, J.; Perez-Garcia, P.; Dierkes, R.; Streit, W. R. Microbial
Enzymes Will Offer Limited Solutions to the Global Plastic Pollution
Crisis. Microb. Biotechnol. 2023, 16 (2), 195−217.
(7) Kawai, F.; Kawabata, T.; Oda, M. Current State and Perspectives
Related to the Polyethylene Terephthalate Hydrolases Available for
Biorecycling. ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2020, 8 (24), 8894−8908.
(8) Jin, Z.; Ntwali, J.; Han, S.-Y.; Zheng, S.-P.; Lin, Y. Production of
Flavor Esters Catalyzed by CALB-Displaying Pichia Pastoris Whole-
Cells in a Batch Reactor. J. Biotechnol. 2012, 159 (1−2), 108−114.
(9) Jaeger, K.-E.; Eggert, T. Lipases for Biotechnology. Curr. Opin.
Biotechnol. 2002, 13 (4), 390−397.
(10) Kumar, A.; Gross, R. A. Candida a Ntartica Lipase B Catalyzed
Polycaprolactone Synthesis: Effects of Organic Media and Temper-
ature. Biomacromolecules 2000, 1 (1), 133−138.
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46233
(11) Gotor-Fernández, V.; Busto, E.; Gotor, V. Candida Antarctica
Lipase B: An Ideal Biocatalyst for the Preparation of Nitrogenated
Organic Compounds. Adv. Synth. Catal. 2006, 348 (7−8), 797−812.
(12) Uppenberg, J.; Hansen, M. T.; Patkar, S.; Jones, T. A. The
Sequence, Crystal Structure Determination and Refinement of Two
Crystal Forms of Lipase B from Candida Antarctica. Structure 1994, 2
(4), 293−308.
(13) Uppenberg, J.; Oehrner, N.; Norin, M.; Hult, K.; Kleywegt, G.
J.; Patkar, S.; Waagen, V.; Anthonsen, T.; Jones, T. A. Crystallo-
graphic and Molecular-Modeling Studies of Lipase B from Candida
Antarctica Reveal a Stereospecificity Pocket for Secondary Alcohols.
Biochemistry 1995, 34 (51), 16838−16851.
(14) Strzelczyk, P.; Bujacz, G. D.; Kiełbasin ́ski, P.; Błaszczyk, J.
Crystal and Molecular Structure of Hexagonal Form of Lipase B from
Candida Antarctica. Acta Biochim. Polym. 2016, 63 (1), 103−109,
DOI: 10.18388/abp.2015_1065.
(15) Stauch, B.; Fisher, S. J.; Cianci, M. Open and Closed States of
Candida Antarctica Lipase B: Protonation and the Mechanism of
Interfacial Activation. J. Lipid Res. 2015, 56 (12), 2348−2358.
(16) Carniel, A.; Valoni, E
́
.; Nicomedes, J.; Gomes, A. D. C.; Castro,
A. M. D. Lipase from Candida Antarctica (CALB) and Cutinase from
Humicola Insolens Act Synergistically for PET Hydrolysis to
Terephthalic Acid. Process Biochem. 2017, 59, 84−90.
(17) S
́
widerek, K.; Velasco-Lozano, S.; Galmés, M. A
̀
.; Olazabal, I.;
Sardon, H.; López-Gallego, F.; Moliner, V. Mechanistic Studies of a
Lipase Unveil Effect of pH on Hydrolysis Products of Small PET
Modules. Nat. Commun. 2023, 14 (1), No. 3556.
(18) Thumarat, U.; Nakamura, R.; Kawabata, T.; Suzuki, H.; Kawai,
F. Biochemical and Genetic Analysis of a Cutinase-Type Polyesterase
from a Thermophilic Thermobifida Alba AHK119. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 2012, 95 (2), 419−430.
(19) Thumarat, U.; Kawabata, T.; Nakajima, M.; Nakajima, H.;
Sugiyama, A.; Yazaki, K.; Tada, T.; Waku, T.; Tanaka, N.; Kawai, F.
Comparison of Genetic Structures and Biochemical Properties of
Tandem Cutinase-Type Polyesterases from Thermobifida Alba
AHK119. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 2015, 120 (5), 491−497.
(20) Hu, X.; Thumarat, U.; Zhang, X.; Tang, M.; Kawai, F. Diversity
of Polyester-Degrading Bacteria in Compost and Molecular Analysis
of a Thermoactive Esterase from Thermobifida Alba AHK119. Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2010, 87 (2), 771−779.
(21) Kawai, F.; Thumarat, U.; Kitadokoro, K.; Waku, T.; Tada, T.;
Tanaka, N.; Kawabata, T. Comparison of Polyester-Degrading
Cutinases from Genus Thermobif ida. In ACS Symposium Series;
Cheng, H. N.; Gross, R. A.; Smith, P. B., Eds.; American Chemical
Society: Washington, DC, 2013; Vol. 1144, pp 111−120
DOI: 10.1021/bk-2013-1144.ch009.
(22) Kitadokoro, K.; Matsui, S.; Osokoshi, R.; Nakata, K.; Kamitani,
S. Expression, Purification and Crystallization of Thermostable
Mutant of Cutinase Est1 from Thermobifida Alba. Adv. Biosci.
Biotechnol. 2018, 09 (05), 215−223.
(23) Lenfant, N.; Hotelier, T.; Velluet, E.; Bourne, Y.; Marchot, P.;
Chatonnet, A. ESTHER, the Database of the α/β-Hydrolase Fold
Superfamily of Proteins: Tools to Explore Diversity of Functions.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2012, 41 (D1), D423−D429.
(24) Lu, D.; Chen, Y.; Jin, S.; Wu, Q.; Wu, J.; Liu, J.; Wang, F.;
Deng, L.; Nie, K. The Evolution of Cutinase Est1 Based on the
Clustering Strategy and Its Application for Commercial PET Bottles
Degradation. J. Environ. Manage. 2024, 368, No. 122217.
(25) Wei, R.; Oeser, T.; Zimmermann, W. Synthetic Polyester-
Hydrolyzing Enzymes From Thermophilic Actinomycetes. In
Advances in Applied Microbiology; Elsevier, 2014; Vol. 89, pp 267−
305 DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-800259-9.00007-X.
(26) Oda, M.; Numoto, N.; Bekker, G.-J.; Kamiya, N.; Kawai, F.
Cutinases from Thermophilic Bacteria (Actinomycetes): From
Identification to Functional and Structural Characterization. In
Methods Enzymology; Elsevier, 2021; Vol. 648, pp 159−185
DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2020.12.031.
(27) Billig, S.; Oeser, T.; Birkemeyer, C.; Zimmermann, W.
Hydrolysis of Cyclic Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) Trimers by a
Carboxylesterase from Thermobifida Fusca KW3. Appl. Microbiol.
Biotechnol. 2010, 87 (5), 1753−1764.
(28) von Haugwitz, G.; Han, X.; Pfaff, L.; Li, Q.; Wei, H.; Gao, J.;
Methling, K.; Ao, Y.; Brack, Y.; Mican, J.; Feiler, C. G.; Weiss, M. S.;
Bednar, D.; Palm, G. J.; Lalk, M.; Lammers, M.; Damborsky, J.;
Weber, G.; Liu, W.; Bornscheuer, U. T.; Wei, R. Structural Insights
into (Tere)Phthalate-Ester Hydrolysis by a Carboxylesterase and Its
Role in Promoting PET Depolymerization. ACS Catal. 2022, 12 (24),
15259−15270.
(29) Chahinian, H.; Ali, Y.; Abousalham, A.; Petry, S.; Mandrich, L.;
Manco, G.; Canaan, S.; Sarda, L. Substrate Specificity and Kinetic
Properties of Enzymes Belonging to the Hormone-Sensitive Lipase
Family: Comparison with Non-Lipolytic and Lipolytic Carboxyles-
terases. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Mol. Cell Biol. Lipids 2005, 1738 (1−
3), 29−36.
(30) Oeser, T.; Wei, R.; Baumgarten, T.; Billig, S.; Föllner, C.;
Zimmermann, W. High Level Expression of a Hydrophobic
Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate)-Hydrolyzing Carboxylesterase from
Thermobifida Fusca KW3 in Escherichia Coli BL21(DE3). J. Biotechnol.
2010, 146 (3), 100−104.
(31) Belisário-Ferrari, M. R.; Wei, R.; Schneider, T.; Honak, A.;
Zimmermann, W. Fast Turbidimetric Assay for Analyzing the
Enzymatic Hydrolysis of Polyethylene Terephthalate Model Sub-
strates. Biotechnol. J. 2019, 14 (4), No. 1800272.
(32) Ebaid, R.; Wang, H.; Sha, C.; Abomohra, A. E.-F.; Shao, W.
Recent Trends in Hyperthermophilic Enzymes Production and Future
Perspectives for Biofuel Industry: A Critical Review. J. Cleaner Prod.
2019, 238, No. 117925.
(33) Cava, F.; Hidalgo, A.; Berenguer, J. Thermus thermophilus as
Biological Model. Extremophiles 2009, 13 (2), 213−231.
(34) López-López, O.; Cerdán, M.-E.; González-Siso, M.-I. Thermus
thermophilus as a Source of Thermostable Lipolytic Enzymes.
Microorganisms 2015, 3 (4), 792−808.
(35) Fucin ̃ os, P.; Pastrana, L.; Sanromán, A.; Longo, M. A.;
Hermoso, J. A.; Ru ́a, M. L. An Esterase from Thermus thermophilus
HB27 with Hyper-Thermoalkalophilic Properties: Purification,
Characterisation and Structural Modelling. J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym.
2011, 70 (3−4), 127−137.
(36) Fucin ̃ os, P.; Abadín, C. M.; Sanromán, A.; Longo, M. A.;
Pastrana, L.; Ru ́a, M. L. Identification of Extracellular Lipases/
Esterases Produced by Thermus thermophilus HB27: Partial
Purification and Preliminary Biochemical Characterisation. J.
Biotechnol. 2005, 117 (3), 233−241.
(37) Fucin ̃ os, P.; Atanes, E.; López-López, O.; Solaroli, M.; Cerdán,
M. E.; González-Siso, M. I.; Pastrana, L.; Ru ́a, M. L. Cloning,
Expression, Purification and Characterization of an Oligomeric His-
Tagged Thermophilic Esterase from Thermus thermophilus HB27.
Process Biochem. 2014, 49 (6), 927−935.
(38) E, H.; U, B. Esterases from Bacillus subtilis and B.
Stearothermophilus Share High Sequence Homology but Differ
Substantially in Their Properties. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2002, 60
(3), 320−326.
(39) Kaiser, P.; Raina, C.; Parshad, R.; Johri, S.; Verma, V.; Andrabi,
K. I.; Qazi, G. N. A Novel Esterase from Bacillus subtilis (RRL 1789):
Purification and Characterization of the Enzyme. Protein Expr. Purif.
2006, 45 (2), 262−268.
(40) Schmidt, M.; Henke, E.; Heinze, B.; Kourist, R.; Hidalgo, A.;
Bornscheuer, U. T. A Versatile Esterase from Bacillus subtilis :
Cloning, Expression, Characterization, and Its Application in
Biocatalysis. Biotechnol. J. 2007, 2 (2), 249−253.
(41) Kourist, R.; Bartsch, S.; Fransson, L.; Hult, K.; Bornscheuer, U.
T. Understanding Promiscuous Amidase Activity of an Esterase from
Bacillus subtilis. ChemBioChem. 2008, 9 (1), 67−69.
(42) Heinze, B.; Kourist, R.; Fransson, L.; Hult, K.; Bornscheuer, U.
T. Highly Enantioselective Kinetic Resolution of Two Tertiary
Alcohols Using Mutants of an Esterase from Bacillus subtilis. Protein
Eng. Des. Sel. 2007, 20 (3), 125−131.
(43) Bartsch, S.; Kourist, R.; Bornscheuer, U. T. Complete Inversion
of Enantioselectivity towards Acetylated Tertiary Alcohols by a
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46234
Double Mutant of a Bacillus subtilis Esterase. Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.
2008, 47 (8), 1508−1511.
(44) Barbayianni, E.; Kokotos, C. G.; Bartsch, S.; Drakou, C.;
Bornscheuer, U. T.; Kokotos, G. Bacillus subtilis Esterase (BS2) and
Its Double Mutant Have Different Selectivity in the Removal of
Carboxyl Protecting Groups. Adv. Synth. Catal. 2009, 351 (14−15),
2325−2332.
(45) Kim, H. T.; Hee Ryu, M.; Jung, Y. J.; Lim, S.; Song, H. M.;
Park, J.; Hwang, S. Y.; Lee, H.; Yeon, Y. J.; Sung, B. H.; Bornscheuer,
U. T.; Park, S. J.; Joo, J. C.; Oh, D. X. Chemo-Biological Upcycling of
Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) to Multifunctional Coating Materials.
ChemSusChem 2021, 14 (19), 4251−4259.
(46) Dröge, M. J.; Bos, R.; Boersma, Y. L.; Quax, W. J. Comparison
and Functional Characterisation of Three Homologous Intracellular
Carboxylesterases of Bacillus subtilis. J. Mol. Catal. B Enzym. 2005, 32
(5−6), 261−270.
(47) Maqbool, Q.-u.-A.; Johri, S.; Rasool, S.; Riyaz-ul-Hassan, S.;
Verma, V.; Nargotra, A.; Koul, S.; Qazi, G. N. Molecular Cloning of
Carboxylesterase Gene and Biochemical Characterization of Encoded
Protein from Bacillus subtilis (RRL BB1). J. Biotechnol. 2006, 125 (1),
1−10.
(48) Rozeboom, H. J.; Godinho, L. F.; Nardini, M.; Quax, W. J.;
Dijkstra, B. W. Crystal Structures of Two Bacillus Carboxylesterases
with Different Enantioselectivities. Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Proteins
Proteomics 2014, 1844 (3), 567−575.
(49) Bååth, J. A.; Borch, K.; Jensen, K.; Brask, J.; Westh, P.
Comparative Biochemistry of Four Polyester (PET) Hydrolases**.
ChemBioChem 2021, 22 (9), 1627−1637.
(50) Gall, M. G.; Nobili, A.; Pavlidis, I. V.; Bornscheuer, U. T.
Improved Thermostability of a Bacillus subtilis Esterase by Domain
Exchange. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2014, 98 (4), 1719−1726.
(51) Tanasupawat, S.; Takehana, T.; Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Oda, K.
Ideonella Sakaiensis Sp. Nov., Isolated from a Microbial Consortium
That Degrades Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate). Int. J. Syst. Evol.
Microbiol. 2016, 66 (8), 2813−2818.
(52) Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Takehana, T.; Taniguchi, I.; Yamaji, H.;
Maeda, Y.; Toyohara, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Kimura, Y.; Oda, K. A
Bacterium That Degrades and Assimilates Poly(Ethylene Tereph-
thalate). Science 2016, 351 (6278), 1196−1199.
(53) Poulsen, J. S.; Nielsen, J. L. Proteomic Characterisation of
Polyethylene Terephthalate and Monomer Degradation by Ideonella
Sakaiensis. J. Proteomics 2023, 279, No. 104888.
(54) Palm, G. J.; Reisky, L.; Böttcher, D.; Mu ̈ ller, H.; Michels, E. A.
P.; Walczak, M. C.; Berndt, L.; Weiss, M. S.; Bornscheuer, U. T.;
Weber, G. Structure of the Plastic-Degrading Ideonella Sakaiensis
MHETase Bound to a Substrate. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10 (1),
No. 1717.
(55) Sagong, H.-Y.; Seo, H.; Kim, T.; Son, H. F.; Joo, S.; Lee, S. H.;
Kim, S.; Woo, J.-S.; Hwang, S. Y.; Kim, K.-J. Decomposition of the
PET Film by MHETase Using Exo-PETase Function. ACS Catal.
2020, 10 (8), 4805−4812.
(56) Knott, B. C.; Erickson, E.; Allen, M. D.; Gado, J. E.; Graham,
R.; Kearns, F. L.; Pardo, I.; Topuzlu, E.; Anderson, J. J.; Austin, H. P.;
Dominick, G.; Johnson, C. W.; Rorrer, N. A.; Szostkiewicz, C. J.;
Copié, V.; Payne, C. M.; Woodcock, H. L.; Donohoe, B. S.; Beckham,
G. T.; McGeehan, J. E. Characterization and Engineering of a Two-
Enzyme System for Plastics Depolymerization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U.S.A. 2020, 117 (41), 25476−25485.
(57) Peng, X.; Lu, C.; Pang, J.; Liu, Z.; Lu, D. A Distal Regulatory
Strategy of Enzymes: From Local to Global Conformational
Dynamics. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2021, 23 (39), 22451−22465.
(58) Saunders, J. W.; Damry, A. M.; Vongsouthi, V.; Spence, M. A.;
Frkic, R. L.; Gomez, C.; Yates, P. A.; Matthews, D. S.; Tokuriki, N.;
McLeod, M. D.; Jackson, C. J. Increasing the Soluble Expression and
Whole-Cell Activity of the Plastic-Degrading Enzyme MHETase
through Consensus Design. Biochemistry 2024, 63 (13), 1663−1673.
(59) Suzuki, K.; Hori, A.; Kawamoto, K.; Thangudu, R. R.; Ishida,
T.; Igarashi, K.; Samejima, M.; Yamada, C.; Arakawa, T.; Wakagi, T.;
Koseki, T.; Fushinobu, S. Crystal Structure of a Feruloyl Esterase
Belonging to the Tannase Family: A Disulfide Bond near a Catalytic
Triad. Proteins: Struct., Funct., Bioinf. 2014, 82 (10), 2857−2867.
(60) Tawfik, D. S. Enzyme Promiscuity and Evolution in Light of
Cellular Metabolism. FEBS J. 2020, 287 (7), 1260−1261.
(61) Joho, Y.; Vongsouthi, V.; Spence, M. A.; Ton, J.; Gomez, C.;
Tan, L. L.; Kaczmarski, J. A.; Caputo, A. T.; Royan, S.; Jackson, C. J.;
Ardevol, A. Ancestral Sequence Reconstruction Identifies Structural
Changes Underlying the Evolution of Ideonella Sakaiensis PETase and
Variants with Improved Stability and Activity. Biochemistry 2023, 62
(2), 437−450.
(62) Austin, H. P.; Allen, M. D.; Donohoe, B. S.; Rorrer, N. A.;
Kearns, F. L.; Silveira, R. L.; Pollard, B. C.; Dominick, G.; Duman, R.;
El Omari, K.; Mykhaylyk, V.; Wagner, A.; Michener, W. E.; Amore,
A.; Skaf, M. S.; Crowley, M. F.; Thorne, A. W.; Johnson, C. W.;
Woodcock, H. L.; McGeehan, J. E.; Beckham, G. T. Characterization
and Engineering of a Plastic-Degrading Aromatic Polyesterase. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2018, 115 (19), E4350−E4357, DOI: 10.1073/
pnas.1718804115.
(63) Pinto, A. V.; Ferreira, P.; Neves, R. P. P.; Fernandes, P. A.;
Ramos, M. J.; Magalha ̃es, A. L. Reaction Mechanism of MHETase, a
PET Degrading Enzyme. ACS Catal. 2021, 11 (16), 10416−10428.
(64) Feng, S.; Yue, Y.; Zheng, M.; Li, Y.; Zhang, Q.; Wang, W. Is
PETase- and Is MHETase-Catalyzed Cascade Degradation Mecha-
nism toward Polyethylene Terephthalate. ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng.
2021, 9 (29), 9823−9832.
(65) Rauwerdink, A.; Kazlauskas, R. J. How the Same Core Catalytic
Machinery Catalyzes 17 Different Reactions: The Serine-Histidine-
Aspartate Catalytic Triad of α/β-Hydrolase Fold Enzymes. ACS Catal.
2015, 5 (10), 6153−6176.
(66) Meyer-Cifuentes, I. E.; Werner, J.; Jehmlich, N.; Will, S. E.;
Neumann-Schaal, M.; O
̈
ztu ̈ rk, B. Synergistic Biodegradation of
Aromatic-Aliphatic Copolyester Plastic by a Marine Microbial
Consortium. Nat. Commun. 2020, 11 (1), No. 5790.
(67) Meyer-Cifuentes, I. E.; O
̈
ztu ̈ rk, B. Mle046 Is a Marine
Mesophilic MHETase-Like Enzyme. Front. Microbiol. 2021, 12,
No. 693985.
(68) Perez-Garcia, P.; Chow, J.; Costanzi, E.; Gurschke, M. F.;
Dittrich, J.; Dierkes, R. F.; Applegate, V.; Feuerriegel, G.; Tete, P.;
Danso, D.; Schumacher, J.; Pfleger, C.; Gohlke, H.; Smits, S. H. J.;
Schmitz, R. A.; Streit, W. R. The First Archaeal PET-Degrading
Enzyme Belongs to the Feruloyl-Esterase Family bioRxiv 2022
DOI: 10.1101/2022.10.14.512230.
(69) Zhang, J.; Wang, H.; Luo, Z.; Yang, Z.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, P.; Li,
M.; Zhang, Y.; Feng, Y.; Lu, D.; Zhu, Y. Computational Design of
Highly Efficient Thermostable MHET Hydrolases and Dual Enzyme
System for PET Recycling. Commun. Biol. 2023, 6 (1), No. 1135.
(70) Liu, P.; Wang, Y.-F.; Ewis, H. E.; Abdelal, A. T.; Lu, C.-D.;
Harrison, R. W.; Weber, I. T. Covalent Reaction Intermediate
Revealed in Crystal Structure of the Geobacillus Stearothermophilus
Carboxylesterase Est30. J. Mol. Biol. 2004, 342 (2), 551−561.
(71) Lu, H.; Diaz, D. J.; Czarnecki, N. J.; Zhu, C.; Kim, W.; Shroff,
R.; Acosta, D. J.; Alexander, B. R.; Cole, H. O.; Zhang, Y.; Lynd, N.
A.; Ellington, A. D.; Alper, H. S. Machine Learning-Aided Engineering
of Hydrolases for PET Depolymerization. Nature 2022, 604 (7907),
662−667.
(72) Carr, C. M.; Göttsch, F.; De Oliveira, B. F. R.; Murcia, P. A. S.;
Jackson, S. A.; Wei, R.; Clarke, D. J.; Bornscheuer, U. T.; Dobson, A.
D. W. Identification and Expression of MarCE, a Marine
Carboxylesterase with Synthetic Ester-degrading Activity. Microb.
Biotechnol. 2024, 17 (6), No. e14479.
(73) Jackson, S. A.; Kennedy, J.; Morrissey, J. P.; O’Gara, F.;
Dobson, A. D. W. Pyrosequencing Reveals Diverse and Distinct
Sponge-Specific Microbial Communities in Sponges from a Single
Geographical Location in Irish Waters. Microb. Ecol. 2012, 64 (1),
105−116.
(74) Li, A.; Sheng, Y.; Cui, H.; Wang, M.; Wu, L.; Song, Y.; Yang, R.;
Li, X.; Huang, H. Discovery and Mechanism-Guided Engineering of
BHET Hydrolases for Improved PET Recycling and Upcycling. Nat.
Commun. 2023, 14 (1), No. 4169.
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46235
(75) Mrigwani, A.; Thakur, B.; Guptasarma, P. Conversion of
Polyethylene Terephthalate in-to Pure Terephthalic Acid through
Synergy between a Solid-Degrading Cutinase and a Reaction
Intermediate-Hydrolysing Carboxy-lesterase. Green Chem. 2022, 24
(17), 6707−6719.
(76) Ribitsch, D.; Heumann, S.; Trotscha, E.; Herrero Acero, E.;
Greimel, K.; Leber, R.; Birner-Gruenberger, R.; Deller, S.; Eiteljoerg,
I.; Remler, P.; Weber, T.; Siegert, P.; Maurer, K.-H.; Donelli, I.;
Freddi, G.; Schwab, H.; Guebitz, G. M. Hydrolysis of Polyethyl-
eneterephthalate by p-nitrobenzylesterase from Bacillus Subtilis.
Biotechnol. Prog. 2011, 27 (4), 951−960.
(77) Joo, S.; Cho, I. J.; Seo, H.; Son, H. F.; Sagong, H.-Y.; Shin, T. J.;
Choi, S. Y.; Lee, S. Y.; Kim, K.-J. Structural Insight into Molecular
Mechanism of Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) Degradation. Nat.
Commun. 2018, 9 (1), No. 382.
(78) Chen, C.-C.; Han, X.; Li, X.; Jiang, P.; Niu, D.; Ma, L.; Liu, W.;
Li, S.; Qu, Y.; Hu, H.; Min, J.; Yang, Y.; Zhang, L.; Zeng, W.; Huang,
J.-W.; Dai, L.; Guo, R.-T. General Features to Enhance Enzymatic
Activity of Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) Hydrolysis. Nat. Catal.
2021, 4 (5), 425−430.
(79) Tournier, V.; Topham, C. M.; Gilles, A.; David, B.; Folgoas, C.;
Moya-Leclair, E.; Kamionka, E.; Desrousseaux, M.-L.; Texier, H.;
Gavalda, S.; Cot, M.; Guémard, E.; Dalibey, M.; Nomme, J.; Cioci, G.;
Barbe, S.; Chateau, M.; André, I.; Duquesne, S.; Marty, A. An
Engineered PET Depolymerase to Break down and Recycle Plastic
Bottles. Nature 2020, 580 (7802), 216−219.
(80) Sulaiman, S.; Yamato, S.; Kanaya, E.; Kim, J.-J.; Koga, Y.;
Takano, K.; Kanaya, S. Isolation of a Novel Cutinase Homolog with
Polyethylene Terephthalate-Degrading Activity from Leaf-Branch
Compost by Using a Metagenomic Approach. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2012, 78 (5), 1556−1562.
(81) Brizendine, R. K.; Erickson, E.; Haugen, S. J.; Ramirez, K. J.;
Miscall, J.; Salvachu ́a, D.; Pickford, A. R.; Sobkowicz, M. J.;
McGeehan, J. E.; Beckham, G. T. Particle Size Reduction of
Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) Increases the Rate of Enzymatic
Depolymerization But Does Not Increase the Overall Conversion
Extent. ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 2022, 10 (28), 9131−9140.
(82) Arnal, G.; Anglade, J.; Gavalda, S.; Tournier, V.; Chabot, N.;
Bornscheuer, U. T.; Weber, G.; Marty, A. Assessment of Four
Engineered PET Degrading Enzymes Considering Large-Scale
Industrial Applications. ACS Catal. 2023, 13 (20), 13156−13166.
(83) Bell, E. L.; Smithson, R.; Kilbride, S.; Foster, J.; Hardy, F. J.;
Ramachandran, S.; Tedstone, A. A.; Haigh, S. J.; Garforth, A. A.; Day,
P. J. R.; Levy, C.; Shaver, M. P.; Green, A. P. Directed Evolution of an
Efficient and Thermostable PET Depolymerase. Nat. Catal. 2022, 5
(8), 673−681.
(84) Pfaff, L.; Gao, J.; Li, Z.; Jäckering, A.; Weber, G.; Mican, J.;
Chen, Y.; Dong, W.; Han, X.; Feiler, C. G.; Ao, Y.-F.; Badenhorst, C.
P. S.; Bednar, D.; Palm, G. J.; Lammers, M.; Damborsky, J.; Strodel,
B.; Liu, W.; Bornscheuer, U. T.; Wei, R. Multiple Substrate Binding
Mode-Guided Engineering of a Thermophilic PET Hydrolase. ACS
Catal. 2022, 12 (15), 9790−9800.
(85) Barth, M.; Oeser, T.; Wei, R.; Then, J.; Schmidt, J.;
Zimmermann, W. Effect of Hydrolysis Products on the Enzymatic
Degradation of Polyethylene Terephthalate Nanoparticles by a
Polyester Hydrolase from Thermobifida Fusca. Biochem. Eng. J. 2015,
93, 222−228.
(86) Barth, M.; Honak, A.; Oeser, T.; Wei, R.; Belisário-Ferrari, M.
R.; Then, J.; Schmidt, J.; Zimmermann, W. A Dual Enzyme System
Composed of a Polyester Hydrolase and a Carboxylesterase Enhances
the Biocatalytic Degradation of Polyethylene Terephthalate Films.
Biotechnol. J. 2016, 11 (8), 1082−1087.
(87) Brott, S.; Pfaff, L.; Schuricht, J.; Schwarz, J.; Böttcher, D.;
Badenhorst, C. P. S.; Wei, R.; Bornscheuer, U. T. Engineering and
Evaluation of Thermostable Is PETase Variants for PET Degradation.
Eng. Life Sci. 2022, 22 (3−4), 192−203.
(88) Kawai, F.; Kawabata, T.; Oda, M. Current Knowledge on
Enzymatic PET Degradation and Its Possible Application to Waste
Stream Management and Other Fields. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
2019, 103 (11), 4253−4268.
(89) Wei, R.; Zimmermann, W. Microbial Enzymes for the
Recycling of Recalcitrant Petroleum-based Plastics: How Far Are
We? Microb. Biotechnol. 2017, 10 (6), 1308−1322.
(90) Chen, K.; Dong, X.; Sun, Y. Sequentially Co-Immobilized PET
and MHET Hydrolases via Spy Chemistry in Calcium Phosphate
Nanocrystals Present High-Performance PET Degradation. J. Hazard.
Mater. 2022, 438, No. 129517.
(91) Zakeri, B.; Fierer, J. O.; Celik, E.; Chittock, E. C.; Schwarz-
Linek, U.; Moy, V. T.; Howarth, M. Peptide Tag Forming a Rapid
Covalent Bond to a Protein, through Engineering a Bacterial Adhesin.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2012, 109 (12), E690−E697,
DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1115485109.
(92) Cui, Y.; Chen, Y.; Liu, X.; Dong, S.; Tian, Y.; Qiao, Y.; Mitra,
R.; Han, J.; Li, C.; Han, X.; Liu, W.; Chen, Q.; Wei, W.; Wang, X.; Du,
W.; Tang, S.; Xiang, H.; Liu, H.; Liang, Y.; Houk, K. N.; Wu, B.
Computational Redesign of a PETase for Plastic Biodegradation
under Ambient Condition by the GRAPE Strategy. ACS Catal. 2021,
11 (3), 1340−1350.
(93) Tarazona, N. A.; Wei, R.; Brott, S.; Pfaff, L.; Bornscheuer, U.
T.; Lendlein, A.; Machatschek, R. Rapid Depolymerization of
Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) Thin Films by a Dual-Enzyme System
and Its Impact on Material Properties. Chem. Catal. 2022, 2 (12),
3573−3589.
(94) Han, W.; Zhang, J.; Chen, Q.; Xie, Y.; Zhang, M.; Qu, J.; Tan,
Y.; Diao, Y.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, Y. Biodegradation of Poly(Ethylene
Terephthalate) through PETase Surface-Display: From Function to
Structure. J. Hazard. Mater. 2024, 461, No. 132632.
(95) Narita, J.; Okano, K.; Tateno, T.; Tanino, T.; Sewaki, T.; Sung,
M.-H.; Fukuda, H.; Kondo, A. Display of Active Enzymes on the Cell
Surface of Escherichia Coli Using PgsA Anchor Protein and Their
Application to Bioconversion. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2006, 70
(5), 564−572.
(96) Lu, D.; Wu, J.; Jin, S.; Wu, Q.; Wang, F.; Deng, L.; Nie, K.
Dual-Enzyme-Cascade Catalysis for PET Biodegradation Based on a
Variable-Temperature Program. Catalysts 2024, 14 (8), 543.
(97) Kincannon, W. M.; Zahn, M.; Clare, R.; Lusty Beech, J.;
Romberg, A.; Larson, J.; Bothner, B.; Beckham, G. T.; McGeehan, J.
E.; DuBois, J. L. Biochemical and Structural Characterization of an
Aromatic Ring−Hydroxylating Dioxygenase for Terephthalic Acid
Catabolism. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2022, 119 (13),
No. e2121426119.
(98) Fukuhara, Y.; Inakazu, K.; Kodama, N.; Kamimura, N.; Kasai,
D.; Katayama, Y.; Fukuda, M.; Masai, E. Characterization of the
Isophthalate Degradation Genes of Comamonas Sp. Strain E6. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 2010, 76 (2), 519−527.
(99) Sasoh, M.; Masai, E.; Ishibashi, S.; Hara, H.; Kamimura, N.;
Miyauchi, K.; Fukuda, M. Characterization of the Terephthalate
Degradation Genes of Comamonas Sp. Strain E6. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2006, 72 (3), 1825−1832.
(100) Clarkson, S. M.; Giannone, R. J.; Kridelbaugh, D. M.; Elkins, J.
G.; Guss, A. M.; Michener, J. K. Construction and Optimization of a
Heterologous Pathway for Protocatechuate Catabolism in Escherichia
Coli Enables Bioconversion of Model Aromatic Compounds. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 2017, 83 (18), e01313−17.
(101) Yamanashi, T.; Kim, S.-Y.; Hara, H.; Funa, N. In Vitro
Reconstitution of the Catabolic Reactions Catalyzed by PcaHG, PcaB,
and PcaL: The Protocatechuate Branch of the β-Ketoadipate Pathway
in Rhodococcus Jostii RHA1. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 2015, 79 (5),
830−835.
(102) Kasai, D.; Fujinami, T.; Abe, T.; Mase, K.; Katayama, Y.;
Fukuda, M.; Masai, E. Uncovering the Protocatechuate 2,3-Cleavage
Pathway Genes. J. Bacteriol. 2009, 191 (21), 6758−6768.
(103) Masai, E.; Katayama, Y.; Fukuda, M. Genetic and Biochemical
Investigations on Bacterial Catabolic Pathways for Lignin-Derived
Aromatic Compounds. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem. 2007, 71 (1), 1−
15.
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46236
(104) Wilkes, R. A.; Waldbauer, J.; Caroll, A.; Nieto-Domínguez, M.;
Parker, D. J.; Zhang, L.; Guss, A. M.; Aristilde, L. Complex Regulation
in a Comamonas Platform for Diverse Aromatic Carbon Metabolism.
Nat. Chem. Biol. 2023, 19 (5), 651−662.
(105) Trifunovic ́, D.; Schuchmann, K.; Mu ̈ ller, V. Ethylene Glycol
Metabolism in the Acetogen Acetobacterium Woodii. J. Bacteriol.
2016, 198 (7), 1058−1065.
(106) Bertsch, J.; Siemund, A. L.; Kremp, F.; Mu ̈ ller, V. A Novel
Route for Ethanol Oxidation in the Acetogenic Bacterium
Acetobacterium Woodii : The Acetaldehyde/Ethanol Dehydrogenase
Pathway. Environ. Microbiol. 2016, 18 (9), 2913−2922.
(107) Hachisuka, S.-i.; Chong, J. F.; Fujiwara, T.; Takayama, A.;
Kawakami, Y.; Yoshida, S. Ethylene Glycol Metabolism in the
Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate)-Degrading Bacterium Ideonella Sa-
kaiensis. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2022, 106 (23), 7867−7878.
(108) Ru, J.; Huo, Y.; Yang, Y. Microbial Degradation and
Valorization of Plastic Wastes. Front. Microbiol. 2020, 11, 442.
(109) Taniguchi, I.; Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Kimura,
Y.; Oda, K. Biodegradation of PET: Current Status and Application
Aspects. ACS Catal. 2019, 9 (5), 4089−4105.
(110) Lin, B.; Tao, Y. Whole-Cell Biocatalysts by Design. Microb.
Cell Fact. 2017, 16 (1), No. 106.
(111) Loll-Krippleber, R.; Sajtovich, V. A.; Ferguson, M. W.; Ho, B.;
Burns, A. R.; Payliss, B. J.; Bellissimo, J.; Peters, S.; Roy, P. J.; Wyatt,
H. D. M.; Brown, G. W. Development of a Yeast Whole-Cell
Biocatalyst for MHET Conversion into Terephthalic Acid and
Ethylene Glycol. Microb. Cell Fact. 2022, 21 (1), No. 280.
(112) Qi, X.; Ma, Y.; Chang, H.; Li, B.; Ding, M.; Yuan, Y.
Evaluation of PET Degradation Using Artificial Microbial Consortia.
Front. Microbiol. 2021, 12, No. 778828.
(113) Moog, D.; Schmitt, J.; Senger, J.; Zarzycki, J.; Rexer, K.-H.;
Linne, U.; Erb, T.; Maier, U. G. Using a Marine Microalga as a
Chassis for Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET) Degradation. Microb.
Cell Fact. 2019, 18 (1), No. 171.
(114) Kenny, S. T.; Runic, J. N.; Kaminsky, W.; Woods, T.; Babu, R.
P.; Keely, C. M.; Blau, W.; O’Connor, K. E. Up-Cycling of PET
(Polyethylene Terephthalate) to the Biodegradable Plastic PHA
(Polyhydroxyalkanoate). Environ. Sci. Technol. 2008, 42 (20), 7696−
7701.
(115) Amstutz, V.; Hanik, N.; Pott, J.; Utsunomia, C.; Zinn, M.
Tailored Biosynthesis of Polyhydroxyalkanoates in Chemostat
Cultures. In Methods Enzymology; Elsevier, 2019; Vol. 627, pp 99−
123 DOI: 10.1016/bs.mie.2019.08.018.
(116) Plackett, D.; Siró, I. Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) for Food
Packaging. In Multifunctional and Nanoreinforced Polymers for Food
Packaging; Elsevier, 2011; pp 498−526 DOI: 10.1533/
9780857092786.4.498.
(117) Fujiwara, R.; Sanuki, R.; Ajiro, H.; Fukui, T.; Yoshida, S.
Direct Fermentative Conversion of Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate)
into Poly(Hydroxyalkanoate) by Ideonella Sakaiensis. Sci. Rep. 2021,
11 (1), No. 19991.
(118) Fukui, T.; Doi, Y. Efficient Production of Polyhydroxyalka-
noates from Plant Oils by Alcaligenes eutrophus and Its Recombinant
Strain. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 1998, 49 (333), 336
DOI: 10.1007/s002530051178.
(119) Werner, A. Z.; Clare, R.; Mand, T. D.; Pardo, I.; Ramirez, K.
J.; Haugen, S. J.; Bratti, F.; Dexter, G. N.; Elmore, J. R.; Huenemann,
J. D.; Peabody, G. L.; Johnson, C. W.; Rorrer, N. A.; Salvachu ́a, D.;
Guss, A. M.; Beckham, G. T. Tandem Chemical Deconstruction and
Biological Upcycling of Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate) to β-Ketoadipic
Acid by Pseudomonas Putida KT2440. Metab. Eng. 2021, 67, 250−261.
(120) Johnson, C. W.; Salvachu ́a, D.; Rorrer, N. A.; Black, B. A.;
Vardon, D. R.; St John, P. C.; Cleveland, N. S.; Dominick, G.; Elmore,
J. R.; Grundl, N.; Khanna, P.; Martinez, C. R.; Michener, W. E.;
Peterson, D. J.; Ramirez, K. J.; Singh, P.; VanderWall, T. A.; Wilson,
A. N.; Yi, X.; Biddy, M. J.; Bomble, Y. J.; Guss, A. M.; Beckham, G. T.
Innovative Chemicals and Materials from Bacterial Aromatic
Catabolic Pathways. Joule 2019, 3 (6), 1523−1537.
(121) Ackermann, Y. S.; Li, W.-J.; Op De Hipt, L.; Niehoff, P.-J.;
Casey, W.; Polen, T.; Köbbing, S.; Ballerstedt, H.; Wynands, B.;
O’Connor, K.; Blank, L. M.; Wierckx, N. Engineering Adipic Acid
Metabolism in Pseudomonas Putida. Metab. Eng. 2021, 67, 29−40.
(122) Sullivan, K. P.; Werner, A. Z.; Ramirez, K. J.; Ellis, L. D.;
Bussard, J. R.; Black, B. A.; Brandner, D. G.; Bratti, F.; Buss, B. L.;
Dong, X.; Haugen, S. J.; Ingraham, M. A.; Konev, M. O.; Michener,
W. E.; Miscall, J.; Pardo, I.; Woodworth, S. P.; Guss, A. M.; Román-
Leshkov, Y.; Stahl, S. S.; Beckham, G. T. Mixed Plastics Waste
Valorization through Tandem Chemical Oxidation and Biological
Funneling. Science 2022, 378 (6616), 207−211.
(123) Sadler, J. C.; Wallace, S. Microbial Synthesis of Vanillin from
Waste Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate). Green Chem. 2021, 23 (13),
4665−4672.
(124) Kim, H. T.; Kim, J. K.; Cha, H. G.; Kang, M. J.; Lee, H. S.;
Khang, T. U.; Yun, E. J.; Lee, D.-H.; Song, B. K.; Park, S. J.; Joo, J. C.;
Kim, K. H. Biological Valorization of Poly(Ethylene Terephthalate)
Monomers for Upcycling Waste PET. ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng.
2019, 7 (24), 19396−19406.
(125) Franden, M. A.; Jayakody, L. N.; Li, W.-J.; Wagner, N. J.;
Cleveland, N. S.; Michener, W. E.; Hauer, B.; Blank, L. M.; Wierckx,
N.; Klebensberger, J.; Beckham, G. T. Engineering Pseudomonas
Putida KT2440 for Efficient Ethylene Glycol Utilization. Metab. Eng.
2018, 48, 197−207.
(126) Pandit, A. V.; Harrison, E.; Mahadevan, R. Engineering
Escherichia Coli for the Utilization of Ethylene Glycol. Microb. Cell
Fact. 2021, 20 (1), No. 22.
(127) Panda, S.; Zhou, J. F. J.; Feigis, M.; Harrison, E.; Ma, X.; Fung
Kin Yuen, V.; Mahadevan, R.; Zhou, K. Engineering Escherichia Coli
to Produce Aromatic Chemicals from Ethylene Glycol. Metab. Eng.
2023, 79, 38−48.
ACS Omega http://pubs.acs.org/journal/acsodf Review
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.5c02068
ACS Omega 2025, 10, 46218−46237
46237