ARTICLE
Versatile selective evolutionary pressure using
synthetic defect in universal metabolism
Lara Sellés Vidal 1,2, James W. Murray 2 & John T. Heap 1,2,3✉
The non-natural needs of industrial applications often require new or improved enzymes. The
structures and properties of enzymes are difﬁcult to predict or designde novo. Instead, semi-
rational approaches mimicking evolution entail diversiﬁcation of parent enzymes followed by
evaluation of isolated variants. Artiﬁcial selection pressures coupling desired enzyme prop-
erties to cell growth could overcome this key bottleneck, but are usually narrow in scope.
Here we show diverse enzymes using the ubiquitous cofactors nicotinamide adenine dinu-
cleotide (NAD) or nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP) can substitute for
defective NAD regeneration, representing a very broadly-applicable arti ﬁcial selection.
Inactivation of Escherichia coli genes required for anaerobic NAD regeneration causes a
conditional growth defect. Cells are rescued by foreign enzymes connected to the metabolic
network only via NAD or NADP, but only when their substrates are supplied. Using this
principle, alcohol dehydrogenase, imine reductase and nitroreductase variants with desired
selectivity modiﬁcations, and a high-performing isopropanol metabolic pathway, are isolated
from libraries of millions of variants in single-round experiments with typical limited infor-
mation to guide design.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 OPEN
1 Imperial College Centre for Synthetic Biology, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK.2 Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London,
London SW7 2AZ, UK.3 School of Life Sciences, The University of Nottingham, Biodiscovery Institute, University Park, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK.
✉email: john.heap@nottingham.ac.uk
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 1
1234567890():,;
C
atalysts are essential to increase chemical reaction rates in
a wide range of industries. Enzymes have advantages over
non-biological catalysts including high chemoselectivity,
stereoselectivity, and positional selectivity; and activity under
mild temperature and pressure conditions, which also decreases
undesired side reactions
1. These advantages can decrease costs
and increase process performance and sustainability. Enzymes are
used both in industries with unchanging catalytic requirements,
such as the manufacture of commodity chemicals and products or
as active agents in cleaning products; and to meet the ongoing
need for new specialized catalytic steps in synthetic-chemistry
routes to bespoke pharmaceutical or agrichemical compounds2.
However, despite the vast diversity of natural enzymes and the
reactions they catalyze, often no optimal enzyme can be identiﬁed
for a speciﬁc application, typically due to low afﬁnity or activity
for the target substrate or a lack of stability or activity under
required conditions such as high temperatures or organic
solvents3.
In principle, enzymes with new or improved properties could
be designed rationally on the basis of structural information, or
even de novo, but in practice, this is rarely straightforward.
Directed evolution is one of the most powerful tools for protein
engineering, since it bypasses the need to determine speci ﬁc
sequences and structures a priori by mimicking the process of
natural evolution in the laboratory2,4. Starting from one or more
parent enzymes with properties close to the desired ones, libraries
of many variants are readily generated using targeted and/or
random mutagenesis. Variants with desired improvements occur
very rarely in such libraries, if at all, so identifying and isolating
improved variants is usually the key challenge5. Typically, var-
iants of interest are identiﬁed through screening, where individual
variants from samples of the library are isolated and the target
property evaluated. This is generally a laborious and time-
consuming process, except in special cases with convenient
readouts such asﬂuorescence5. The need for screening is a fun-
damental constraint on throughput which limits the success and
scope of directed evolution. Artiﬁcial selection pressure approa-
ches offer an attractive alternative, since they link an improve-
ment in the target property to the survival of the variant. Such
approaches do not require variants to be isolated for evaluation
and automatically discard non-functional variants, thus allowing
much higher throughput than screening. However, the techniques
available so far tend to be narrowly applicable only to very spe-
ciﬁc types of biomolecules or properties6. Here, we exploit a
synthetic metabolic defect to apply a broadly-applicable artiﬁcial
selection pressure to diverse biocatalysts, using genetically-
modiﬁed E. coli under special conditions.
Wild-type (WT)E. coliis a facultative anaerobe, normally able
to grow by aerobic respiration using oxygen, anaerobic respira-
tion using alternative electron acceptors, or anaerobic fermenta-
tion without an external electron acceptor. Strict anaerobic
fermentation is a closed system in which consumption by gly-
colysis of a ﬁnite supply of the redox cofactor oxidized nicoti-
namide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) must be stoichiometrically
matched by regeneration of NAD+ through reduction of central
metabolites to form fermentation products. InE. coli, NAD+ is
normally regenerated largely by ethanol formation. Unlike in
yeast, ethanol production serves no other known physiological
role inE. coli. Inactivation of this pathway preventsE. coligrowth
by anaerobic fermentation7 (Fig. 1a), presumably due mainly to
NAD+ depletion blocking glycolysis, although pyruvate and
acetyl-CoA will also accumulate to unnatural levels with various
impacts on metabolism. Anaerobic fermentative growth of such
mutants can be rescued by introducing pathways that reinstate
ﬂuxes from central metabolites and restore NAD+ regeneration.
This can provide a useful selection pressure to identify redox-
active pathways, enzymes, and variants with desired properties
useful for the production of products such as butanol, 2-
methylpropan-1-ol, L-alanine, and 2,3-butanediol 8–11 (related
selections can be achieved involving different mutations, NADP
and/or aerobic conditions
12–14). It is dif ﬁcult to discern the
contributions to the selection of NAD+ regeneration, relieving
central metabolite accumulation, and restoring otherﬂuxes.
We hypothesized that regeneration of NAD+ by a metaboli-
cally isolated foreign enzyme, using an externally-supplied sub-
strate not otherwise connected to the native metabolic network,
would be sufﬁcient to restore glycolysis and thereby growth. If so,
a strong artiﬁcial selection pressure could be applied to libraries
of enzyme variants for activity with substrates that are not pro-
duced within cells, linking restoration of growth by anaerobic
fermentation to the presence of a variant possessing a desired new
or improved activity with a non-natural substrate (Fig.1b). This
broader scope would be compatible with the development of
biocatalysts active upon non-biogenic compounds for which no
biosynthetic pathway exists in any organism, so cannot be pro-
duced using introduced heterologous pathways, which represent
the great majority of chemotypes used as precursors and inter-
mediates in synthetic chemistry. Reports published during the
present study applied such selection using acetoin11,13, butE. coli
contains native acetoin reductase activity11,15, and our present
study found acetoin alone was sufﬁcient to rescue the metabolic
defect, so acetoin cannot be considered isolated from nativeE. coli
metabolism.
Here we validate and expand upon the above concept, apply it
to rapidly obtain variants from large libraries (comprising tens of
millions of variants) in several different cases, and hence estab-
lish a rapid, high-throughput, widely-applicable platform for
directed evolution of biocatalysts and other biomolecules whose
activity can be directly or indirectly coupled to the regeneration
of NAD+.
Results
Synthetic defects in NAD+ regeneration abolishing anaerobic
growth can be rescued by metabolically isolated foreign
enzyme-substrate pairs. To implement the arti ﬁcial-selection
system, a genetically-modiﬁed E. colistrain (strain AL) unable to
regenerate NAD+ during anaerobic fermentation was constructed
by inactivating the genes encoding the ethanol pathway
(bifunctional aldehyde-alcohol dehydrogenase, adhE) and, to
eliminate a potential mutational escape route7, the lactate path-
way (lactate dehydrogenase,ldhA). When cultured aerobically in
a minimal medium, AL cells grew similarly to WT cells. However,
they were unable to grow anaerobically in the same medium,
indicating the expected impairment of anaerobic fermentation
(Fig. 1c). We validated this strain by genetic complementation,
through a transformation with a plasmid bearing the WTadhE
gene, which allowed anaerobic growth similar to WT cells,
reaching a maximum optical density at 600 nm (OD600) of 0.8 by
24−36 h (Fig.1d). 1H-NMR spectra of the fermentation broth
conﬁrmed the proﬁle of metabolites was similar to that of the
parental strain (except for the expected absence of lactate, Sup-
plementary Table 1).
We attempted to restore anaerobic growth of AL cells using
exogenous enzyme-substrate pairs. In each case, the substrate was
not expected to be natively produced or consumed byE. coli,s o
the main link to theE. colimetabolic network was through NAD.
Three NADH-dependent oxidoreductases were tested: acetoin
reductases from Bacillus subtilis (BDHA)16 and Klebsiella
pneumoniae (BUDC)17, and alcohol dehydrogenase fromTher-
mus sp. ATN1 (TADH)18 (Fig. 1e). AL cells transformed with any
of the exogenous reductases were able to grow anaerobically in
ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9
2 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
minimal medium only if also supplemented with the correspond-
ing substrate (acetoin for BDHA and BUDC, and cyclohexanone
or 3-methylcyclohexanone for TADH) (Fig. 1f−h). The sub-
strates alone did not restore growth except for acetoin, with which
growth was eventually observed, probably due to the activity of an
endogenous acetoin reductase 11,15. The consumption of sub-
strates and generation of corresponding reduced products was
conﬁrmed in all three cases using 1H-NMR (Supplementary
Table 1). These results with cyclohexanone and
3-methylcyclohexanone indicate that NAD+ regeneration alone,
Fig. 1 Principle and validation of redox-directed in vivo evolution. aE. coli anaerobic fermentation pathways. In anaerobic fermentation, reduction of
pyruvate to ethanol and/or lactate regenerates NAD+ required for glycolysis and growth.b E. coli strain AL lacking ADHE (bifunctional alcohol-aldehyde
dehydrogenase) and LDH (lactate dehydrogenase) cannot regenerate NAD+, so cannot grow by anaerobic fermentation. Under anaerobic fermentation
conditions, selection pressure to restore NAD+ regeneration and hence growth can be used to select variants from libraries, such as enzyme variants active
with non-natural substrates.c Cultures of WT and AL cells in M9 glucose medium under aerobic or anaerobic conditions.d Transformation with ADHE
(pLS1, hereafter‘Pos. control’) but not vector (pUC19, hereafter‘Neg. control’) restores anaerobic growth of AL cells in M9 glucose to WT levels.e Foreign
enzyme-substrate pairs used as proof of concept of the selection system.f AL cells transformed with BDHA (Bacillus subtilis acetoin reductase; pLS2),
BUDC (Klebsiella pneumoniae acetoin reductase; pLS3), or TADH (Thermus sp. ATN1 alcohol dehydrogenase; pLS12) do not grow anaerobically in M9
glucose medium without the oxidized substrate of each oxidoreductase. Addition of acetoin (g) or cyclohexanone or 3-methylcyclohexanone (h) to the
culture medium restored anaerobic growth in M9 glucose medium of AL cells transformed with BDHA or BUDC (g) or TADH (h). Data points of growth
curves represent mean values, with error bars showing standard deviation;n = 3 biologically independent cultures for all timepoints of growth curves.
Source data are provided as a Source Dataﬁle.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 3
without any effects of carbonﬂux with metabolism, is enough to
rescue AL cells from their metabolic defect.
High-throughput arti ﬁcial selection outperforms computa-
tional design of cofactor speciﬁcity reversal. NAD(P)-depen-
dent oxidoreductases have been extensively engineered to make
them more suitable for speciﬁc applications, targeting properties
such as kinetic parameters, substrate speci ﬁcity, or cofactor
preference19–22. Switching the cofactor preference of NADP-
dependent enzymes to NAD is of particular interest due to the
lower cost and higher stability of NAD, and the higher efﬁciency
of cell-free NAD recycling systems23,24, for which low-cost co-
substrates are available. Substrate selectivities, and modiﬁcations
to them, are not generally computationally predictable. NAD/
NADP selectivity is a partial exception, as the many known
examples and a common structural motif enabled the develop-
ment of a computational design tool, CSR-SALAD, which
represents the state of the art in cofactor-selectivity reversal25,26.
Alcohol dehydrogenases (ADHs), also known as ketoreduc-
tases (KREDs), are of great industrial interest primarily due to
their ability to perform an asymmetric reduction of aldehydes and
ketones. Thanks to their regioselectivity and stereoselectivity,
ADHs can be used not only to produce enantiomerically pure
alcohols, but also other types of compounds, such asγ- and δ-
lactones through the desymmetrisation of meso-diols27,28. The
primary-secondary alcohol dehydrogenase ofClostridium beijer-
inckii (CBADH) reduces this organism ’s waste acetone to
isopropanol, but is strictly NADP-dependent, which is unusual
in anaerobic fermentation29 (Fig. 2a). An efﬁcient NAD-utilizing
acetone reductase variant of CBADH would be useful in
industrial biotechnology and cofactor recycling, so we set out to
evolve one.
CSR-SALAD was used to analyze CBADH, predict residues
critical for cofactor preference, and design a cofactor preference
reversal strategy. The software suggested 567 protein variants
encoded by a library of 648 genetic variants of positions G198
(substitutions to DEGKNRS), S199 (to DGHILNRSV), and Y218
(to ADFINSTVY), located at the cofactor binding pocket close to
the 2′ phosphate group of NADP (Fig.2b). CSR-SALAD assumes
reversal would cause substantial loss of activity, and proposed
subsequent rounds of site-saturation mutagenesis and screening
to attempt to recover activity, initially prioritizing I175 and R200.
A previous manual analysis of the CBADH crystal structure
proposed substitutions of residues G198, S199, R200, and Y218 to
reverse cofactor preference
29, but neither the speciﬁc substitu-
tions proposed nor saturation mutagenesis of S199 yielded any
NADH-dependent variants of the closely-related Clostridium
autoethanogenum ADH30. Here we applied the proposed
substitutions to CBADH, constructing variants CBADH R1
(S199G, R200G, and Y218F) and CBADHR2 (G198D, S199G,
R200G, and Y218F), but plasmids encoding these variants did not
restore anaerobic growth of AL cells in minimal medium
supplemented with 15 mM acetone, indicating low or absent
NADH-dependent activity.
We performed full combinatorial saturation mutagenesis of all
four target residues of CBADH (G198, S199, R200, and Y218)
replacing each codon with NNN to yield a library (CBADHLib)o f
16.8 million unique genetic variants encoding 160,000 unique
protein variants. Every variant proposed by CSR-SALAD was
included, comprising only 0.4% of the library. By including R200,
the activity loss that CSR-SALAD envisages as an emergent
problem to be solved by subsequent recovery is addressed
simultaneously during cofactor preference reversal.
To select for CBADH variants able to accept NAD, AL cells
were transformed with the library, and pools of variants were
incubated anaerobically in a minimal medium supplemented with
15 mM acetone, so that any variant with NADH-dependent
acetone-reducing activity would lead to a regeneration of NAD+,
restoring growth. For this library and each similar case in this
study, multiple independent transformations (six for this library)
were used to obtain complete library coverage (approximately 18
million transformant clones in this case) and samples were
sequenced to conﬁrm diverse codon incorporation. Clones from
each transformation were pooled and subjected to selection
separately. Growth was observed in three of the variant pools
(Fig. 2c) so these were each subcultured under the same
conditions once, then plasmid DNA was extracted and
sequenced, revealing the presence of the same CBADH variant
in each case (CBADH
S) with G198D, S199Y, and Y218P
substitutions. Interestingly, NAD-dependent mouse class II
alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH2)31, which is distantly related to
CBADH, contains D227 and P247 which are equivalent positions
to 198 and 218 in CBADH. CBADHS was not among the 567
variants proposed by CSR-SALAD. The selection of the same
variant in three independent experiments indicates the super-
iority of this variant, the strength of the arti ﬁcial selection
pressure, and its utility to isolate variants. Transforming AL cells
with isolated plasmid encoding CBADHS enabled fast anaerobic
growth in a medium containing acetone (Fig. 2d). Acetone
consumption and corresponding isopropanol generation were
conﬁrmed by 1H-NMR (Supplementary Table 1). Unlike the
parent enzyme CBADHWT, puriﬁed CBADHS was unable to
oxidize isopropanol using oxidized NADP (NADP +) as the
cofactor, but could do so with NAD + (Km = 17.49 mM,
kcat = 333 min−1 and kcat/Km = 316.67 M−1 s−1, Supplementary
Fig. 1 and Supplementary Table 2).
Eliminating transhydrogenase activities provides strict cofactor
selection allowing exceptional reversal of cofactor preference.
Unexpectedly, we observed that AL cells were able to slowly grow
anaerobically in a medium with acetone when transformed with
the parent enzyme CBADH WT, despite its strict NADP-
dependence (Fig. 2c, d). We hypothesized that acetone-
dependent anaerobic growth recovery by CBADHWT could be
mediated by the activity of one or both ofE. coli’s two transhy-
drogenases, PNTA and STHA, which could use the NADP +
produced by CBADHWT to oxidize NADH. To test this hypoth-
esis, we generated E. coli strains with knockout mutations of
transhydrogenase genespntA (ALP strain), sthA (ALS strain), or
both (ALPS strain) in addition to knockout mutations ofadhE and
ldhA. We then tested the ability of CBADHWT and CBADHS to
restore anaerobic growth of ALP, ALS, and ALPS cells. The ALP
and ALS strains, each with one intact transhydrogenase gene, were
able to grow anaerobically in a medium with acetone when
transformed with either NADP-dependent CBADHWT or NAD-
dependent CBADHS (Supplementary Fig. 2). However, only
NAD-dependent CBADH S could support acetone-dependent
anaerobic growth of ALPS cells, which lack either intact trans-
hydrogenase gene (Fig. 2f and Supplementary Fig. 2). This
demonstrates that transhydrogenases are indeed responsible for
the acetone-dependent recovery of anaerobic growth by
CBADHWT, and that either STHA or PNTA alone is sufﬁcient to
generate the required NAD+ to sustain anaerobic growth. Inter-
estingly, this is thought to be the non-physiological direction for
the membrane-bound, ‘energy-linked’ transhydrogenase PntA32.
Due to its inability to grow anaerobically when transformed with
an NADP-dependent oxidoreductase, the transhydrogenase-free
ALPS strain provides a more stringent selection system than the
AL, ALP, or ALS strains, strictly requiring NAD-dependent oxi-
doreductase activity to restore growth.
ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9
4 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
To validate the ALPS strain as a selection host, we used it to
evolve NAD-dependent variants of TBADH, an NADP-
dependent alcohol dehydrogenase from Thermoanaerobacter
brockii closely related to CBADH29. Similarly to CBADHWT,
WT TBADH was able to support the anaerobic growth of AL cells
in a medium supplemented with acetone, but not of ALPS cells
(Fig. 2g). We performed full combinatorial saturation mutagen-
esis of residues G198, S199, R200 and Y218 of TBADH to
generate a library (TBADHLib) of 16.8 million unique genetic
variants (Fig. 2e). A similar selection procedure as for CBADH
was followed but using the ALPS strain, and two different
variants were identiﬁed, TBADHS1 and TBADHS2. TBADHS1 had
Fig. 2 Selection of alcohol dehydrogenases with reversed cofactor selectivity. aCBADH (Clostridium beijerinckii alcohol dehydrogenase) and TBADH
(Thermoanaerobacter brockii alcohol dehydrogenase) catalyze the reduction of acetone to isopropanol exclusively using NADPH, as well as the reverse
reaction. b Cofactor binding site of CBADHWT with NADPH bound (PDB code 1KEV). The S199, R200, and Y218 residues interact with the 2′ phosphate of
NADPH. Hydrogen bonds are shown in green.c Anaerobic culture of, AL cells transformed with library CBADHLib (pLS10) in M9 glucose medium
supplemented with acetone. Controls are as in Fig.1. CBADHWT (pLS6) was able to restore the slow anaerobic growth of AL cells due to the activity of
transhydrogenases. d Anaerobic growth of AL cells transformed with CBADHS (with substitutions G198D, S199Y, and Y218P; pLS10_3) in medium with
acetone. e Cofactor binding site of TBADHWT with NADPH bound (PDB code 1YKF). A similar set of residues as in CBADH establishes interactions with
the 2′ phosphate of TBADH. Hydrogen bonds are shown in green.f Anaerobic culture of ALPS cells in medium supplemented with acetone. CBADHS,
which can use NAD, supported anaerobic growth of ALPS. Unlike AL cells transformed with CBADHWT, ALPS cells transformed with CBADHWT did not
grow anaerobically, due to the absence of any transhydrogenase activity to regenerate NAD+ from NADP+. g Anaerobic culture of ALPS cells transformed
with CBADHS, TBADHS1 (with substitutions G198S, S199K, R200P, and Y218V; pLS73_2), TBADHS2 (with a duplication of residues 191−241 and
substitutions G198H, S199R, R200A, Y218M, G198’A, and R200’K; pLS73_1) or TBADHWT (pLS69) in medium supplemented with acetone. All NAD-
utilizing variants supported the anaerobic growth of ALPS. TBADHWT, like CBADHWT, could not support the anaerobic growth of ALPS cells. Data points of
growth curves represent mean values, with error bars showing standard deviation;n =3 biologically independent cultures for all timepoints of growth
curves. Source data are provided as a Source Dataﬁle.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 5
substitutions G198S, S199K, R200P, and Y218V. Surprisingly,
TBADHS2 contained a duplication of residues 191 −241, in
addition to substitutions in the targeted residues, both in the
positions of the original sequence and in the corresponding
positions of the duplication (Supplementary Fig. 3). The
substitutions were G198H, S199R, R200A, Y218M, G198’A, and
R200’K (198’and 200’denote positions 249 and 251 of TBADH
S2,
the positions in the duplication equivalent to the original 198 and
200 residues). Since the duplication was not intentionally
introduced into the variant library by design, it presumably arose
through a rare event during the PCR, ligation or within cells,
highlighting the potential of the selection system to isolate
variants with desired properties even when these are rare and
outside the intended design space.
TBADHS1 and TBADHS2 were both able to restore the anaerobic
growth of ALPS cells in a medium with acetone (Fig.2g), and
1H-NMR of the fermentation broth conﬁrmed the production of
isopropanol (Supplementary Table 1). When the enzymatic activity
was assayed, TBADHS1 could oxidize isopropanol only with NAD+,
certifying the reversal of cofactor preference (Supplementary Fig. 1
and Supplementary Table 2). Thekcat of TBADHS1 for the oxidation
of isopropanol with NAD+ was 112 ± 5.7 min−1,4 . 5t i m e sl o w e r
than the kcat of TBADHWT for the same reaction with NADP+.
However, theKm of TBADHS1 for isopropanol was 3.74 ± 0.54 mM,
a 32-fold decrease (improvement) compared to theKm of TBADHWT
for isopropanol in the presence of NADP+. Overall, the catalytic
efﬁciency (kcat/Km)o fT B A D HS1 for the oxidation of isopropanol
(kcat/Km =496.67 M−1 s−1) was more than seven times greater than
that of TBADHWT with NADP+ (kcat/Km =70 M−1 s−1). This is, to
our knowledge, the highest relative catalytic efﬁciency obtained in any
case of cofactor speciﬁcity reversal for an alcohol dehydrogenase, and
the best for the reversal of preference from NADP to NAD for any
enzyme. In contrast, TBADHS2 was able to oxidize isopropanol both
with NAD+ and NADP+ (in the presence of NAD+, Km =22.07
mM, kcat =238.5 min−1 and kcat/Km =180 M−1 s−1; in the presence
of NADP+, Km =55.15 mM,kcat =231.4 min−1 and kcat/Km =70 M
−1 s−1; Supplementary Fig. 1, Supplementary Table 2). A decrease in
kcat compared to TBADHWT was observed, but the Km for
isopropanol decreased (improved)i nt h ep r e s e n c eo fb o t hc o f a c t o r s .
We crystallized CBADHS and TBADHS1 in order to elucidate
the structural basis for the observed reversal of cofactor
preference. The resulting maps showed clear density for NAD+
in the case of CBADHS, but only partial occupancy for TBADHS1
(Supplementary Fig. 4). In both cases, the size of the cofactor-
binding pocket is reduced due to the substitution of residues 198
and 199 by others with bulkier side chains (Fig. 3), which
sterically prevents the binding of the 2′ phosphate of NADP. In
the case of CBADH S, this effect is further enhanced by the
presence of an aspartate residue at position 198, which would also
prevent NADP binding through electrostatic repulsion between
the side-chain carboxylate group and the 2′ phosphate of NADP.
Another common feature of both CBADHS and TBADHS1 is the
substitution of Y218. The side chain of Y218 is known to undergo
a 120° rotation in the WT enzymes to allow stacking to the
adenine moiety of NADP and the formation of a hydrogen bond
with the 2′ phosphate through its hydroxyl group
29. As shown by
the CBADHS and TBADHS1 structures, the side chains of the
substituted residues are not close enough to the 2′ phosphate to
interact with it, and would only be able to form hydrophobic
interactions with the adenine moiety, if any (Fig.3).
Simultaneous optimization of multiple kinetic parameters by
high-throughput artiﬁcial selection. Next, we applied the arti-
ﬁcial selection system to an imine reductase (IRED). IREDs are of
great industrial interest thanks to their ability to catalyze the
asymmetric reduction of imines and the reductive amination of
ketones, both of which yield chiral amines, fundamental building
blocks in the pharmaceutical and agrichemical industries33,34. All
known natural IREDs are NADP dependent35, so there is great
interest in developing NAD-dependent variants due to the lower
cost and higher efﬁciency of NAD-regeneration systems. The
most active NAD-dependent IRED thus far is MsIREDC, a variant
of Myxococcus stipitatusIRED (MsIRED), which is able to reduce
2-methyl-1-pyrroline amongst other substrates (Fig.4a). MsIR-
EDC was obtained through several rounds of mutagenesis and
screening36. We aimed to obtain a superior NAD-dependent
variant of MsIRED through a faster and simpler workﬂow by
applying the artiﬁcial selection system.
CSR-SALAD predicted residues N32, R33, T34, and K37 to be
critical determinants of cofactor speciﬁcity (Fig. 4b). Thus, we
performed full combinatorial saturation mutagenesis of these
residues to generate a library (MsIREDLib) of 16.8 million unique
genetic variants. AL cells transformed with the library were able
to grow anaerobically in medium with 2-methyl-1-pyrroline
(Fig. 4c), and the same MsIRED variant (MsIREDS) was identiﬁed
from three independent transformations of the library, compris-
ing residue substitutions N32D, R33V, T34R, and K37R. We
analyzed the fermentation broth of AL cells transformed with
MsIREDS (Fig. 4d) by 1H-NMR, conﬁrming the consumption of
2-methyl-1-pyrroline and the production of the corresponding
amine, 2-methylpyrrolidine (Supplementary Table 1). The
enzymatic activities of MsIREDC and MsIREDS were compared
(for MsIREDC, Km = 34.06 mM, kcat = 161.17 min−1 and Ki =
4.94 mM; for MsIREDS, Km = 19.57 mM,kcat = 78.1 min−1 and
Ki = 11.42 mM; Supplementary Fig. 5, Supplementary Table 2).
Both variants were able to reduce 2-methyl-1-pyrroline only with
NADH and showed substrate inhibition, as shown by the
decrease in activity at the highest concentrations of substrate.
MsIREDS performed better than MsIREDC at all tested substrate
concentrations (Fig. 4e), partly due to the higher value of the
substrate inhibition constant Ki, which indicates a relief of
substrate inhibition in MsIREDS compared to MsIREDC. To our
knowledge, MsIREDS has the highest NAD-dependent IRED
activity yet reported. These results highlight the ability of the
artiﬁcial selection system to obtain variant enzymes where
multiple kinetic parameters are enhanced simultaneously, result-
ing in enzymes with optimal activity towards the desired
substrate. Furthermore, while identi ﬁcation of MsIRED C by
Borlinghaus and Nestl36 required multiple rounds of mutagenesis
and screening, we obtained the superior NAD-dependent variant
MsIREDS in a single round.
Chemically-directed evolution of enzyme variants with mod-
iﬁed chemoselectivity and positional selectivity. We aimed to
apply the artiﬁcial selection pressure to target the evolution of
enzyme activity towards non-native chemicals. Nitroreductases
can synthesize aromatic hydroxylamines or amines (pharma-
ceutical and agrichemical precursors) from low-cost and readily
available nitroaromatics37, can activate nitroaromatic anticancer
prodrugs38,39, and can be used for bioremediation of soils con-
taminated with explosives such as TNT 40,41. However, these
applications often require the tailoring of natural nitroreductases
to improve their catalytic properties. We targeted the classic
Enterobacter cloacae nitroreductase NfsB (EntNfsB), a type-I
nitroreductase able to reduce several nitroaromatic compounds,
including 4-nitrobenzoic acid (4-NBA), and which can accept
NAD and NADP as cofactors42. We characterized the activity of
the WT enzyme, EntNfsBWT, with 4-NBA, 4-nitrobenzyl alcohol
(4-NBALC), and 2-nitrobenzoic acid (2-NBA),ﬁnding that it was
able to reduce 4-NBA and 4-NBALC but not 2-NBA (Fig.5a,
ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9
6 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
Supplementary Fig. 6, and Supplementary Table 2). The activity
towards 4-NBALC was, however, considerably lower than
towards 4-NBA, which prevented the accurate determination of
kinetic parameters.
We performed full combinatorial saturation mutagenesis of
residues S40, T41, Y68, and F124 of EntNfsB (generating a library
(EntNfsBLib) of 16.8 million unique genetic variants), chosen based
on their proximity to the substrate-binding pocket and their lack of
direct contact with the essential FMN43 (Fig. 5b). AL cells were
transformed with the library and cultured anaerobically in a minimal
medium supplemented with 2-NBA or 4-NBALC (Fig.5c, d). We
identiﬁed a different variant from thecells grown in the presence of
each of the substrates. The variant selected in the cultures with
2-NBA (EntNfsBS1) contained substitutions S40A, T41I, and F124A,
while the variant selected in the cultures with 4-NBALC (EntNfsBS2)
contained T41L, Y68L, and F124L substitutions. In order to
determine the product generated by the EnfNfsB variants, the
fermentation broth of AL cells transformed with plasmids expressing
either EntNfsBS1 or EntNfsBS2 and grown anaerobically in minimal
medium with 2-NBA or 4-NBALC (Fig.5e, f) respectively was
characterized by1H-NMR (Supplementary Table 1). Interestingly,
the observed product signals matched those of the aromatic amines
corresponding to 2-NBA or 4-NBALC, despite a previous report
indicating that EntNfsB WT can only reduce 4-NBA to
4-hydroxylaminobenzoic acid, and not all the way to the amine
4-aminobenzoic acid42. That report only assayed the in vivo activity
up to 24 h. It is possible that the highly reducing conditions inside AL
cells, combined with longer periods of incubation under anaerobic
conditions, allow for the formation of the amine products. Enzymatic
assays conﬁrmed that EntNfsBS1 w a sa b l et or e d u c e2 - N B A(Km =
0.808 mM,kcat =28.4 min−1 and kcat/Km =585 M−1 s−1), and that
EntNfsBS2 could reduce 4-NBALC more ef ﬁciently than WT
EntNfsB, allowing determination of kinetic parameters (Km =
1.111 mM,kcat =205.0 min−1 and kcat/Km =3075 M−1 s−1, Supple-
mentary Fig. 6, Supplementary Table 2). Both variants retained the
ability to reduce 4-NBA. Therefore, EntNfsBS1 is active on both
2-NBA and 4-NBA, unlike any previously reported nitroreductase.
The ability to engineer nitroreductase selectivity and promiscuity in
this way could prove useful in applications including activation of
anticancer prodrugs with multiplenitro groups, and bioremediation
of soils contaminated with nitroaromatics, where a complex mixture
of different compounds is often found, and therefore the ability to act
on multiple isomers is desirable. The isolation of EntNfsBS1 and
EntNfsBS2 demonstrates chemically-directed evolution as a powerful
application of the artiﬁcial selection system, using an external supply
of target substrates to direct both improvement of an existing poor
activity, and acquisition of an activity with a non-native substrate.
Coupling artiﬁcial selection to genetic design optimization
yields the best-performing synthetic isopropanol pathway.W e
anticipated that the artiﬁcial selection system should be readily
applicable to more complex systems than individual enzymes,
such as metabolic pathways. Furthermore, the selection pressure
should act not only on the sequences of enzymes, but in general
on any genetically-encoded trait that can be linked to the gen-
eration of NAD+, such as regulatory sequences controlling gene
expression. These sequences, particularly promoters and ribo-
some binding sites (RBSs), are important in the design and
optimization of heterologous/synthetic metabolic pathways, as
they control the amount of each enzyme that is produced. To
maximize production, high yet balancedﬂux across the pathway
is required, while avoiding the accumulation of intermediates44,45
and expression-associated metabolic burden46. Finding the best
combination of regulatory elements for a speciﬁc pathway is not
trivial, often requiring multiple rounds of laborious and time-
consuming screening.
Fig. 3 Crystal structures of CBADHS and TBADHS1 reveal mechanism of cofactor selectivity reversal. aCofactor binding site of CBADHS with NAD+
bound. The substitutions identiﬁed in CBADHS allow for the binding of NAD+ but would prevent the binding of NADP+ by steric impediments and
electrostatic repulsion with the side chains of D198 and Y199. Additionally, the stacked-ring interaction of the adenine moiety with Y218 observed in
CBADHWT cannot be established due to the Y218P substitution, possibly enabling a moreﬂexible binding of the cofactor.b Cofactor binding site of
TBADHS1, with NAD+ placed at the same position as NADP+ in the structure of TBADHWT. P200−P201 is modelled as a cis peptide bond. While TBADHS1
can accommodate NAD+ in its cofactor binding pocket, the binding of NADP+ would be prevented by steric impediments caused by the side chains of
S198 and K199. As in CBADHS, the substitution of Y218 prevents the formation of a stacked-ring interaction with the adenine ring of the cofactor, possibly
enabling a moreﬂexible binding of NAD+.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 7
Isopropanol is a widely used solvent, additive, and platform
chemical with a large market, conventionally manufactured by
petrochemical routes. We sought to develop an isopropanol
production pathway and prototype whole-cell biocatalyst superior
to the natural and engineered examples reported previously47
(Fig. 6a). A library (MP Lib) of variants of pathway-encoding
plasmids, differing in the regulatory elements (promoters and
RBSs) controlling each gene, was constructed by combinatorial
DNA assembly using the Start-Stop Assembly48 system (Fig.6b),
giving a library of 60.4 million different variants. While only one
enzyme in the pathway (CBADH) directly generates NADP+
(converted to NAD+ by transhydrogenases), the rate depends on
the ﬂux through the entire pathway, which in turn depends on a
combination of regulatory genetic elements giving optimal
expression of all enzymes, without causing problematic over-
expression. This coupling allows the artiﬁcial selection pressure to
be applied to the identiﬁcation of optimal genetic designs.
AL cells were transformed with MPLib and grown anaerobically
on minimal medium agar plates, with gluconate as a carbon
source instead of glucose, because the maximum theoretical yield
of isopropanol from gluconate is greater. Colonies of transformed
AL cells were visible after 65 h of anaerobic incubation. We
veriﬁed the ability of 10 colonies to grow anaerobically after
inoculating them into minimal medium liquid cultures, and
conﬁrmed the presence of isopropanol in the fermentation broth
by 1H-NMR (Supplementary Table 1).
We compared the combinations of regulatory elements and the
isopropanol titer of 10‘S’variants obtained by artiﬁcial selection
with those of 10‘R’variants picked from the library at random
without arti ﬁcial selection. We found only two different
combinations of regulatory elements among the S variants
(MPS1 and MPS2), whereas the 10R variants were all different,
and included defective variants lacking one or more of the genes,
which can arise during DNA assembly (Fig.6b). In these minimal
culture conditions, the S variants gave an average isopropanol
titer of 4.97 mM after 17 h of incubation, which was signiﬁcantly
greater (t(9) = 9.22 and p = 1.54 × 10−8, or excluding defective
variants t(9) = 6.82 and p = 4.19 × 10−6) than the average of
0.60 mM produced by the R variants (Fig.6b). This indicates that
the artiﬁcial selection pressure had acted both to eliminate
defective variants and to favour speciﬁc combinations of genetic
elements leading to maximized production of isopropanol.
We compared the performance of the best isopropanol
pathway variant MP S1 with the best isopropanol pathway
reported previously, by Hanai and coworkers47, using the same
growth medium and culture conditions. The previous best 43.5%
of maximum theoretical isopropanol yield during the production
phase (with 45 mM titre) was surpassed here by WTE. coli cells
transformed with MPS1, which achieved 56% at the same point
(with 62 mM titre), the highest isopropanol yield reported so far
for any organism, including both native producers and
engineered strains.
Fig. 4 Selection of an imine reductase with reversed cofactor selectivity and minimized substrate inhibition. aReaction catalyzed by MsIRED
(Myxococcus stipitatus imine reductase). MsIRED can reduce several imines to the corresponding amine using NADPH as cofactor.b Homology model of
the cofactor binding site of MsIREDWT with NADPH bound. The model was generated by threading the MsIRED sequence into PDB code 3ZHB. Residues
32, 33, 34, and 37 were predicted to be close to the 2’ phosphate of NADPH. Hydrogen bonds are shown in green.c Anaerobic culture of AL cells
transformed with MsIREDWT (pLS130), MsIREDC (with substitutions N32E, R33Y, T34E, K37R, L67I, and T71V; pLS131) and library MsIREDLib (pLS133) in
medium with 2-methyl-1-pyrroline. Controls are as in Fig.1. d Anaerobic culture of AL cells transformed with MsIREDWT, MsIREDC, and MsIREDS (with
substitutions N32D, R33V, T34R, and K37R) in M9 glucose medium with 2-methyl-1-pyrroline. MsIREDS caused the best anaerobic growth of AL cells.e
Comparison of enzymatic activity at different concentrations of 2-methyl-1-pyrroline for MsIREDC and MsIREDS. Data points of panelsc−e represent mean
values, with error bars showing standard deviation. For panelsc and d, n = 3 biologically independent cultures for all timepoints of growth curves. For panel
e, n = 3 biologically independent assays for all substrate concentrations with both enzymes. Source data are provided as a Source Dataﬁle.
ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9
8 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
Fig. 5 Chemically-directed selection of nitroreductase variants with altered substrate speciﬁcity. aCatalytic activities of EntNfsB (Enterobacter cloacae
nitroreductase NfsB). EntNfsB is able to reduce several nitroaromatic compounds, such as 4-nitrobenzoic acid (4-NBA), using NADH or NADPH as
cofactors. EntNfsB
WT is also able to reduce 4-nitrobenzyl alcohol (4-NBALC) less efﬁciently, but does not display any activity towards 2-nitrobenzoic acid
(2-NBA). b Substrate binding site of EntNfsBWT with 4-NBA bound (PDB code 5J8G). Residues 40, 41, 68, and 124 were close to the substrate, and did not
contact the FMN group essential for catalysis. Anaerobic culture of AL cells transformed with the library EntNfsBLib (pLS169) in M9 glucose medium with
2-NBA (c) or 4-NBALC (e). Controls are as in Fig.1. d Anaerobic culture of AL cells transformed with EntNfsBS1 (with substitutions S40A, T41I, and F124A;
pLS169_1), the variant with activity towards 2-NBA, in M9 glucose medium supplemented with 2-NBA.f Anaerobic culture of AL cells transformed with
EntNfsBS2 (with substitutions T41L, Y68L, and F124L; pLS169_3), the variant with improved activity towards 4-NBALC, in M9 glucose medium
supplemented with 4-NBALC. Data points of growth curves represent mean values, with error bars showing standard deviation;n =3 biologically
independent cultures for all timepoints of growth curves. Source data are provided as a Source Dataﬁle.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 9
Discussion
Known natural enzymes and other proteins encompass extremely
diverse catalysts, structures, materials, and molecular machines,
yet necessarily these represent a tiny subset of all possible pro-
teins. Automated chemical synthesis can readily provide DNA
encoding arbitrary protein sequences, so identifying novel func-
tionalities in protein sequence space is effectively solely a search
problem. Searches of such astronomically large and highly mul-
tidimensional design spaces cannot be exhaustive, so success is a
function of start points, search strategies, and throughput; as well
as the structure of the space.
Natural evolution and laboratory evolution alike use existing
proteins as start points, and generate new functional proteins by
modest numbers of modiﬁcations. Initiating searches for new
Fig. 6 Selection of an isopropanol production pathway with optimized regulatory elements. aA synthetic isopropanol production pathway forE. coli.
Thiolase (acetyl-CoA acetyltransferase) THL (encoded byatoB) catalyzes the condensation of two acetyl-CoA molecules to one acetoacetyl-CoA,
releasing one free CoA molecule. Acetoacetyl-CoA transferase ACoAT (comprising two subunits encoded byatoA and atoD) transfers the CoA group from
acetoacetyl-CoA to acetate, yielding acetoacetate and acetyl-CoA. Acetoacetate is decarboxylated by acetoacetate decarboxylase ADC (encoded byadc),
resulting in acetone and CO2. Finally, acetone is reduced to isopropanol by CBADH. The acetate consumed by ACoAT can be regenerated from the
resulting acetyl-CoA by phosphate acetyltransferase PTA and acetate kinase ACK. The NADP+ generated during the reduction of acetone can be
employed by transhydrogenases STHA and PNTA to regenerate the NAD+ required to sustain anaerobic growth.b A library of isopropanol pathway-
encoding plasmids was combinatorially assembled using mixtures of promoters and RBSs, expected to cause a diversity of performance in terms ofﬂux,
accumulation of intermediates, and expression-associated metabolic burden. 10‘S’ pathway variants were isolated by redox selection inE. coliAL cells and
10 ‘R’ pathway variants were isolated at random. Sequencing was used to determine the parts present in each case, which are shown aligned below the
corresponding part in the design. Only two different permutations of parts were identiﬁed among the S variants, whereas all 10R variants were unique. Two
R variants were defective, lacking one or more expected parts, whereas all S variants were complete. For comparison of isopropanol production, AL cells
containing the S and R variants were cultured in M9 glucose medium for 17 h, then individual and average isopropanol titers in culture broths of both
groups were determined. For both variants obtained by selection and variants picked at random,n = 10 biologically independent samples. In each set, black
bars represent individual biological replicates, and the red bar represents the mean value with standard deviation indicated by the error bar obtained from
the corresponding set of individual biological replicates. Source data are provided as a Source Dataﬁle.
ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9
10 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
proteins from these proximal start points greatly decreases the
scale of the search, increasing feasibility. However, it also means
that ‘new’ proteins are very similar to their parents. In this
context, new functional proteins identiﬁed from metagenomic
resources49 also represent additional start points to access new
regions of sequence space. It is not currently possible to make
large jumps in sequence space to islands of functionality distant
from the natural repertoire, a limitation that might be overcome
by the future development ofde novo enzyme design, allowing
exotic and truly novel proteins to be identiﬁed. In this direction,
artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) are already
being applied to directed evolution and protein engineering50,51.
Encouraging progress towards solving the 50-year-old protein
folding problem has recently been made using AI52, although
predicting function is much more difﬁcult. When developing new
or improved enzyme activities, there is currently no substitute for
experimental evaluation, so throughput is key.
Isolation and screening of variants using robotic automation is
the current state of the art in protein engineering, but remains
much slower than library generation, so is usually the bottleneck.
Technologies like FACS and micro ﬂuidics achieve higher
throughputs, but are less widely applicable. Artiﬁcial selection
provides the highest throughput, because variants do not need to
be physically separated for individual evaluation, and in some
cases because beneﬁcial mutations can continuously accumulate
without intervention. Selection is part of classical strain
improvement53, a longstanding approach re-popularized in
recent years, with the beneﬁt of modern genome sequencing, as
Adaptive Laboratory Evolution (ALE) 54. Over time, arti ﬁcial
selections6 have enabled powerful technologies, with limited
scopes, including Systematic Evolution of Ligands by Exponential
Enrichment (SELEX)55,56 for generation of high-afﬁnity binding
aptamers, Compartmentalized Self-Replication (CSR) 57 for
directed evolution of DNA polymerases, and Phage-Assisted
Continuous Evolution (PACE)58, which supports selection of
factors linked to gene expression.
Previous studies have shown that E. coli cells with defective
anaerobic fermentation can be used to select redox-active
enzymes or pathways acting on substrates connected to native
metabolism8–11,13. Here, we have demonstrated that such a
metabolic defect can be exploited as an unusually widely applic-
able selection system acting on metabolically isolated enzymes by
providing an external electron acceptor in the culture medium.
The outcome of the selection can be directly controlled by simply
replacing the externally provided substrate, enabling an easily-
tunable, chemically-driven selection system. The selection pres-
sure acts directly on NAD+ regeneration, so is directly applicable
to NAD-dependent oxidoreductases, a very large class of
enzymes59. The diverse viable growth rates observed among
selected variants and controls, and diverse kinetic parameters
among selected variants, indicate that the selection has a wide
dynamic range. Furthermore, the selection is highly amenable to
extension through coupling. This ﬁrst study includes optional
coupling to NADP-dependent activities via transhydrogenases;
coupling to non-redox enzymes (in the isopropanol pathway
here, but many pathways and cascades contain at least one
NAD(P)H-dependent step); and coupling to genetic design,
illustrating the broad scope of selection, not limited to protein
sequences. These results demonstrate that the system will be
applicable to diverse problems in industrial biotechnology, and
especially in biocatalysis.
Direct applications of examples described here include the
development of alcohol dehydrogenases (ketoreductases) for
production of chiral alcohols60, imine reductases (especially the
subset with reductive aminase activity) for production of chiral
amines61, and development of isopropanol-producing microbial
strains. The artiﬁcial selection could be applied widely in the
ﬁelds represented by these speciﬁc examples; the development of
enzymes and cascades for the synthesis of pharmaceutical and
agrichemical precursors, and whole-cell biocatalysts required for
sustainable biomanufacture of commodity chemicals. Besides
laboratory development, nature is still a very important source of
biocatalysts
49. Identifying new enzymes from metagenomic
sources is conceptually similar to identifying desired variants
from synthetic libraries, and the selection is well suited to both.
The great throughput provided by artiﬁcial selection is more
than a ‘brute force’ alternative to computational design: The
libraries in this study are too large to screen by conventional
methods, but cutting library sizes requires assumptions. For
example, the CBADH and TBADH variants which outcompeted
all others (and previous reports) under selection pressure were
not part of the much smaller computationally-designed libraries.
Furthermore, the capacity to include an additional residue in the
initial design obviated subsequent recovery of activity.
Even the throughput provided by artiﬁcial selection is not a
panacea given the size of protein sequence space. It will be very
powerful to combine selection with AI/ML approaches, iteratively
using AI/ML for library design and artiﬁcial selection to rapidly
search libraries, and hence rapidly progress through design space.
Artiﬁcial selection could be coupled to an in vivo mutagenesis
system, such as OrthoRep 62 or eMutaT763, to achieve fully
automated and continuous in vivo evolution. In time, these
approaches will support the transition from the fossil economy to
the sustainable, circular bioeconomy, inform protein and enzyme
design principles, and ultimately enable the development ofde
novo design of enzymes and other systems.
Methods
Construction ofE. coli mutant strains. E. coli strain JW1228, theΔadhE mutant
from the Keio collection64, was used as the starting point for construction of
multiple strains. The pMAK705 allele exchange method65 was used to construct the
AL (ΔadhE ΔldhA), ALP (ΔadhE ΔldhA ΔpntA), ALS (ΔadhE ΔldhA ΔsthA) and
ALPS (ΔadhE ΔldhA ΔpntA ΔsthA) strains; using pMAK70565-derived plasmids
targeting ldhA (pLS63), pntA (pLS40) andsthA (pLS39) (Supplementary Table 3).
Brieﬂy, cells were transformed by heat shock at 37 °C, plated onto LB agar plates
with chloramphenicol, and incubated at 30 °C. Single colonies were used to
inoculate LB medium with chloramphenicol, and incubated at 30 °C overnight.
Serial dilutions prepared from the overnight cultures were plated onto LB agar
plates with chloramphenicol and incubated at 44 °C (the non-permissive tem-
perature for replication of these plasmids) with chloramphenicol selection to isolate
single crossover (cointegrate) clones, then subcultured and incubated at 30 °C (the
permissive temperature) without selection to allow cointegrate resolution and to
allow the arising double crossover clones to grow, andﬁnally subcultured and
incubated at 44 °C without selection to eliminate the plasmid. Mutants were ver-
iﬁed by antibiotic resistance proﬁle and PCR screening of the target locus. Firstly,
pLS63 was used to derive the AL strain from JW1228. The AL strain was then
subjected to the same protocol with pLS40 or pLS39, yielding strains ALP and ALS,
respectively. Finally, ALS was treated with pLS40 to obtain the quadruple mutant
strain ALPS.
Construction of plasmids. Plasmids are listed in Supplementary Table 3. Oligo-
nucleotides are listed in Supplementary Table 4.E. coliDH5α was used as a cloning
host. Restriction digestion and ligation reactions were performed as recommended
by the manufacturer (New England Biolabs). All constructed plasmids were iso-
lated and veriﬁed by sequencing.
Sequences encoding ADHE (AIN31697.1 [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/
AIN31697.1]) and BDHA (CAB12443.1 [https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/
CAB12443.1]) were PCR-ampliﬁed from genomic DNA ofE. coliBW25113
and Bacillus subtilis168, respectively. Sequences encoding CBADH (AAA23199.2
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/AAA23199.2/]), BUDC (AAC78679.1
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/AAC78679.1]), TADH (ACD50896.1 [https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/ACD50896.1]), TBADH (CAA46053.1 [https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/CAA46053.1]), MsIRED (AGC43099.1
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/AGC43099.1]) and EntNfsB (AAA62801.1
[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/protein/AAA62801.1]) were codon-adapted suitably for
expression inE. coliand chemically synthesized (IDT or DNA2.0) (Supplementary
Table 5). Plasmids for expression of these enzymes were constructed by cloning the
coding sequences into pUC19. Synthetic sequences encoding ADHE, BDHA, CBADH,
BUDC, TADH, TBADH, and MsIRED were PCR ampliﬁed, the PCR products were
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 11
digested with SphI and BamHI, and the appropriate fragments were puriﬁed and ligated
with pUC19 vector (previously linearized by treatment with SphI and BamHI) using T4
DNA ligase. For EntNfsB, the pUC19 vector backbone was PCR ampliﬁed with primers
introducing BbsI restriction sites. The pUC19 PCR product was mixed with the
synthetic sequence encoding EntNfsB and assembled in a Golden Gate reaction in the
presence of DpnI. Golden Gate reactions were performed in a total reaction volume of
20 μL in 1 × T4 DNA ligase buffer, comprising 50 fmol of backbone (linearized pUC19
with BbsI restriction sites obtained as described above), 50 fmol of the DNA fragment
to be cloned, 1 U/μL of BbsI-HF restriction enzyme and 20 U/μL of T4 DNA ligase. The
reaction mixture was then incubated in a thermocycler with 30 cycles alternating 5 min
steps at 37 °C with 5 min steps at 16 °C, before performing a singleﬁnal deactivation
step at 65 °C for 20 min. pLS131, encoding the previously-reported
36 MsIREDC variant,
was generated by inverse PCR using pLS130(encoding WT MsIRED) as template and
primers designed to introduce the appropriate substitutions (N32E, R33Y, T34E, K37R,
L67I, and T71V) followed by self-ligation of the PCR product using T4 DNA ligase. To
construct plasmids for expression of hexahistidine-tagged versions of MsIRED,
EntNfsB, and their variants, the coding sequences were PCR-ampliﬁed using primers
containing a C-terminal hexahistidine tag and BbsI restriction sites (Supplementary
Table 5). The resulting PCR products were mixed with pUC19 vector backbone
previously PCR-ampliﬁed with primers introducing BbsI restriction sites and used to
perform a Golden Gate assembly reaction as described above. To construct plasmids for
expression of hexahistidine-tagged versions of CBADH, TBADH, and their variants,
coding sequences were ampliﬁed by PCR using primers designed to introduce NdeI and
BlpI restriction sites. PCR products and the pET28 vector were digested using NdeI and
BlpI, and the appropriate puriﬁed fragments were ligated using T4 DNA ligase,
resulting in pET28-derived plasmidse n c o d i n ge n z y m e sw i t hN - t e r m i n a l
hexahistidine tags.
To construct allele exchange directed mutagenesis plasmids derived from
pMAK705, two 500 bp sequences, one upstream and one downstream of the target
gene, were PCR-ampliﬁed from genomic DNA ofE. coli BW25113. The resulting
PCR products were fused using overlap extension PCR using primers incorporating
BamHI and HindIII sites. The product of the overlap extension PCR was digested
with BamHI and HindIII, and ligated with linearized pMAK705 (obtained by
treating pMAK705 with BamHI and HindIII) using T4 DNA ligase.
Prediction of residues involved in nicotinamide cofactor preference. CSR-
SALAD
25 with standard parameters was used to predict residues important in
determining the nicotinamide cofactor preference of CBADH, TBADH, and
MsIRED. The inputs were the available crystal structures for CBADH and TBADH
(PDB codes 1KEV [https://doi.org/10.2210/pdb1KEV/pdb] and 1YKF [https://
doi.org/10.2210/pdb1YKF/pdb], respectively), or a homology model of MsIRED
generated with SWISS-MODEL66 using the crystal structure ofStreptomyces
kanamyceticus imine reductase as starting model (PDB code 3ZHB [https://doi.org/
10.2210/pdb3ZHB/pdb]).
Construction of full combinatorial saturation mutagenesis libraries. Libraries
of variants of CBADH, TBADH, MsIRED, and EntNfsB were generated by full
combinatorial saturation mutagenesis of the targeted positions using either inverse
PCR (for CBADH and TBADH) or Golden Gate assembly (for MsIRED and
EntNfsB). For inverse PCR reactions, a pair of primers were designed for each
reaction, with degenerate N mixtures of nucleotides at each position targeted for
saturation mutagenesis. The 5′ end of one primer in each pair was phosphorylated
(Supplementary Table 4). The reactions were carried out with Phusion High-
Fidelity DNA polymerase (New England Biolabs) using as template the pUC19-
derived expression plasmid for each parental coding sequence, described above.
The reactions were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions in a
total volume of 50μL. PCR products were treated with DpnI, puriﬁed, and cir-
cularized by self-ligation with T4 DNA ligase. For Golden Gate assembly
reactions
67, ﬁrst the pUC19 vector backbone was ampliﬁed by PCR with primers
with overhangs designed to incorporate matching BbsI restriction sites. The parent
coding sequences were ampliﬁed with one or more pairs of primers containing
degenerate N mixtures of nucleotides at the positions targeted for saturation
mutagenesis and overhangs matching the corresponding BbsI restriction sites. The
resulting PCR ampliﬁed fragments contained the targeted positions and covered
the entire coding sequence, such that assembly would lead to libraries of full-length
coding sequences. The ampliﬁed vector backbone and PCR fragments were used to
carry out a Golden Gate assembly reaction in the presence of DpnI as previously
described. Successful genetic diversiﬁcation was veriﬁed by sequencing 10 random
isolated clones of each library, obtaining in all cases 10 different sequences (Sup-
plementary Tables 6−9).
Construction of the library of isopropanol production pathways. The atoB,
atoD, andatoA coding sequences were obtained by PCR ampliﬁcation fromE. coli
strain BW25113 genomic DNA. Theadc coding sequence was obtained by PCR
ampliﬁcation from Clostridium acetobutylicum ATCC 824 genomic DNA. The
sequence encoding CBADH (cbadh) was obtained by PCR ampliﬁcation from the
pLS6 plasmid. In all cases, primers designed to introduce BsaI overhangs
were used.
Individual parts, expression units, and full metabolic pathways were constructed
by hierarchical Start-Stop Assembly
48. Firstly, functional genetic parts were cloned
in the Level 0 storage plasmid pStA0 by mixing the PCR ampliﬁed fragments with
BsaI-digested vector and ligating with T4 DNA ligase. Level 0 mixtures of six
different promoters and 6 different RBSs (described previously48) were prepared as
equimolar mixtures of the plasmids containing these parts. Libraries of Level 1
plasmids (each containing whole expression units comprising a promoter, an RBS,
a functional gene, and a transcriptional terminator) were obtained by Start-Stop
Assembly reactions. For each functional gene, the reaction was performed in a total
reaction volume of 20μL in 1 × T4 DNA ligase buffer, and included 20 fmol of the
destination vector (pStA1AB, pStA1BC, pStA1CD, pStA1DE or pStA1EZ), 40 fmol
of the mixture of Level 0 plasmids carrying promoters, 40 fmol of the mixture of
Level 0 plasmids carrying RBSs, 40 fmol of Level 0 plasmid carrying the
corresponding gene, 40 fmol of Level 0 plasmid carrying a terminator out of four
different possibilities (as shown in Supplementary Table 3), T4 DNA ligase buffer,
20 U/μL of T4 DNA ligase and 0.5 U/μL of SapI. The reaction mixture was
incubated using a thermocycler for 30 cycles of 37 °C for 5 min and 16 °C for 5 min,
before a singleﬁnal step of deactivation at 65 °C for 20 min. The resulting products
were used to transformE. coli DH5α cells, and plasmid DNA was isolated. The
Level 2 library (containing variants of the full metabolic pathway differing in the
combination of promoters and RBSs) was generated with similar Start-Stop
Assembly reactions, but the BsaI restriction enzyme was used instead of SapI.
Anaerobic cultures. E. coli AL, ALS, ALP, or ALPS cells were transformed with
individual plasmids encoding WT enzymes or variants, or plasmid libraries
encoding variants of enzymes or variants of pathways. Transformed cells were
transferred into 15 mL of M9 medium and incubated aerobically at 30 °C for 6 h to
recover. Recovered transformant cells were then used at a 1:100 dilution to
inoculate anaerobic M9 media containing 18 mM glucose or (where stated) glu-
conate, 100μg/mL ampicillin or 50μg/mL kanamycin as appropriate, 1 mM IPTG,
and an external substrate as appropriate (Supplementary Table 10). Anaerobic
cultures were incubated in a Don Whitley Scientiﬁc A35 anaerobic workstation
containing anaerobic growth gas mix (10% CO
2, 10% H2, and 80% N2). The culture
medium was made anaerobic by placing it in the anaerobic workstation for 24 h
before inoculation. Growth was monitored by measuring OD600. In all growth
complementation experiments, cells transformed with pLS1 encodingE. coliADHE
were used as the positive control, and cells transformed with empty vector pUC19
were used as the negative control.
For artiﬁcial selection experiments performed with enzyme variant libraries,
after the plateau phase of growth was reached, cells were subcultured under the
same selective conditions to select variants supporting growth, and to dilute out
other variants. Selected variants were isolated by culturing samples of the grown
cells on LB agar plates containing the appropriate antibiotic and picking single
colonies, which were sequenced to identify the variant.
For artiﬁcial selection on the solid medium of the library of variants of the
isopropanol pathway MP
Lib, AL cells transformed with the library were plated onto
anaerobic M9 minimal medium agar plates supplemented with 18 mM gluconate,
50 μg/mL kanamycin, and 1 mM IPTG. The plates were made anaerobic by placing
them in the anaerobic workstation for 24 h before plating cells.
Growth curves were generated using GraphPad PRISM byﬁtting a Gompertz
growth equation to the OD
600 values measured at different time points.
Evaluation of isopropanol pathway variants. E. coli AL cells were transformed
with MPLib and plated on both aerobic and anaerobic M9 minimal medium agar
plates supplemented with 18 mM gluconate, 50μg/mL kanamycin, and 1 mM
IPTG. The redox selection pressure acts under anaerobic conditions. Plasmid DNA
was isolated from 10 colonies from the aerobic plates (random‘R’variants) and 10
colonies from the anaerobic plates (selected‘S’variants). Puriﬁed plasmids were
sequenced and used to retransformE. coli AL cells. To compare isopropanol
production among these clones (Fig.6), transformed cells were used to inoculate
M9 minimal medium supplemented with 18 mM gluconate, 50μg/mL kanamycin,
and 1 mM IPTG and incubated aerobically for 17 h at 37 °C and 250 rpm shaking,
after which cultures were centrifuged and the supernatant was analyzed by
1H-NMR. The isopropanol titers were compared by performing a one-tailed t-test,
and a large effect size was conﬁrmed by calculating Cohen’sD( D = 4.123, or
excluding defective variantsD = 3.519). Statistical tests were performed in R.
In order to compare the isopropanol production of MPS1 (the best isopropanol
pathway variant obtained by artiﬁcial selection in this study) with a previous
report47, the culture conditions used in that previous report were replicated.E. coli
BW25113 cells were transformed with pLS60_1, encoding pathway variant MPS1.
Transformed cells were plated onto LB agar plates supplemented with 50μg/mL
kanamycin and incubated aerobically overnight at 37 °C. Individual colonies were
picked and used to inoculate precultures of 5 mL SD-7 medium
47 with 111 mM
glucose. Cells were cultured aerobically for 17 h at 37 °C and 250 rpm shaking.
Then, 250μL of the preculture was used to inoculate 25 mL of SD-8 medium47 with
111 mM glucose in 250 mLﬂasks with bafﬂes. After culturing cells aerobically for
9 h (because the previous study47 reported yield at this point, due to it being the
most productive phase of the culture) at 37 °C and 250 rpm shaking, the
isopropanol titer in the culture broth was determined by1H-NMR. All cultures
were supplemented with 50μg/mL kanamycin.
ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9
12 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
Analysis of culture broths by1H-NMR. Samples of cultures were centrifuged for
15 min at 8000 × g to pellet the cells. 0.5 mL of each supernatant was removed and
mixed with 0.5 mL of NMR buffer (75 mM Na2HPO4 buffer at pH 7.4, 4.6 mM 3-
(trimethylsilyl)-[2,2,3,3-2H4]-propionate (TSP) and 20% (v/v) D2O). The resulting
solution was transferred into a 3 mm NMR tube. 1D1H-NMR spectra were
acquired with TopSpin 3 on a Bruker Avance III 400 MHz spectrometer operating
at 293 K using the zg30 pulse sequence. A total of 16 scans for each sample were
collected into 32,768 data points with a spectral window of 20 ppm. Additionally,
for each metabolite of interest, spectra of M9 medium supplemented with 10 mM
of the metabolite were acquired in order to determine characteristic peaks of each
metabolite (Supplementary Table 11 and Supplementary Fig. 7). The spectra were
processed with the MestReNova suite. After performing phase and baseline cor-
rection, spectra were calibrated to the TSP signal atδ 0 ppm. Metabolite assign-
ment was conﬁrmed with spiking experiments. The concentration of each
metabolite of interest was calculated by integrating the characteristic signal of each
compound and comparing it to the area of the signal corresponding to TSP, taking
into account the different number of protons corresponding to each signal. For
each analysis, metabolite concentrations were measured in each of three inde-
pendent replicate cultures, and the mean of these values was determined.
Nickel-afﬁnity chromatography puriﬁcation of hexahistidine-tagged enzymes.
E. coli BL21(DE3) cells were transformed with pET28a or pUC19 expression
plasmids encoding hexahistidine-tagged proteins, allowed to recover at 37 °C for
1 h, then plated on LB agar plates supplemented with 50μg/mL kanamycin or
100 μg/mL ampicillin and incubated at 37 °C to select transformants. Individual
colonies were inoculated in 10 mL of LB broth with 50μg/mL kanamycin or
100 μg/mL ampicillin and cultured overnight at 37 °C and 230 rpm. Cells were then
inoculated at a 1:1000 ratio in LB with 50μg/mL kanamycin or 100μg/mL
ampicillin and incubated at 37 °C and 230 rpm until an OD
600 of 0.6 was reached.
Then, protein expression was induced with 400μM IPTG and incubated overnight
at 18 °C and 230 rpm. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4000 × g for 30 min
at 4 °C and resuspended in 50 mL of puriﬁcation buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl at pH
7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 10% (w/v) glycerol and 1 mM TCEP) supplemented with Base
Muncher DNAse, lysozyme, one cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Tablet per liter of
culture and, in the case of nitroreductases, 100μM ﬂavin mononucleotide (FMN).
After lysing cells by ultrasonication, the lysate was centrifuged at 21,000 × g for 1 h
at 4 °C to pellet cell debris. The supernatant wasﬁltered through a 0.21μm ﬁlter
and loaded onto a 5 mL HisTrap column (GE HealthCare). The column was
extensively washed with puriﬁcation buffer and eluted with a gradient of
25–500 mM imidazole. Eluted fractions were tested for enzymatic activity, and
those containing the activity of interest were pooled and subjected to gelﬁltration
in a Superdex 200 column (GE HealthCare) in buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl
at pH 7.4 and 150 mM NaCl. The purity of peak fractions was assessed by means of
SDS-PAGE. Additionally, for nitroreductase enzymes the presence of pure FMN-
bound holoprotein was determined based on a A280/A454 ratio lower than 5.
Puriﬁed proteins were concentrated to 40–80 μM, ﬂash frozen with liquid nitrogen,
and stored at−80 °C. All puriﬁcation steps were carried out with an ÄKTA pure
chromatography system (GE HealthCare).
Enzymatic activity assays. Enzymatic assays at different substrate concentrations
were performed at 37 °C with puriﬁed protein by monitoring NAD(P)H absor-
bance at 340 nm or 370 nm with an Eppendorf BioSpectrometer kinetic instru-
ment. Assays were performed anaerobically for EntNfsB and its variants and
aerobically for all other enzymes. All reactions were performed in a total volume of
200 μL for aerobic reactions and 400μL for anaerobic reactions, with protein
concentration ranging between 26 nM and 1.3μM and saturating concentrations of
cofactor (Supplementary Table 12). Oxidation reactions were performed in assay
buffer A (50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.8 and 50 mM NaCl), while reduction reactions
were carried out in assay buffer B (50 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.4 and 50 mM NaCl).
Reaction rates were determined using the initial linear rates. These were calculated
from the change in absorbance using the known molar absorption coefﬁcients
42 of
NADH and NADPH at 340 nm ofε340 = 6.22 × 103 M−1 cm−1 and of NADH at
370 nm ofε370 = 2.66 × 103 M−1 cm−1. Triplicate measurements were acquired for
all initial reaction rates. For all reactions except those catalyzed by EntNfsB and its
variants, equimolar amounts of cofactor and substrate are consumed as the reac-
tion progresses, and thus the consumption of cofactor was directly converted to
consumption of substrate. For reactions catalyzed by EntNfsB and its variants, the
substrates were assumed to be reduced only to the corresponding hydroxylamines,
due to previous reports indicating that the WT enzyme does not catalyze the
reduction to amines in vitro
42. Additionally, the reduction from the nitroso
intermediate to the corresponding hydroxylamine was assumed to happen
immediately. As a consequence, and considering that both the reduction to a
nitroso compound and to a hydroxylamine require 2 NADH, calculations were
performed on the basis of 4 mol of cofactor being consumed for each consumed
mol of the substrate. Kinetic parameters were obtained byﬁtting a Michaelis-
Menten model with GraphPad Prism, including substrate inhibition in the model
when a reduction of initial rates was observed at higher substrate concentrations.
Crystallization and structure solution. Puriﬁed CBADH
S and TBADHS1 were
concentrated to ~10 mg/mL for crystallization with sitting drop vapour diffusion at
17 °C using commercial sparse matrix screens with a Mosquito robot (TTPLab-
Tech). Crystallization hits were detected with a light-UV microscope and further
optimized in manually set up hanging drop vapour diffusion experiments. Final
CBADH
S crystals came from 900 mM sodium citrate, 100 mM imidazole at pH 8
mixed with an equal volume of protein solution. Final TBADHS1 crystals came
from 20% (w/v) PEG 3 K and 100 mM sodium citrate at pH 5.5 mixed with an
equal volume of protein solution. Crystals were soaked in the corresponding
mother liquor with 1 mM NAD
+, then cryoprotected for several minutes in mother
liquor with 30% volume PEG 400 andﬂash-cooled in liquid nitrogen. X-ray dif-
fraction data were collected at the Diamond Light Source synchrotron (Didcot,
UK), and processed with the xia2 pipeline68 using AutoPROC69. Structures were
solved by molecular replacement in Phaser70 using PDB 1KEV [https://doi.org/
10.2210/pdb1KEV/pdb]71 as a model for CBADHS and PDB 1YKF [https://doi.org/
10.2210/pdb1YKF/pdb]29 for TBADHS1. The models were rebuilt in Coot72 with
cycles of reﬁnement in phenix.reﬁne73, and validated with MolProbity74. Data
collection and reﬁnement information are presented in Supplementary Table 13.
Reporting summary. Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Research Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The coordinates and structure factors for CBADHS and TBADHS1 generated in this
study have been deposited in the PDB under accession codes6SCH (CBADHS) and
6SDM (TBADHS1). The DNA sequences of enzyme variants generated in this study have
been deposited in GenBank under accession codesMW431031−MW431041. The
CBADHWT, TBADHWT, Streptomyces kanamyceticus imine reductase and EntNfsBWT
structures used in this study are available in the PDB under accession codes1KEV
(CBADHWT), 1YKF (TBADHWT), 3ZHB (Streptomyces kanamyceticus imine reductase)
and 5J8G (EntNfsBWT). Source data are provided with this paper.
Received: 8 September 2021; Accepted: 4 November 2021;
References
1. Sanchez, S. & Demain, A. L. Enzymes and bioconversions of industrial,
pharmaceutical, and biotechnological signiﬁcance. Org. Process Res. Dev.15,
224–230 (2011).
2. Arnold, F. H. Directed evolution: bringing new chemistry to life.Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. Engl.57, 4143–4148 (2018).
3. Reetz, M. T. What are the limitations of enzymes in synthetic organic
chemistry? Chem. Rec. 16, 2449–2459 (2016).
4. Packer, M. S. & Liu, D. R. Methods for the directed evolution of proteins.Nat.
Rev. Genet. 16, 379–394 (2015).
5. Xiao, H., Bao, Z. & Zhao, H. High throughput screening and selection
methods for directed enzyme evolution.Ind. Eng. Chem. Res.54, 4011–4020
(2015).
6. Tizei, P. A. G., Csibra, E., Torres, L. & Pinheiro, V. B. Selection platforms for
directed evolution in synthetic biology.Biochem. Soc. Trans.44, 1165–1175
(2016).
7. Clark, D. P. The fermentation pathways of Escherichia coli.FEMS Microbiol.
Rev. 5, 223–234 (1989).
8. Shen, C. R. et al. Driving forces enable high-titer anaerobic 1-butanol synthesis
in Escherichia coli. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.77, 2905–2915 (2011).
9. Bastian, S. et al. Engineered ketol-acid reductoisomerase and alcohol
dehydrogenase enable anaerobic 2-methylpropan-1-ol production at
theoretical yield in Escherichia coli.Metab. Eng. 13, 345–352 (2011).
10. Zhang, X., Jantama, K., Moore, J. C., Shanmugam, K. T. & Ingram, L. O.
Production of L -alanine by metabolically engineered Escherichia coli.Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 77, 355–366 (2007).
11. Liang, K. & Shen, C. R. Selection of an endogenous 2,3-butanediol pathway in
Escherichia coli by fermentative redox balance.Metab. Eng. 39, 181–191
(2017).
12. Calzadiaz-Ramirez, L. et al. In vivo selection for formate dehydrogenases with
high efﬁciency and speciﬁcity toward NADP.ACS Catal. 10, 7512–7525
(2020).
13. Zhang, L., King, E., Luo, R. & Li, H. Development of a high-throughput,
in vivo selection platform for NADPH-dependent reactions based on redox
balance principles.ACS Synth. Biol
. https://doi.org/10.1021/acssynbio.8b00179
(2018).
14. Maxel, S. et al. A growth-based, high-throughput selection platform enables
remodeling of 4-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylase active site.ACS Catal. 10,
6969–6974 (2020).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 13
15. Nielsen, D. R., Yoon, S.-H., Yuan, C. J. & Prather, K. L. J. Metabolic
engineering of acetoin and meso-2,3-butanediol biosynthesis inE. coli.
Biotechnol. J. 5, 274–284 (2010).
16. Nicholson, W. L. The Bacillus subtilis ydjL (bdhA) gene encodes acetoin
reductase/2,3-butanediol dehydrogenase. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.74,
6832–6838 (2008).
17. Gu, J. et al. Isobutanol and 2-ketoisovalerate production by Klebsiella
pneumoniae via a native pathway.Metab. Eng. 43,7 1–84 (2017).
1 8 . H ö l l r i g l ,V . ,H o l l m a n n ,F . ,K l e e b ,A .C . ,B u e h l e r ,K .&S c h m i d ,A .T A D H ,t h e
thermostable alcohol dehydrogenase from Thermus sp. ATN1: a versatile new
biocatalyst for organic synthesis.Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.81,2 6 3–273 (2008).
19. Solanki, K., Abdallah, W. & Banta, S. Engineering the cofactor speciﬁcity of an
alcohol dehydrogenase via single mutations or insertions distal to the 2’-
phosphate group of NADP(H).Protein Eng. Des. Sel.30, 373–380 (2017).
20. Huang, R., Chen, H., Upp, D. M., Lewis, J. C. & Job Zhang, Y. P. A high-
throughput method for directed evolution of NAD(P)+-dependent
dehydrogenases for the reduction of biomimetic nicotinamide analogues.ACS
Catal. 9, 11709–11719 (2019).
21. Jiang, H.-W., Chen, Q., Pan, J., Zheng, G.-W. & Xu, J.-H. Rational engineering
of formate dehydrogenase substrate/cofactor afﬁnity for better performance in
NADPH regeneration. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol.192, 530–543 (2020).
22. You, C., Huang, R., Wei, X., Zhu, Z. & Zhang, Y.-H. P. Protein engineering of
oxidoreductases utilizing nicotinamide-based coenzymes, with applications in
synthetic biology. Synth. Syst. Biotechnol.2, 208–218 (2017).
23. van der Donk, W. A. & Zhao, H. Recent developments in pyridine nucleotide
regeneration. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.14, 421–426 (2003).
24. Wang, X. et al. Cofactor NAD(P)H regeneration inspired by heterogeneous.
Pathw. Chem. 2, 621–654 (2017).
25. Cahn, J. K. B. et al. A general tool for engineering the NAD/NADP cofactor
preference of oxidoreductases.ACS Synth. Biol.6, 326–333 (2017).
26. Cahn, J. K. B., Brinkmann-Chen, S. & Arnold, F. H. Enzyme nicotinamide
cofactor speciﬁcity reversal guided by automated structural analysis and
library design. Methods Mol. Biol.1671,1 5–26 (2018).
27. Patel, R. N. Biocatalytic synthesis of chiral alcohols and amino acids for
development of pharmaceuticals.Biomolecules 3, 741–777 (2013).
28. Hall, M. & Bommarius, A. S. Enantioenriched compounds via enzyme-
catalyzed redox reactions.Chem. Rev. 111, 4088–4110 (2011).
29. Korkhin, Y. et al. NADP-dependent bacterial alcohol dehydrogenases: crystal
structure, cofactor-binding and cofactor speciﬁcity of the ADHs of Clostridium
beijerinckii and Thermoanaerobacter brockii.J. Mol. Biol.278,9 6 7–981 (1998).
3 0 . M a d d o c k ,D .J . ,P a t r i c k ,W .M .&G e r t h ,M .L .S u b s t i t u t i o n sa tt h ec o f a c t o r
phosphate-binding site of a clostridial alcohol dehydrogenase lead to unexpected
changes in substrate speciﬁcity. Protein Eng. Des. Sel.28, 251–258 (2015).
31. Svensson, S., Höög, J. O., Schneider, G. & Sandalova, T. Crystal structures of
mouse class II alcohol dehydrogenase reveal determinants of substrate
speciﬁcity and catalytic efﬁciency. J. Mol. Biol.302, 441–453 (2000).
32. Voordouw, G., van der Vies, S. M. & Themmen, A. P. Why are two different
types of pyridine nucleotide transhydrogenase found in living organisms?Eur.
J. Biochem. 131, 527–533 (1983).
33. Schrittwieser, J. H., Velikogne, S. & Kroutil, W. Biocatalytic imine reduction
and reductive amination of ketones.Adv. Synth. Catal.357, 1655–1685 (2015).
34. Bornadel, A. et al. Technical considerations for scale-up of imine-reductase-
catalyzed reductive amination: a case study.Org. Process Res. Dev.23,
1262–1268 (2019).
35. Gand, M. et al. A NADH-accepting imine reductase variant: immobilization
and cofactor regeneration by oxidative deamination.J. Biotechnol.230,1 1–18
(2016).
36. Borlinghaus, N. & Nestl, B. M. Switching the cofactor speciﬁcity of an imine
reductase. ChemCatChem 10, 183–187 (2018).
37. de la Calle, M. E., Cabrera, G., Cantero, D., Valle, A. & Bolivar, J. A genetically
engineered Escherichia coli strain overexpressing the nitroreductase NfsB is
capable of producing the herbicide D-DIBOA with 100% molar yield.Microb.
Cell Fact. 18, 86 (2019).
38. Searle, P. F. et al. Nitroreductase: a prodrug-activating enzyme for cancer gene
therapy. Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol.31, 811–
816 (2004).
39. Williams, E. M. et al. Nitroreductase gene-directed enzyme prodrug therapy:
insights and advances toward clinical utility.Biochem. J.471, 131–153 (2015).
40. Spain, J. C. Biodegradation of nitroaromatic compounds.Annu. Rev.
Microbiol. 49, 523–555 (1995).
41. Ramos, J. L., González-Pérez, M. M., Caballero, A. & van Dillewijn, P.
Bioremediation of polynitrated aromatic compounds: plants and microbes put
up a ﬁght. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.16, 275–281 (2005).
42. Pitsawong, W., Hoben, J. P. & Miller, A.-F. Understanding the broad substrate
repertoire of nitroreductase based on its kinetic mechanism.J. Biol. Chem.
289, 15203–15214 (2014).
43. Pitsawong, W., Haynes, C. A., Koder, R. L. Jr, Rodgers, D. W. & Miller, A.-F.
Mechanism-informed reﬁnement reveals altered substrate-binding mode for
catalytically competent nitroreductase.Structure 25, 978–987.e4 (2017).
44. Ajikumar, P. K. et al. Isoprenoid pathway optimization for Taxol precursor
overproduction in Escherichia coli.Science 330,7 0–74 (2010).
45. Jeschek, M., Gerngross, D. & Panke, S. Combinatorial pathway optimization for
streamlined metabolic engineering.Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.47, 142–151 (2017).
46. Ceroni, F., Algar, R., Stan, G.-B. & Ellis, T. Quantifying cellular capacity
identiﬁes gene expression designs with reduced burden.Nat. Methods 12,
415–418 (2015).
47. Hanai, T., Atsumi, S. & Liao, J. C. Engineered synthetic pathway for
isopropanol production in Escherichia coli.Appl. Environ. Microbiol.73,
7814–7818 (2007).
48. Taylor, G. M., Mordaka, P. M. & Heap, J. T. Start-stop assembly: a
functionally scarless DNA assembly system optimized for metabolic
engineering. Nucleic Acids Res.47, e17 (2019).
49. Lennon, J. T. & Locey, K. J. More support for Earth’s massive microbiome.
Biol. Direct 15, 5 (2020).
50. Yang, K. K., Wu, Z. & Arnold, F. H. Machine-learning-guided directed
evolution for protein engineering.Nat. Methods 16, 687–694 (2019).
51. Wu, Z., Kan, S. B. J., Lewis, R. D., Wittmann, B. J. & Arnold, F. H. Machine
learning-assisted directed protein evolution with combinatorial libraries.Proc.
Natl Acad. Sci. USA116, 8852–8858 (2019).
52. Callaway, E.
‘It will change everything’: DeepMind’s AI makes gigantic leap in
solving protein structures.Nature 588, 203–204 (2020).
53. Crook, N. & Alper, H. S. Classical Strain Improvement. inEngineering
Complex Phenotypes in Industrial Strains(ed. Patnaik, R.) 1–33 (John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 2012).
54. Dragosits, M. & Mattanovich, D. Adaptive laboratory evolution— principles
and applications for biotechnology.Microb. Cell Fact.12, 64 (2013).
55. Ellington, A. D. & Szostak, J. W. In vitro selection of RNA molecules that bind
speciﬁc ligands. Nature 346, 818–822 (1990).
56. Tuerk, C. & Gold, L. Systematic evolution of ligands by exponential
enrichment: RNA ligands to bacteriophage T4 DNA polymerase.Science 249,
505–510 (1990).
57. Ghadessy, F. J., Ong, J. L. & Holliger, P. Directed evolution of polymerase
function by compartmentalized self-replication.Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA98,
4552–4557 (2001).
58. Esvelt, K. M., Carlson, J. C. & Liu, D. R. A system for the continuous directed
evolution of biomolecules.Nature 472, 499–503 (2011).
59. Sellés Vidal, L., Kelly, C. L., Mordaka, P. M. & Heap, J. T. Review of NAD(P)
H-dependent oxidoreductases: properties, engineering, and application.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta.: Proteins Proteom.1866, 327–347 (2018).
60. Hummel, W. New alcohol dehydrogenases for the synthesis of chiral
compounds. Adv. Biochem. Eng. Biotechnol.58, 145–184 (1997).
61. Cosgrove, S. C. et al. Imine reductases, reductive aminases, and amine
oxidases for the synthesis of chiral amines: discovery, characterization, and
synthetic applications. Methods Enzymol. 608, 131–149 (2018).
62. Ravikumar, A., Arzumanyan, G. A., Obadi, M. K. A., Javanpour, A. A. & Liu,
C. C. Scalable, continuous evolution of genes at mutation rates above genomic
error thresholds. Cell 175, 1946–1957.e13 (2018).
63. Park, H. & Kim, S. Gene-speciﬁc mutagenesis enables rapid continuous
evolution of enzymes in vivo.Nucleic Acids Res.49, e32 (2021).
64. Baba, T. et al. Construction ofEscherichia coli K-12 in-frame, single-gene
knockout mutants: the Keio collection.Mol. Syst. Biol. 2, 2006.0008 (2006).
65. Hamilton, C. M., Aldea, M., Washburn, B. K., Babitzke, P. & Kushner, S. R.
New method for generating deletions and gene replacements in Escherichia
coli. J. Bacteriol. 171, 4617–4622 (1989).
66. Waterhouse, A. et al. SWISS-MODEL: homology modelling of protein
structures and complexes.Nucleic Acids Res.46, W296–W303 (2018).
67. Püllmann, P. et al. Golden mutagenesis: an efﬁcient multi-site-saturation
mutagenesis approach by Golden Gate cloning with automated primer design.
Sci. Rep. 9, 10932 (2019).
68. Winter, G. xia2: an expert system for macromolecular crystallography data
reduction. J. Appl. Crystallogr.43, 186–190 (2010).
69. Vonrhein, C. et al. Data processing and analysis with the autoPROC toolbox.
Acta Crystallogr. D. Biol. Crystallogr.67, 293–302 (2011).
70. McCoy, A. J. et al. Phaser crystallographic software.J. Appl. Crystallogr.40,
658–674 (2007).
71. Korkhin, Y. et al. Crystalline alcohol dehydrogenases from the mesophilic
bacterium Clostridium beijerinckii and the thermophilic bacterium
Thermoanaerobium brockii: preparation, characterization and molecular
symmetry. Acta Crystallogr. D. Biol. Crystallogr.52, 882–886 (1996).
72. Emsley, P., Lohkamp, B., Scott, W. G. & Cowtan, K. Features and development
of Coot. Acta Crystallogr. D. Biol. Crystallogr.66, 486–501 (2010).
73. Adams, P. D. et al. PHENIX: a comprehensive Python-based system for
macromolecular structure solution.Acta Crystallogr. D. Biol. Crystallogr.66,
213–221 (2010).
74. Chen, V. B. et al. MolProbity: all-atom structure validation for
macromolecular crystallography. Acta Crystallogr. D. Biol. Crystallogr.66,
12–21 (2010).
ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9
14 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council
[grant number BB/N503873/1 to J.T.H.] and Syngenta [grant number BB/N503873/1 to
J.T.H]. We thank Dr. George Hodges and Dr. Nick Mulholland of Syngenta for their
input and perspectives as industrial supervisors of LSV’s CASE PhD studentship. The
crystallization facility at Imperial College London was funded by the Biotechnology and
Biological Sciences Research Council [grant number BB/D524840/1] and the Wellcome
Trust [grant number 202926/Z/16/Z]. We thank Diamond Light Source for X-ray beam
time (proposal mx12579), and the staff of beam lines I03 and I04 for assistance with
crystal testing and data collection.
Author contributions
J.T.H. conceived the study. L.S.V. and J.T.H. designed the study and strain engineering,
enzyme engineering, and microbiological experiments, which L.S.V. performed. L.S.V.
and J.W.M. designed and performed protein structure determination experiments. L.S.V.
and J.T.H. prepared the manuscript with input from J.W.M.
Competing interests
J.T.H. and L.S.V. declare the following competing interests: J.T.H. and L.S.V. are named
inventors and potential beneﬁciaries of patent application WO2019243821/EP3810760/
US20210277441 (applicant: Imperial College Innovations Limited; status: pending),
which covers aspects of this manuscript: the method and enzyme variants CBADH
S,
MsIREDS, EntNfsBS1, and EntNfsBS2. J.T.H. and L.S.V. are named inventors and
potential beneﬁciaries of patent application WO2021099767A1 (applicant: Imperial
College Innovations Limited; status: pending) which covers aspects of this manuscript:
enzyme variants TBADHS1 and TBADHS2. J.W.M. declares no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material
available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to John T. Heap.
Peer review informationNature Communicationsthanks the anonymous reviewer(s) for
their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permission informationis available athttp://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the
article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visithttp://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2021
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS|         (2021) 12:6859 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27266-9 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications 15