Published online 20 July 2023 Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 8293–8307 
https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gkad607 
Retr on-mediated m ultiplex genome editing and 
continuous evolution in Escherichia coli 
Wenqian Liu 1 , 2 , Siqi Zuo 1 , 2 , Youran Shao 1 , 2 , Ke Bi 1 , 2 , Jiarun Zhao 1 , 2 , Lei Huang 1 , 2 , 
Zhinan Xu 1 , 2 , * and Jiazhang Lian 1 , 2 , 3 , * 
1 Key Laboratory of Biomass Chemical Engineering of Ministry of Education, College of Chemical and Biological 
Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China, 2 Institute of Bioengineering, College of Chemical and 
Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China and 3 ZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientiﬁc and 
T echnological Innovation Center, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 311215, China 
Received March 13, 2023; Revised July 02, 2023; Editorial Decision July 03, 2023; Accepted July 07, 2023 
ABSTRACT 
While there are several genome editing techniques 
availab le, f ew are suitab le for dynamic and simulta- 
neous mutagenesis of arbitrary targeted sequences 
in prokar yotes. Here , to address these limitations, 
we present a versatile and multiplex retron-mediated 
genome editing system (REGES). First, through sys- 
tematic optimization of REGES, we achieve efﬁciency 
of ∼100%, 85 ± 3%, 69 ± 14% and 25 ± 14% for 
single-, double-, triple- and quadruple-locus genome 
editing, respectively. In addition, we employ REGES 
to generate pooled and bar coded v ariant libraries 
with degenerate RBS sequences to ﬁne-tune the 
e xpression le vel of endogenous and e xogenous 
genes, such as transcriptional factors to impr o ve 
ethanol tolerance and biotin biosynthesis. Finally, 
we demonstrate REGES-mediated continuous in vivo 
pr otein evolution, b y combining retr on, polymerase- 
mediated base editing and err or -pr one transcription. 
By these case studies, we demonstrate REGES as a 
po werful multiple x genome editing and continuous 
evolution tool with broad applications in synthetic 
biology and metabolic engineering. 
GRAPHICAL ABSTRACT 
INTRODUCTION 
With incr easing inter est in gene therap y, metabolic engi- 
neering and synthetic biology ( 1–3 ), there are expanding 
and continued demands for novel and efficient gene edit- 
ing tools. Classic genetic engineering methods depend on 
homology-dir ected r epair and often combine with phage- 
deri v ed recombinases (e.g. RecET or Lambda Red) ( 4 , 5 ) to 
improve the recombination efficiency. Unfortunately, these 
methods often suffer from low efficiency and the most com- 
monly used Cre / loxP and FLP / FRT systems will leave scars 
in the genome ( 6 , 7 ), hindering their broad applications in 
genetic engineering. To construct scarless mutant strains 
with high efficiency, genome-editing tools employing spe- 
cific nucleases have been developed recently. These include 
zinc finger nucleases (ZFNs) ( 8 ), transcription activator- 
like effector nucleases (TALENs) ( 9 ) and clustered regularly 
interspaced short palindromic repea t-associa ted nucleases 
(CRISPR) ( 10–12 ). In contrast to ZFNs ( 13 ) and TALENs 
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tel: +86 571 82993283; Fax: +86 571 82993283; Email: jzlian@zju.edu.cn 
Correspondence may also be addressed to Zhinan Xu. Email: znxu@zju.edu.cn 
C ⃝ The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research. 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creati v e Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License 
(http: // creati v ecommons.org / licenses / by-nc / 4.0 / ), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work 
is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals .permissions@oup .com 
8294 Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 
( 9 ), CRISPR-mediated editing only r equir es for changing 
the sequences of a short single guide RN A (sgRN A) for dif- 
ferent targets. As a result, CRISPR has been ra pidl y becom- 
ing one of the most commonly used editing methods, with 
applications in almost all kingdoms of life. 
Substitution mutations are indispensable and are ubiq- 
uitous in natural variation, which can alter the function of 
coding and regulatory sequences ( 14 , 15 ). In addition, most 
genetic mutation diseases in humans are caused by substi- 
tution mutations ( 16 ). Howe v er, current genome engineer- 
ing tools still have limited abilities to introduce substitution 
muta tions. The ef ficiency of oligonucleotide-media ted point 
mutations is < 3%, e v en when combined with CRISPR 
( 17 ). To address this challenge, base editors based on the 
CRISPR system have been developed ( 18 ). In this system, 
C to T mutations can be achie v ed with cytosine deami- 
nase (CBE) ( 19 , 20 ), with the adenine base editor (ABE, A 
to G mutations) de v eloped afterwar ds ( 21 ). Howe v er, base 
editors ar e r estricted to some specific nucleotide substitu- 
tions in a short window. To enable all 12 types of substi- 
tutions, prime editor was de v eloped by fusing a catalyt- 
ically impaired Cas9 endonuclease to an engineered re- 
verse transcriptase ( 22 ). Although well established in mam- 
malian cells, prime editor suffers from poor performance 
in prokaryotes (e.g. Esc heric hia coli ), with substitution, in- 
sertion and deletion reported with an editing efficiency of 
6.8%, 12.2% and 26%, respecti v ely ( 23 ). Multiple x auto- 
mated genome engineering (MAGE), enabling nucleotide 
substitution with chemically synthesized single-stranded 
DN As (ssDN As), is one of the most efficient methods in 
introducing substitution mutation ( 24 ). Ne v ertheless, mul- 
tiplex substitutions are introduced in multiple rounds of ss- 
DNA transforma tion and automa tion devices are generally 
r equir ed. 
Compared with the introduction of chemically synthe- 
sized ssDNAs in vitro , the generation of ssDNAs in vivo 
is expected to benefit recombineering-based genome edit- 
ing, such as higher editing efficiency and easier manipula- 
tion. The retron cassette from E. coli BL21 is such a rep- 
resentati v e e xample tha t can genera te m ulti-copy ssDN As 
(msDNAs) in vivo ( 25 ). Retrons are found to mediate anti- 
phage defense in bacteria ( 26 ) and the structure and defense 
mechanisms have been elucidated recently ( 27 ). Retron ms- 
DNAs can generate functional recombineering donors to 
introduce specific mutations (Supplementary Table S1), but 
the editing efficiency was reported to be low ( 28 , 29 ). Re- 
cently, by introducing a stronger ribosomal binding site 
(RBS) to ov ere xpress the single-stranded annealing protein 
(SSAP) bet from Lambda phage ( 30 ), HiSCRIBE (high- 
efficiency Synthetic Cellular Recorders Integrating Biolog- 
ical Events) increased editing efficiency up to 60%. In addi- 
tion, r etron library r ecombineering (RLR) was r eported to 
generate pooled and barcoded variant libraries with high ef- 
ficiency ( 31 ). Howe v er, the retron system is still not system- 
atically optimized, with an editing frequency of 3 × 10 −7 
for simultaneous two-locus editing ( 28 ), limiting their ap- 
plications in modifying se v eral single nucleotide polymor- 
phisms at a time to treat a genetic disease ( 19 ), regulating 
many endogenous genes at once to trigger changes in cel- 
lular phenotype ( 32 ) or optimizing complex metabolic reg- 
ulatory networks ( 24 ). Considering the continuous editing 
capability, the retron system is expected to enable multiplex 
genome editing. 
In this work, we establish an efficient retron-mediated 
genome editing system (REGES) in E. coli (Figure 1 ). We 
first optimize the retron system in a modular and systematic 
manner, and the incorporation frequency of mutations was 
increased to ∼100% for genomic substitutions , insertions , 
deletions as well as their combinations. In addition, by as- 
sembling an array of retron cassettes, we employ REGES 
for multiplex genome editing and can edit four genes with 
an efficiency of 25 ± 14%, r epr esenting the highest number 
of precise substitutions to be introduced in a single round of 
genome editing in E. coli . We then demonstrate REGES for 
the construction of pooled and barcoded variant libraries 
with degenerate RBS sequences to fine-tune the expression 
le v el of endogenous and exogenous genes, such as tran- 
scription factors to construct ethanol resistant strains and 
biotin-overproducing strains. Finally, we explored the capa- 
bility of REGES for continuous in vivo protein evolution, 
via the combination of retron, ortho gonal m utagenic RN A 
polymerase and cytidine deaminase to introduce random 
mutagenesis during the replication and transcription stages 
of in vivo ssDNA generation. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Materials and cultivation conditions 
Unless specifically mentioned, strains were cultivated at 
37 ◦C, and genome editing experiments were performed at 
30 ◦C. MacConkey agar medium (peptone 20 g l −1 , bile salts 
1.5 g l −1 , sodium chloride 5 g l −1 , agar 13.5 g l −1 , neutral 
red 0.03 g l −1 and crystal violet 0.001 g l −1 ) was used to 
determine the editing efficiency of galK mutations. Antibi- 
otics, when needed, were added at the following concentra- 
tions: ampicillin, 100 mg l −1 ; chloramphenicol, 34 mg l −1 ; 
kanamycin, 50 mg l −1 ; spectinomycin, 50 mg l −1 ; strepto- 
mycin, 25 mg l −1 and sodium dodecyl sulfate, 0.1% v / v. 
PCR was performed with the high-fidelity enzyme PrimeS- 
TAR ® Max DN A Pol ymer ase (Takar a, Tok yo , Japan). 
Oligonucleotides were synthesized by TSINGKE Biologi- 
cal Technology (Hangzhou, China). All chemicals were pur- 
chased from Sigma (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). 
Strain construction 
E. coli strains used in this study were listed in Supplemen- 
tary Table S2. DH5 /H9251(F −end A1 sup E44 thi -1 r ecA 1 r elA 1 
gyr A96 deoR phoA /Phi1 80d lacZ /Delta1 M15 /Delta1 ( lac ZYA- arg F) 
U169, hsdR 17 (rK −, mK + ), /H9261−) was used for plasmid con- 
struction, and WT MG1655 (F − /H9261−ilvG −rfb -50 rph -1) was 
used as the parental strain for REGES. All the basic strains 
in this study were constructed by CRISPR / Cas9 with the 
pTargetT and pCas system as previously described ( 11 ). To 
construct the /Delta1 recJ , /Delta1 mutS , /Delta1 xonA and /Delta1 xseA strains, 
DNA fragments including 500-bp upstream and 500-bp 
downstr eam wer e PCR amplified and assembled to generate 
donor DNAs. With the help of specific sgRNA expressed 
by pTargetT, recJ , mutS , xonA and xseA were individually 
knocked out in MG1655. MG06 ( /Delta1 recJ /Delta1 xonA ) was con- 
structed by knocking out recJ in MG04 ( /Delta1 xonA ). Donor 
DNAs used for the construction of MG01, MG07, MG08 
Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 8295 
Figure 1. Design and establishment of REGES for genome editing and genome evolution applica tions. ( A ) Schema tic r epr esentation of REGES. Retron 
is encoded as a polycistronic transcriptional cassette containing a promoter, self-complementary regions (grey), an msr (blue) with a priming guanosine 
residue (black), an msd (brown) with the desired donor sequence (red lines), an RBS to initiate the translation of re v erse transcriptase (RT), an RT, an RBS 
(purple) to initiate the translation of SSAP, an SSAP and a terminator. Retron can generate ssDNAs (red lines) in vivo , which are subsequently incorpo- 
rated into the targeted loci in the genome. ( B ) Systematic optimization of REGES parameters, including host engineering, retron bioparts optimization 
and editing condition optimization. ( C ) Through the design of in vivo generated ssDNAs, REGES enables versatile synthetic biology and metabolic en- 
gineering applications, such as precise genome editing (substitution, insertion and / or deletion), multiplex genome editing, ssDNA pool with degenerate 
RBS sequences for regulating the expression of endogenous and exogenous genes as well as ssDNA pool with random mutations for continuous in vivo 
protein evolution. 
and MG11 were obtained by assembly of the mutant se- 
quences of each gene ( galK off , gfp off , rfp off and cat off ) with 
their upstream and downstream sequences. Transformants 
were verified by colony PCR and DNA sequencing. 
Plasmid cloning 
All constructs, template sequences and primers used in 
this study are listed in Supplementary Tables S3–S5. Plas- 
mids were constructed by digestion / ligation, Gibson assem- 
bly or Golden-Gate assembly. The REGES editing plas- 
mids expressing msr, msd, RT and SSAP was constructed 
as following: the WT retron cassette (Ec86) expressing msr , 
msd and RT was amplified from the genome of BL21(DE3). 
The bet gene was amplified from pKD46 (Novagen). The 
retron cassette and bet were assembled into a medium copy- 
number plasmid pET28a to construct pRE01. The tem- 
plate sequences for ssDNA production were inserted into 
8296 Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 
pRE01 between the Eco R I (New England Biolabs, Ip- 
swich, MA) and Hind III sites. CspRecT , I- Sce I, pro- 
moter sequences, 5 ′ UTR sequences and replicons were 
chemically synthesized by TSINGKE Biological Technol- 
ogy (Hangzhou, China). All plasmids harboring various 
targeting sequences were cloned into Eco R I and Hin d III 
restriction sites. To construct multiplex editing plasmid, tar- 
get plasmids (pRE13, pRE22) without RT and bet were first 
constructed. The replacement of promoter and terminator 
was performed by Gibson assembly. The reaction mixture 
was then purified and added to 100 /H9262l DH5 /H9251competent 
cells, and electroporation was done in a 2-mm Gene Pulser 
cuvette (Bio-rad) under 2.5 kV, 25 /H9262F and 200 /Omega1. After- 
wards, 800 /H9262l of SOC liquid medium was added to recover 
the cells at 37 ◦C. After about 1 h, the transformants were 
plated onto LB solid medium containing the correspond- 
ing antibiotics. 
Genome editing by REGES 
Unless otherwise mentioned, the heat shock transformation 
method was used to transform editing plasmids to the cor- 
responding E. coli strains. Competent cells were prepared 
according to the method as previously described ( 33 ). For 
editing in liquid medium, a single colony was inoculated 
to 50 ml of LB medium containing 50 mg l −1 kanamycin 
and 1 mM IPTG. After editing for ∼16 h, the mixed culture 
was streak out onto agar plate to isolate mono-clones. Al- 
ternati v ely, for editing in solid medium, E. coli strains were 
spread onto agar plates containing 50 mg l −1 kanamycin 
and 1 mM IPTG. After 16 h of growth, single colonies were 
isolated for genotyping analysis. 
Editing efficiency assay 
The galK re v ersion assa y was perf ormed as previously de- 
scribed ( 28 ). Briefly, strains after editing were plated onto 
MacConkey agar plates containing 50 mg l −1 kanamycin. 
The galK mutation efficiency was calculated by calculating 
the ratio of purple colonies to the total number of colonies. 
In the gfp and rfp re v ersion assay, strains after editing were 
plated on LB agar plates supplemented with kanamycin. 
The editing efficiency was the percentage of strains show- 
ing gr een fluor escence (or r ed fluor escence). The editing fr e- 
quency of rpsL conversion was determined by plating cells 
on LB agar plates with or without streptomycin and calcu- 
lating the ratio of str eptomycin-r esistant strains (plates with 
streptomycin) to the total number (plates without strepto- 
mycin). For cat reversion assay, cultures were spotted on LB 
agar plates with or without chloramphenicol, and the ra- 
tio of chloramphenicol-resistant strains to the total number 
was determined. The tolC editing efficiency was calculated 
by the ratio of SDS-sensiti v e strains to the total number. In 
addition to the phenotype-based validation, genome editing 
r esults wer e further verified by diagnostic PCR and Sanger 
sequencing. 
Regulation of RFP expression and fluorescence intensity 
measurement 
DNA containing degenerate RBS sequences 
(NNNNNNNNNNN) flanked by homologous regions on 
each side was synthesized and ligated into the Eco R I and 
Hin d III sites of pRE15 to generate the pool of editing 
plasmid. After editing for 16 h, E. coli strains were spread 
into agar plates, and single colonies were picked, inoculated 
and cultured in 96-well plates overnight. To measure the 
fluorescence intensity, E. coli strains were washed twice, 
diluted in sterile water and measured at 555–584 nm. The 
fluorescence intensity (relati v e fluorescence units; RFU) 
was normalized to cell density (OD 600 ). 
Regulation of IscR expression and isolation of iscR mutant 
strains 
Barcoded plasmid library prepared as above was electropo- 
rated into BL21(DE3) △  recJ △  xonA / pAra-bioB-pMB1 and 
plated on LB plates with 1 mM IPTG. After 16 h of editing, 
the resultant colonies were scraped from the plates. Selec- 
tion was performed by diluting the cell culture 100-fold into 
5 ml LB with 100 mM arabinose to induce bioB ov ere xpres- 
sion to the cytotoxicity le v el. After isolating single colonies 
of the viable strains, they were picked for further character- 
ization of biotin production capacity. 
Quantification of biotin production 
Bition quantification was performed as previously de- 
scribed with few modifications using Lactobacillus plan- 
tarum ATCC8014 as the biotin reporter strain ( 34 ). Sample 
supernatant was diluted ∼5000-fold and then mixed with 
the bioassay medium in a microtiter pla te. Pla tes were in- 
cuba ted a t dark a t 37 ◦C for 24 h. OD 600 was measured 
and biotin concentration was calculated using the standard 
curve with known concentration of biotin in the bioassay 
medium. 
Plasmid elimination assay 
Strains were inoculated into 5 ml of LB liquid medium con- 
taining arabinose. After culturing at 37 ◦C for 1-9 h the di- 
luted culture was spread onto an antibiotic-free LB solid 
medium and incubated overnight at 37 ◦C. Colonies were 
then picked to kanamycin-containing and kanamycin-free 
plates to test their sensitivity to kanamycin. The elimination 
efficiency of the donor plasmids was determined based on 
the ratio of kanamy cin-sensiti v e strains to the total number 
of E. coli strains. Plasmid elimination was further verified 
by diagnostic PCR with specific primers. 
Construction of lycopene-producing strains and quantifica- 
tion of lycopene production 
After simultaneous editing of multiple genomic loci, E. 
coli strains were spread onto LB agar plates containing 
kanamy cin. The multiple x editing efficiency was determined 
by diagnostic PCR with specific primers and further verified 
by Sanger sequencing. After elimination of the editing plas- 
mids, pAC-lyc containing the lycopene biosynthetic path- 
w ay w as transformed to enab le ly copene production ( 24 ). 
Ly copene e xtraction and quantification was performed as 
previously described with few modifications ( 24 ). 1 ml of 
cells were centrifuged at 12 000 rpm for 1 min and washed 
Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 8297 
twice with PBS buffer. The resultant cell pellets were re- 
suspended in 300 /H9262l of acetone and incuba ted a t 55 ◦C for 
15 min. After centrifuge at 12 000 rpm for 1 min, the ab- 
sorbance of the supernatant was measured at 470 nm with 
a Varioskan Flash Multimode Reader (Thermo Scientific, 
Waltham, USA). Cell dry weight (DCW) was calculated 
based on a conversion coefficient of 0.36 for DCW / OD 
( 35 , 36 ). The lycopene yield of all strains was normalized to 
DCW. 
Evolution of sacB and viability assay 
The mutator plasmid (Mutator-DNA or Mutator-RNA) 
and editing plasmid (pRsacB) were co-transformed 
into MG14. Cells harboring these plasmids were grown 
overnight in 5 ml of LB supplemented with chloram- 
phenicol and kanamycin. The overnight cultures (50 /H9262l) 
wer e mix ed with 5 ml of LB supplemented with chloram- 
phenicol, kanamycin, 1 mM IPTG and 100 mM arabinose 
and incuba ted a t 30 ◦C for 8 hours (Cycle#1). The 1 / 100 
dilution-incubation cycle was repeated, and samples were 
taken at the end of each cycle. To determine the mutation 
ra te of sacB , cells a t each cycle were serial 10-fold diluted 
and then spotted onto selecti v e (10 g l −1 sucrose) or nonse- 
lecti v e (no sucrose) plates. The number of sucrose-resistant 
strains as a percentage of the total number of cells was 
calcula ted. Muta tions in sacB were further determined by 
Sanger sequencing. 
Statistics and reproducibility 
All experimental data were at least in triplicate and ex- 
pressed as mean ± standard error. All data analyses were 
performed by Excel or OriginPro. 
RESULTS 
Design of REGES for multiplex genome editing and evolution 
Retrons are encoded as a polycistronic transcriptional cas- 
sette, which contains a promoter, an msr (including a prim- 
ing guanosine residue), an msd , self-complementary regions 
(5 ′ repeat and 3 ′ repeat), an RBS for translating re v erse 
transcriptase (RT), an RT, an RBS for translating SSAP, 
an SSAP and a terminator (Figure 1 A). After transcrip- 
tion, the msr-msd RNA folds into a secondary structure, 
which can be recognized by RT. Then RT uses the guanosine 
residue in msr as a priming site to re v erse transcribe the msr 
sequence and produce a hybrid RN A–ssDN A molecule. We 
can insert templates (donor sequence) into msd to gener- 
ate multi-copy ssDNAs that will subsequently be incorpo- 
rated into the targeted genes (Figure 1 A). To improve the 
recombineering efficiency in E. coli , we introduced bet , an 
SSAP from Lambda phage ( 37 ) to bind ssDNA fragments 
and anneal complementary sequences. Using standard syn- 
thetic biology parts, key parameters of REGES including 
host, retron bioparts and editing conditions can be opti- 
mized in a modular and systematic manner (Figure 1 B). 
The high efficiency of REGES enables a series of synthetic 
biology and metabolic engineering applications. First, the 
production of ssDNAs with desired mutations enables pre- 
cise genome editing, while ssDNA molecules targeted to 
multiple loci can be employed for multiplex genome edit- 
ing. Additionall y, ssDN A pools can facilitate the genera- 
tion of pooled and barcoded variant libraries, such as de- 
generate RBS sequences to fine-tune the expression level 
of endogenous and exogenous genes for strain engineering 
purposes. Finally, the incorporation of ssDNA pools with 
random mutations (through DNA-dependent transcription 
and RNA-dependent re v erse transcription) can be utilized 
for gene-specific, continuous in vivo evolution (Figure 1 C). 
Systematic optimization of REGES for efficient genome 
editing 
To facilitate the identification of the desired editing e v ents, 
we constructed a reporter strain MG01 by introducing two 
continuous pr ematur e stop codons (L187*-L188*) in the 
galactokinase encoding gene ( galK ). On the MacConkey 
plate, strains with the function of galK r ecover ed will 
turn purple ( 30 , 38 ). For the initially constructed lac-dri v en 
retron editing system, we could not detect any target edits 
on the MacConkey pla te, indica ting tha t the editing ef fi- 
ciency was less than 0.1% (Figure 2 A and Supplementary 
Figure S1A). In previous studies, the efficiency of ssDNA- 
based recombination could be improved by removing nucle- 
ase genes (e.g. xseA , recJ and xonA ) for the degradation of 
exo genous DN As ( 39–42 ) as well as mismatch repair gene 
mutS ( 39 ) . To explore these strategies in REGES, we con- 
structed a series of strains with xseA , recJ , xonA and mutS 
being individually knocked out. The knockout of xseA ( 42 ), 
an ssDNA-specific exonuclease responsible for converting 
large ssDNA substrates into smaller oligonucleotides, no 
enhancement in recombinant efficiency was observed (Fig- 
ure 2 B). On the other hand, we found that the inactiva- 
tion of xonA or recJ , encoding 3 ′ or 5 ′ ssDNA exonucle- 
ases ( 39 ), respecti v el y, significantl y improved the editing ef- 
ficiency (Figure 2 B), w hose sim ultaneous deletion increased 
the editing efficiency by ∼130-fold over the original sys- 
tem (Figure 2 B). We observed no significant differences in 
the mutS deficient strain (Figure 2 B), indica ting tha t MutS 
does not recognize sequences with insertions or mismatches 
larger than 4 nucleotides ( 43 ). Although the precise mech- 
anism of retron is still unclear ( 44–46 ), our results showed 
ssDNAs were hybridized to the lagging strand of the repli- 
cation fork, which is akin to the Lambda Red recombi- 
nation mechanism ( 47 ). Accordingl y, ssDN As targeting to 
the lagging strand of galK achie v ed an editing frequency 
of 15 ± 3%, which was ∼300-fold higher than that to the 
leading strand (0.05 ± 0.03%, Figure 2 B). Thus, according 
to the genome coordinate, we come to some basic rules to 
design the template sequences of REGES (Supplementary 
Figure S1B). 
To further improve genome editing efficiency, we sys- 
tematically optimized each module of REGES at replica- 
tion (plasmid copy numbers), transcription (promoter ac- 
tivities) and translation (RBS strengths) levels. We achieved 
an editing efficiency (i.e. proportions of purple cells) of 
29 ± 6% when p15A ( ∼5–10 copies) was used. In con- 
trast, plasmids with pMB1 ( ∼20–40 copies) and pUC 
( ∼600 copies) resulted in editing frequencies of 13 ± 4% 
and 7 ± 3%, respecti v ely (Figure 2 B). To further match 
the recombination capacity with the re v erse transcription 
8298 Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 
Figure 2. Systema tic optimiza tion of REGES for ef ficient genome editing. ( A ) A galK re v ersion assay was used to measure the efficiency of DNA editing 
within living cells. The galK stop codon sequences (TAATGA) were substituted to coding sequences (TT GCT G) using REGES. ( B ) Optimization of each 
element of REGES to improve genome editing efficiency, including host modification, targeting strand, copy number of retron vector, translational strength 
of SSAP and transcriptional activity of the retron cassette. pET-RBS: TAA GAA GGA GA. Ctrl r epr esented wild-type MG1655. The best perf ormance f or 
each parameter was labelled with a red arrow. 
ef ficiency, we evalua ted 11 RBSs ( 48 , 49 ) with different 
transla tion initia tion ra te (Supplementary Figure S2A) for 
the expression of bet from Lambda phage. Interestingly, 
BCDd with medium strength resulted in the highest edit- 
ing efficiency (34 ± 4%, Figure 2 B), indicating that the 
e xpression le v el of bet should be carefully fine-tuned. Fi- 
nally, we regulated the transcription of the retron cassette 
dri v en by eight promoters ( 49 ) of different strengths (Sup- 
plementary Figure S2B). As shown in Figure 2 B, we could 
achie v e ∼100% editing when the strong IPTG-responsi v e 
F AB45, F AB46 and F AB95 were used, indica ting tha t 
high expression of the retron system was beneficial for 
REGES. 
Based on the optimized REGES, we set to evaluate the 
editing efficiency for a full set of possible engineering events, 
including substitution, insertion and deletion. While we 
achie v ed high efficiency for deletion and substitution, the 
insertion efficiency was much lower (Figure 3 A), which has 
been reported for other ssDNA-mediated recombineering 
systems such as MAGE ( 24 , 41 ). Interestingl y, w hen the edit- 
ing length is < 3 nucleotides, the genome editing efficiency 
was drama tically af fected, probably due to the recognition 
and repair of the mutations by mutS of the MMR system 
( 43 ). 
We then employed REGES to edit more target genes re- 
lated to important phenotypes in E. coli. For example, the 
mutant RpsL (K43R) conferring E. coli str eptomycin r e- 
sistance ( 50 ) was obtained with an efficiency of 91 ± 9% 
(Figur e 3 B). Mor e importantly, gfp (encoding gr een fluo- 
rescent protein), rfp (encoding red fluorescent protein) and 
tolC (encoding outer membrane channel) were edited with 
an efficiency of 74 ± 7%, 94 ± 4% and 62 ± 4%, respec- 
ti v ely (Figure 3 B). We evaluated the ability of REGES for 
combina torial muta tions, such as substitution with deletion 
(tested for both gfp and rfp ) and substitution with insertion 
(tested for tolC ), which resulted in 62 ± 4% to 94 ± 4% 
editing efficiency (Figure 3 B). These results demonstrated 
the power and versatility of REGES for genome editing in 
E. coli . 
The last element for optimization was the donor of 
REGES (also known as the guide sequences). By placing 
muta tions in dif ferent positions of the template sequences, 
we found positions from 20 to 55 in the ssDNAs to be op- 
timal for genome editing (Figure 3 C). Although increasing 
donor length was expected to provide more homology for 
annealing, we are surprised to find that larger donor im- 
paired genome editing efficiency significantl y, particularl y 
when larger than 300 bp (Supplementary Figure S2C). In 
Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 8299 
Figure 3. REGES for precise genome editing. ( A ) Editing efficiency of REGES for substitutions, deletions and insertions with different number of mutant 
bases. To ensure the consistency of the starting strains used for editing, we used a galK on to galK off mutation assay to measure the efficiency of DNA editing. 
( B ) Applications of REGES in mutating essential gene and introducing combinatorial mutations (e.g. substitution with deletion as well as substitution with 
insertion). Ctrl r epr esented REGES with a non-targeting plasmid (i.e. pRE15). ( C ) Ef fect of the loca tion of muta tions in ssDNA on the genome editing 
efficiency using REGES. A red box represented the mutated bases (CAA GA G) within the 78-bp ssDNA. ( D ) Characterization of editing efficiency as a 
function of the type and scale of genetic modifications. Error bars r epr esented standard errors of three biological replicates. 
other words, we should keep the guide sequences shorter 
than 300 bp to achie v e efficient genome editing in E. coli . 
In addition, we optimized inducer concentration (Supple- 
mentary Figure S2D), editing time (Supplementary Fig- 
ure S2E) and editing temperature (Supplementary Figure 
S2F) to maximize REGES ef ficiency. After systema tic ex- 
ploration, we summarized the optimal parameters for the 
best performance of REGES in Table 1 . Briefly, retron 
cassette is transcribed by a strong promoter (e.g. FAB45, 
FAB46 and FAB95), with the translation of bet initiated by 
a medium-strength RBS (e.g. BCDd). The optimal window 
for REGES is less than 300 bp, with the mutation site ide- 
ally positioned in the middle of the donor. To induce ss- 
DNA production and continuous editing, IPTG is added at 
a concentration of 1 mM and genome editing is performed 
at 30 ◦C for 16 h. 
After systema tic optimiza tion, we aimed to explore the 
maxim um ca pacity of REGES. Generall y, extended donor 
sequences allow for a broader spectrum of insertions or sub- 
stitutions at specific positions within the target gene, but ex- 
cessi v ely long donor sequences were found to result in de- 
creased editing efficiency of REGES (Supplementary Fig- 
ure S2C). Considering that a donor of 200 bp achie v ed 
an editing efficiency of 87 ± 8% (Supplementary Figure 
S2C), we adopted this length for maximum capacity eval- 
uation. As the homology r egions r equir ed for Lambda Red 
Table 1. Optimal parameters of REGES for maximal editing efficiency 
Parameters Optimal values 
Genome modifications /Delta1 recJ & /Delta1 xonA 
Promoter F AB45 / F AB46 / F AB95 
SSAP bet 
RBS of SSAP BCDd 
Replicon P15A 
Donor length a < 300 bp 
Mutation position in the ssDNA 20 to 55 
Concentration of inducer 1 mM IPTG 
Temperature 30 ◦C 
Editing time 16 h 
a Unless otherwise mentioned, the donor length used in this study was 
78 bp. 
recombination is ∼30 bp ( 24 , 37 ), the maximum allowable 
length for insertions and substitutions tested here is ∼140 
bp. Howe v er, we failed to detect any desired modification 
when attempting to insert a 140 bp random fragment (from 
sacB ) into the galK locus. Ne v ertheless, we could insert a 
100 bp fragment with low efficiency (Figure 3 D). For sub- 
stitutions, we achie v ed a muta tion ef ficiency of 6 ± 2% when 
trying to substitute a 140 bp random sequence (from sacB ) 
with the same size in galK (Figure 3 D). Notably, the effi- 
ciency of generating a substitution or deletion modification 
8300 Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 
is correlated with the size of the mutation. We achie v ed an 
efficiency of 27 ± 5% for the deletion of ∼300 bp. Although 
with extremely low editing efficiency, we could successfully 
delete up to 5000 bp sequences (Figure 3 D). 
REGES for multiplex genome editing 
After systematic optimization, we then tested the perfor- 
mance of REGES for multiplex genome editing, which 
was highly desirable for synthetic biology and metabolic 
engineering applications. To minimize repetiti v e DNA se- 
quences ( 32 ), we used two different REGES constructs, 
FAB45-retron and FAB46-retron, and T7 terminator of the 
first REGES cassette was replaced with L2U5H11 termi- 
na tor ( 51 ). W hen multiple r etron cassettes wer e arranged as 
tandem arrays, these two different constructs were used se- 
quentially, leading to reduced homology between the adja- 
cent expression cassettes. For two-locus editing, we chose 
rpsL and gfp as the reporter genes, which were simulta- 
neously edited with an efficiency of 85 ± 3%. By assem- 
bling another REGES cassette targeting galK , we achie v ed 
three-locus ( rpsL - gfp - galK ) editing with an efficiency of 
69 ± 7%. After the inclusion of a fourth REGES cas- 
sette targeting cat , we observed four-editing e v ents with 
an efficiency of 25 ± 14% (Figure 4 A), r epr esenting the 
maximal number of precise mutations to be introduced 
in a single round of genome editing in E. coli . The edit- 
ing efficiency of each gene in the multiplex editing sys- 
tem was shown in Supplementary Figures S3A, S3B, S3C 
and S3D, respecti v ely. To facilitate continuous or itera- 
ti v e genome editing, we incorporated an I- Sce I-mediated 
( 52 ) plasmid curing system (Supplementary Figure S3E). 
Specifically, the expression of the homing endonuclease 
I- Sce I, which recognized and cleaved a specific recog- 
nition sequence (T AGGGAT AACAGGGT AAT) to intro- 
duce double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs) into the retron 
plasmid, was tightly controlled by an arabinose-inducible 
promoter. The system enabled ∼100% plasmid elimina- 
tion after 3 h of induction by arabinose (Supplementary 
Figure S3F). 
For practical applications, we employed REGES and the 
plasmid elimination system for the construction of lycopene 
overproducing strains (Figure 4 B). Based on previous stud- 
ies, the combination of idi , dxs and ytjC engineering or 
the combination of dxs , idi , dxr , rpoS and ytjC engineer- 
ing were determined to be the most effecti v e in increas- 
ing lycopene production ( 24 ). We constructed and intro- 
duced pRE31 to knock down ytjC , and eight out of nine 
colonies were found to harbor the expected mutations (Fig- 
ure 4 C). After induction of the I- Sce I system to elimi- 
nate the donor plasmid, the resultant strain MG13 was 
further transformed with pRE-multi-2E or pRE-multi-4F, 
which were expected to perform dxs - idi double mutations 
or idi - dxr - rpoS - dxs quadruple mutations (Figure 4 B). For 
the dual-editing e v ent, REGES reached efficiencies up to 
∼100% (Figure 4 D); for the quadruple mutation assay, 
REGES reached efficiencies up to 18 ± 9% (Figure 4 E). In 
addition, we found that all the selected colonies ( ∼100%) 
were edited at least twice, and 60 ± 14% were edited in at 
least three loci (Figure 4 E). DNA sequencing results showed 
that both strains were precisely edited at all the predeter- 
mined loci (Supplementary Figure S4A and S4B). Com- 
pared with the control strain, lycopene production was in- 
creased by 3.9-fold and 4.5-fold in the two-locus editing 
strain and four-locus editing strain, respecti v ely (Supple- 
mentary Figure S4C). Notably, it only took us two days 
to construct a high-yield lycopene producing strain har- 
boring fiv e-locus muta tions, indica ting the ef ficiency and 
time saving of REGES for the construction of microbial cell 
factories. 
REGES for the generation of pooled and barcoded variant 
libraries 
As REGES can efficiently introduce mutations in a rela- 
ti v ely wide window, we propose REGES to incorporate a 
pooled and barcoded library with the desirable mutations 
into the E. coli genome. For example, we can incorporate 
a library of degenerate RBS sequences to regulate the ex- 
pression le v el of endogenous and e xogenous genes (Fig- 
ure 5 A). As a proof-of-concept, we constructed a reporter 
strain MG09 with the RFP expression cassette (harboring 
the original RBS sequences from pET-RBS, TAA GAA G- 
GAGA) integrated into the genome. We inserted degener- 
ate RBS sequences (NNNNNNNNNNN) flanked by 34 bp 
upstream and 33 bp downstream homologous regions of rfp 
into msd to generate a pooled and barcoded retron library. 
After transforming the retron library and editing, we ran- 
domly picked colonies for fluorescence measurement and 
observed an expression range of ∼208-fold (Supplementary 
Figure S5A). Despite the strong translational capacity of 
pET-RBS, the expression level of RFP could still be en- 
hanced by up to 1.6-fold via REGES-mediated RBS engi- 
neering (Figure 5 B). 
For practical applications, we chose to regulate the ex- 
pression le v el of transcriptional factors. In previous stud- 
ies, global transcription machinery engineering (gTME) has 
been found to enable the engineering of complex regula- 
tory networks and used to increase protein expression ( 53 ), 
metabolite production ( 54 ) and stress resistance ( 55 ) via 
directed evolution. We proposed that modulating the ex- 
pression of global transcription factors could also generate 
global di v ersity of transcription le v els and be employed for 
strain engineering purposes. Here, we constructed retron li- 
braries for fine-tuning the expression level of seven global 
transcription factors, including CRP (cyclic AMP receptor 
protein), FNR (fumarate and nitrate reduction regulatory 
pr otein), ArcA (aer obic respiration control regulator), IHF 
(integration host factor), HNS (histone-like nucleoid struc- 
turing protein), Fis (factor f or in version stimulation) and 
LRP (leucine responsi v e regulatory protein) ( 56 , 57 ), and 
chose ethanol tolerance as the target phenotype for engi- 
neering. Among these se v en mutant libraries, we found the 
FNR mutant library enabled the grown of E. coli strains in 
high concentration of ethanol (50 g l −1 , Figure 5 C and Sup- 
plementary Figure S5B), after which six mutant strains were 
picked for further characterization. To evaluate the strength 
of the RBS mutants, we fused the 5 ′ 36-nt of FNR to the 5 ′ 
end of eGFP ( 48 ) and found that all six constructs confer- 
ring ethanol resistance expressed lower le v els of FNR than 
that of the wild-type (WT) strain (Figure 5 C). Although 
there has been no report on improving ethanol tolerance by 
Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 8301 
Figure 4. REGES for multiplex genome editing. ( A ) Efficiency distribution of clones in the population with different numbers of gene editing in each 
editing e v ent, with rpsL , gfp , galK and cat chosen as the reporter genes. ( B ) Lycopene biosynthetic pathway and the edited targets. pRE31: A plasmid 
containing Retron system for editing of ytjC and elements for plasmid curing. pR etron-multi-2E: R etron system for simultaneous editing of two RBS ( dxs 
and idi ). pRetron-multi-4F: Retron system for simultaneous editing of four RBS ( idi , dxr , rpoS and dxs ). For the construction of ly copene-ov erproducing 
strains, ytjC was edited first with pRE31, followed by double editing ( dxs-idi ) with pRetron-multi-2E or quadruple editing ( idi-dxr-rpoS-dxs ) with pRetron- 
multi-4F. ( C ) PCR verification of ytjC editing. Genome editing of ytj C resulted in PCR amplicon of 520 bp. ( D ) PCR v alidation of genome editing b y 
pRetron-multi-2E ( dxs - idi ). Genome editing of dxs and idi resulted in PCR amplicon of 540 and 1200 bp, respecti v ely. ( E ) PCR validation of genome editing 
by pRetron-multi-4F ( idi - dxr - rpoS - dxs ). Genome editing of idi , dxs , rpoS and dxs resulted in PCR amplicon of 485, 750, 1200 and 1850 bp, respecti v ely. 
Ctrl r epr esented wild-type MG1655. M r epr esented DNA Marker. Red arrows r epr esented the size of the target bands. 
engineering of FNR, our results clearly demonstrated that 
FNR r epr ession enabled higher ethanol tolerance in E. coli . 
Additionally, the retron itself can serve as a barcode (unique 
RBS sequence), allowing for direct analysis of mutants 
from the screened libraries by sequencing the retron plas- 
mids using uni v ersal primers. Our REGES-based global 
transcription engineering provides advantages in establish- 
ing genotype and phenotype relationships of the mutant 
strains. 
After successfully demonstrating REGES in an E. coli 
K strain (MG1655), we extended the applications in the 
genome editing and global transcription engineering of an 
E. coli B strain, BL21(DE3). We aimed to increase the 
production of biotin, a high-value vitamin metabolite with 
broad applica tions. W hile the final step of biosynthesis 
pathway, encoded by the bioB gene, is the bottlenecke for 
biotin production ( 58 ), its ov ere xpression dramatically in- 
hibits cell gr owth, pr obably due to the depletion of FeS- 
cluster ( 58 ). As IscR is a global regulator responsible for 
the assembly of FeS-cluster, we constructed a retron library 
to precisely regulate the expression le v el of IscR. As shown 
in Figure 5 D, the ov ere xpression of bioB completely inhib- 
ited cell growth when the inducer arabinose was higher than 
50 mM. Luckily, cell growth could be rescued by the intro- 
duction of the retron library (Supplementary Figure S5C), 
indica ting tha t the supply of FeS-cluster was enhanced in 
the IscR-engineered strains to minimize the cytotoxicity of 
bioB ov ere xpression. Based on the growth-associated selec- 
tion, we successfully obtained se v eral biotin ov erproducing 
strains (Supplementary Figure S5D and Figure 5 E). DNA 
sequencing results verified mutations in the RBS sequences 
(Supplementary Figure S5E), which were introduced by 
REGES. In addition, we found a correlation between im- 
prov ed IscR e xpr ession and incr eased biotin production, 
with maximum titers reaching almost 900 /H9262g l −1 in M9 min- 
imal media (Figure 5 E). 
8302 Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 
Figure 5. REGES for di v ersifying the e xpression le v el of endogenous and exogenous genes. ( A ) Schematic diagram of the regulation of gene expression 
le v els through the incorporation of a library of degenerate RBS sequences. By mutating RBS sequences, it is possible to regulate the expression level of 
RFP, FNR to enhance ethanol resistance of E. coli and IscR to increase biotin production. ( B ) Fold changes in rfp expression le v el (RFP fluorescence) 
of the randomly selected strains. RFP fluorescence intensities were normalized to that with pET-RBS (triangle). ( C ) Expression le v el of eGFP when the 
transla tion was initia ted by the mutant RBS (underneath the corresponding strain) of fumarate and nitrate r eduction r egulatory protein (FNR). In this 
assay, the original promotor of FNR was used. The dashed line r epr esented the expression intensity of the wild-type RBS. ( D ) A growth-associated selection 
system based on the ov ere xpression of bioB . The expression le v el of bioB was controlled by the concentration of ar abinose. ( E ) Tr anslational intensity of 
IscR and corresponding biotin production titers of the selected mutant strains. The mutant RBS sequence was present underneath the corresponding 
strain. WT r epr esented the original RBS of iscR. 
Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 8303 
REGES for gene-specific continuous in vivo evolution 
Finally, we employed REGES for continuous in vivo pro- 
tein evolution. Unlike most of previous ssDNA-mediated 
genome editing and evolution systems (e.g. MAGE), where 
ssDNAs were synthesized and di v ersified in vitro , ssDNAs 
of REGES are generated through DNA-dependent tran- 
scription and RNA-dependent re v erse transcription in vivo . 
This means that by introducing random mutations into 
the DNA templates and / or RNA templates used to gener- 
ate ssDNAs, we can achie v e continuous in vivo evolution 
of any selected proteins. T7 RN A pol ymerase (T7 RN AP) 
guided base editing ( 59 ) and eMutaT7 ( 60 ), which were 
constructed by fusing cytidine deaminase to T7 RNAP, 
have been demonstrated to enable in vivo random mutage- 
nesis (Mutator-DNA). Additionally, err or-pr one T7RNAP 
(epT7RNAP) ( 61 ) has been reported to introduce random 
mutations to the transcribed RNAs (Mutator-RNA) with a 
frequency of ∼2 × 10 −3 . Therefore, we designed and estab- 
lished an orthogonal transcription system for REGES (Fig- 
ur e 6 A), wher e the transcription of msr and msd were dri v en 
by an epT7RNAP fused with a cytidine deaminase from 
Petr om yz on marinus (PmCDA1-epT7RNAP). This enabled 
the introduction of in vivo random mutations to the DNA 
template and RNA molecule, both of which could be in- 
corporated into the generated ssDNAs for protein evolu- 
tion applications. For convenient detection of mutagenesis 
and evaluation of mutation rate, we constructed a reporter 
strain by integrating a model counter-selection gene sacB 
into the genome. The resultant strain could only grow on 
sucrose when sacB was inactivated ( 62 ). 
We initiated mutagenesis by adding arabinose and IPTG 
to the recombinant strains carrying the mutator plasmids 
and editing plasmid pRsacB. After four cycles of editing, 
we spread the mutated cells onto agar plates with or with- 
out sucrose. Compared with the control strains (Figure 
6 B), we found that strains expressing pRsacB and Mutator- 
DNA showed an increased mutation frequency, with an es- 
tima ted muta tion ra te of 2.7 ± 0.5 × 10 −5 (Figure 6 C). Al- 
though functional, the Mutator-DNA based evolution effi- 
ciency was low, probably due to the relati v el y low m utation 
rate ( 60 ) and limited mutation space of PmCDA1 ( 19 ). On 
the other hand, Muta tor-RNA genera ted sucrose-resistant 
clones at a frequency of 1.3 ± 0.56 × 10 −4 (Figure 6 C), 
which was lower than that reported for epT7RNAP ( 61 ). 
The mutation frequency was probab ly negati v ely affected 
by the decreased transcriptional activity of epT7RNAP, 
which has been reported in other systems as well ( 29 ). 
We further improved the mutagenesis efficiency via com- 
bining Mutator-DNA and Mutator-RNA (i.e. PmCDA1- 
epT7RNAP), resulting in an editing frequency of up to 
2.4 ± 0.076 × 10 −3 (Figure 6 C). The resultant mutation 
rate was ∼1000-fold higher than that of the control strain, 
indicating a synergistic effect between Mutator-DNA and 
Mutator-RNA for introducing random mutagenesis and 
continuous in vivo evolution. 
We expected the variants in the sucrose medium to pos- 
sess mutations decreasing the activity of sacB. After geno- 
typing the sacB gene from ∼50 colonies, we found Q230, 
Y237 and D247 to be mutated with high frequency (Fig- 
ure 6 B and Supplementary Figure S6A). As shown in 
Figure 6 D, the mutation at Q230 caused a pr ematur e stop 
codon to inactivate sacB; Y237 was recently reported to af- 
fect ca talytic ef ficiency of this enzyme via site-directed mu- 
tagenesis studies ( 63 ); D247 was located at the acti v e site 
of sacB and its mutation resulted in a 75- to 3500-fold de- 
crease of K cat ( 64 ). To assess any potential off-target muta- 
genesis effects on the genome, we determined the rifampicin 
r esistance fr equency of E. coli strains with or without muta- 
tors. We found no significant difference between the control 
and mutator strains (Supplementary Figure S6B), indicat- 
ing that genome-wide off-target mutagenesis should not be 
a major concern for REGES mediated continuous in vivo 
mutagenesis. 
DISCUSSION 
Significant progress in bacterial genome manipulation has 
been made in recent years. In particular, the CRISPR sys- 
tem has revolutionized genome editing and served as the 
most successful tool for targeted mutagenesis in E. coli . 
Compared with the CRISPR-mediated genome editing (in- 
cluding base editor and prime editor) ( 23 , 65 ) and ssDNA- 
media ted recombina tion (such as MAGE) ( 24 ), REGES 
established in the present study demonstrates advantages 
in high editing ef ficiency, easy manipula tion ( in vivo gen- 
eration of ssDNAs) and fle xib le mutagenesis ranges. We 
achie v ed ∼100%, 85 ± 3%, 69 ± 14% and 25 ± 14% effi- 
ciency for single-, two-, three and four-locus editing of E. 
coli genome, respecti v el y. More importantl y, the editing re- 
gion of REGES is determined by the in vi vo gener ated ss- 
DNA donor, allowing for fle xib le editing of any selected 
range and a relati v ely broad editing window, particularly 
when compared with base editor and prime editor. 
W hile retron-media ted genome editing systems have been 
established in recent years, the editing efficiency remains 
unsatisfactory (Supplementary Table S1). For example, the 
ability of retron to write multiple mutations into inde- 
pendent loci was explored in SCRIBE (Synthetic Cellular 
Recorders Integrating Biological Events), but only a limited 
number of colonies ( ∼3 × 10 −7 ) were found to possess two- 
locus writing e v ents ( 28 ). As the WT retron cassette from 
E. coli BL21 is not efficient enough ( 29–31 ), we optimized 
REGES for maximal editing performance in a modular 
and systematic manner. After systematic optimization, in- 
cluding host modification ( recJ and xonA knockout) to in- 
crease the stability and availability of intracellular ssDNAs, 
r etron expr ession systems (r eplicons, promoters and RBSs), 
donor design (donor length and mutation positions) and 
editing conditions (Table 1 ), we achieved ∼100% genome 
editing efficiency for substitution, deletion and insertion. 
When compared with the recently published RLR, where 
CspRecT was used instead of bet to bind ssDNAs ( 31 ), the 
expression of CspRecT in E. coli resulted in cytotoxicity 
and cell growth retardation (Supplementary Figures S7A 
and S7B). Moreover, by using different promoters and ter- 
minators (i.e. FAB45-L2U5H11 and FAB46-T7terminator) 
for the expression of retron cassettes, we were able to si- 
m ultaneousl y m utate up to four genes with an efficiency 
of 25 ± 14%, r epr esenting the highest number genes to be 
precisely substituted in a single round of genome editing in 
E. coli . As xonA and recJ encode 3 ′ and 5 ′ exonucleases, 
8304 Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 
Figure 6. REGES-mediated continuous in vivo evolution. ( A ) Schematic illustration of the mutation system. Mutator-DNA and Mutator-RNA introduce 
random mutations from the DNA and RNA le v els, respecti v ely. The dilution-incubation cycle was repeated e v ery 8 hours. T7RNAP: T7 RN A pol ymerase, 
PmCDA1: cytidine deaminase from Petr om yz on marinus , epT7RNAP: error-prone T7 RN A pol ymerase. ( B ) Cell viability on sucrose medium. The same 
number of cells after each cycle of growth were serial-diluted and spotted onto sucrose agar pla tes. Muta tions found in clones that survi v ed on sucrose 
medium were listed and the most frequent mutations, Q230, Y237, D247, wer e shown in r ed. ( C ) Resistance fr equency at each mutagenesis cycle for E. coli 
strains with different mutators. ( D ) Structure of sacB with the substrate. The acti v e sites and mutation sites found in this study were highlighted. 
Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 8305 
which are involved in DNA repair and replication ( 66 ), dis- 
ruption of these genes may lead to increased sensitivity to 
DNA damage in bacteria ( 67 ). Thanks to the high efficiency 
of REGES after optimization, we also achie v ed successful 
genome editing in WT genomic background, although with 
lower efficiency (Supplementary Figure S7C), indicating the 
potential of REGES for the construction of stable microbial 
cell factories for industrial applications. Ne v ertheless, con- 
sidering the stability as well as the challenges in the assem- 
b ly of repetiti v e DNA sequences, genome editing of more 
than fiv e genes has not been a ttempted in the present stud y. 
In our future studies, machine learning can be employed 
to rationally design functional and highly nonrepetiti v e se- 
quences, such as ELSA ( 32 ), ena bling sta b le co-e xpression 
of many retron cassettes and simultaneous editing of more 
genomic loci. 
Besides multiplex genome editing, we also demonstrate 
the use of REGES for continuous in vivo evolution of spe- 
cific genes. While se v er al methods for continuous in vi vo 
e volution hav e been estab lished, only a fe w can e volv e the 
target protein specifically in E. coli . T7 RNAP guided base 
editing ( 59 , 60 ) have been recently demonstrated to enable 
in vi vo r andom mutagenesis and one of the most powerful 
tools for continuous protein evolution. With the introduc- 
tion of base editing mutations during T7RNAP transcrip- 
tion, the mutation region is started from T7 promoter and 
ended at T7 terminator. While gene-specific in vivo evolu- 
tion can be achie v ed, the insertion of T7 promoter is ex- 
pected to affect the expression level of the target gene. In 
other words, these systems are more suitable for the evolu- 
tion of exogenous genes and have limited ability to evolve 
the endogenous genes. On the contrary, REGES-mediated 
evolution system employed epT7RNAP-PmCDA1 to dri v e 
the expression of retron cassette and random mutations in- 
troduced to the DN A and RN A templates were incorpo- 
rated into the genome for protein evolution applications. 
In other words, no pre-editing of the target gene is needed, 
and its expression profile remains unchanged. Another ad- 
vantage of the REGES-mediated evolution system is the 
flexibility in choosing the mutation region. As the insertion 
of T7 promoter and T7 terminator will disrupt the coding 
sequences, they are generally inserted in the upstream or 
downstream of the target gene, limiting the mutation region 
to the entire gene. On the other hand, the evolution region 
of REGES is determined by the in vivo generated ssDNA 
donor and in theory any selected region can be e volv ed 
(such as a specific domain or defined region within a cod- 
ing sequences). Considering that the editing efficiency will 
be affected when the donor size exceeds 300 bp, REGES 
is more suitable for continuous in vivo evolution of spe- 
cific structural domains or small proteins. The combination 
of random mutagenesis during replication (Mutator-DNA) 
and transcription (Mutator-RNA) stages for the generation 
of ssDNAs in vivo resulted in a mutation frequency of up 
to 2.4 ± 0.076 × 10 −3 , which is ∼1000-fold higher than 
the control strain. Theoretically, we can also incorporate 
muta tions a t the re v erse transcription stage, by the intro- 
duction or engineering of an err or-pr one re v erse transcrip- 
tase ( 68 , 69 ). In this case, we can further improve REGES- 
media ted muta tion ra te for continuous in vivo protein evo- 
lution applications. 
In summary, we established REGES for multiplex 
genome editing and continuous in vivo protein evolution. 
Systema tic optimiza tion of REGES parameters resulted in 
the editing of one, two, three and four genomic loci with ef- 
ficiencies of ∼100%, 85 ± 3%, 69 ± 14% and 25 ± 14%, 
respecti v ely. In addition, REGES enab led the generation 
of pooled and barcoded variant libraries with degenerate 
RBS sequences to fine-tune the expression level of endoge- 
nous and exogenous genes. Finally, we employed REGES 
for gene-specific continuous in vivo evolution, by combining 
with T7RNAP-mediated base editing and err or-pr one tran- 
scription. REGES can be employed for rapid construction 
of microbial cell factories as well as other synthetic biology 
applications. 
DA T A A V AILABILITY 
The authors declare that all data supporting the findings of 
this study are available in the manuscript and supporting 
information. 
SUPPLEMENT ARY DA T A 
Supplementary Data are available at NAR Online. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors thank Prof. Seokhee Kim from Seoul National 
Uni v ersity for kindly sharing pHyo094 (eMutaT7, Addgene 
plasmid # 173124). 
Author contributions : W.L. performed all the experiments 
and analyzed the data. S .Z., Y.S ., K.B. and J.Z. assisted with 
e xperimental wor k. W.L., L.H., Z.X. and J.L. concei v ed the 
study and wrote the manuscript. 
FUNDING 
National Key Research and De v elopment Program of 
China [2021YFC2103200]; National Natural Science Foun- 
dation of China [22278361, 32200052]; Natural Science 
Foundation of Zhejiang Province [LR20B060003]; Funda- 
mental Research Funds for the Central Uni v ersities [226- 
2023-00015, 226-2022-00214, 226-2023-00085]. Funding for 
open access charge: National Key Research and De v elop- 
ment Program of China. 
Conflict of interest statement. None declared. 
REFERENCES 
1. Baba,T ., Ara,T ., Hasegawa,M., Takai,Y ., Okumura,Y ., Baba,M., 
Datsenko,K.A., Tomita,M., Wanner,B.L. and Mori,H. (2006) 
Construction of Esc heric hia coli K-12 in-frame, single-gene knockout 
mutants: the Keio collection. Mol. Syst. Biol. , 2 , 2006.0008. 
2. Zhang,H. and Wang,X. (2016) Modular co-culture engineering, a 
new approach for metabolic engineering. Metab Eng. , 37 , 114–121. 
3. Weber,W. and Fussenegger,M. (2012) Emerging biomedical 
applications of synthetic biology. Nat. Rev. Genet. , 13 , 21–35. 
4. Yu,D., Ellis,H.M., Lee,E.-C., Jenkins,N.A., Copeland,N.G. and 
Court,D.L. (2000) An efficient recombination system for 
chromosome engineering in Esc heric hia coli . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A. , 97 , 5978–5983. 
5. Muyrers,J.P .P ., Zhang,Y., Testa,G. and Stewart,A.F. (1999) Rapid 
modification of bacterial artificial chromosomes by 
ET-recombina tion. Nuc leic Acids Res . , 27 , 1555–1557. 
8306 Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 
6. Song,C.W. and Lee,S.Y. (2013) Rapid one-step inactivation of single 
or multiple genes in Escherichia coli. Biotechnol J. , 8 , 776–784. 
7. Schweizer,H.P. (2003) Applications of the Sacchar om y ces cer evisiae 
Flp-FRT system in bacterial genetics. J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol. , 
5 , 67–77. 
8. Urnov,F.D., Rebar,E.J., Holmes,M.C., Zhang,H.S. and Gregory,P.D. 
(2010) Genome editing with engineered zinc finger nucleases. Nat. 
Rev. Genet. , 11 , 636–646. 
9. Bogdanove,A.J. and Voytas,D.F. (2011) TAL effectors: customizable 
proteins for DNA targeting. Science , 333 , 1843–1846. 
10. Jiang,W., Bikard,D., Cox,D., Zhang,F. and Marraffini,L.A. (2013) 
RNA-guided editing of bacterial genomes using CRISPR-Cas 
systems. Nat. Biotechnol. , 31 , 233–239. 
11. Jiang,Y., Chen,B., Duan,C., Sun,B., Y ang,J . and Yang,S. (2015) 
Multigene editing in the Esc heric hia coli genome via the 
CRISPR-Cas9 system. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. , 81 , 2506–2514. 
12. Ran,F.A., Hsu,P.D., Wright,J., Agarwala,V., Scott,D.A. and Zhang,F. 
(2013) Genome engineering using the CRISPR-Cas9 system. Nat. 
Protoc. , 8 , 2281–2308. 
13. Segal,D.J., Beerli,R.R., Blancafort,P., Dreier,B., Effertz,K., 
Huber,A., Koksch,B., Lund,C.V., Magnenat,L., Valente,D. et al. 
(2003) Evaluation of a modular strategy for the construction of novel 
polydactyl zinc finger DNA-binding proteins. Biochemistry , 42 , 
2137–2148. 
14. Lee,H., Popodi,E., Tang,H. and Foster,P.L. (2012) Rate and 
molecular spectrum of spontaneous mutations in the bacterium 
Esc heric hia coli as determined by whole-genome sequencing. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. , 109 , E2774–E2783. 
15. Hein,R. and Tsien,R.Y. (1996) Engineering green fluorescent protein 
for improved brightness, longer wavelengths and fluorescence 
resonance energy transfer. Curr. Biol. , 6 , 178–182. 
16. Abbasi,J. (2017) DNA base editing could re v erse most 
disease-causing point mutations. JAMA , 318 , 2173–2173. 
17. Lee,H.J ., Kim,H.J . and Lee,S.J . (2020) CRISPR-Cas9-mediated 
pinpoint microbial genome editing aided by target-mismatched 
sgRNAs. Genome Res. , 30 , 768–775. 
18. Zhang,X., Zhu,B., Chen,L., Xie,L., Yu,W., Wang,Y., Li,L., Yin,S., 
Yang,L., Hu,H. et al. (2020) Dual base editor catalyzes both cytosine 
and adenine base conversions in human cells. Nat. Biotechnol. , 38 , 
856–860. 
19. Komor,A.C., Kim,Y.B., Packer,M.S., Zuris,J.A. and Liu,D.R. (2016) 
Programmable editing of a target base in genomic DNA without 
double-stranded DNA cleavage. Nature , 533 , 420–424. 
20. Jin,S., Fei,H., Zhu,Z., Luo,Y., Liu,J., Gao,S., Zhang,F., Chen,Y.H., 
Wang,Y. and Gao,C. (2020) Rationally designed APOBEC3B 
cytosine base editors with improved specificity. Mol. Cell , 79 , 
728–740. 
21. Gaudelli,N.M., Komor,A.C., Rees,H.A., Packer,M.S., Badran,A.H., 
Bryson,D.I. and Liu,D.R. (2017) Programmable base editing of A*T 
to G*C in genomic DNA without DNA cleavage. Nature , 551 , 
464–471. 
22. Anzalone,A.V., Randolph,P.B., Davis,J.R., Sousa,A.A., Koblan,L.W., 
Levy,J .M., Chen,P.J ., Wilson,C., Newby,G.A., Raguram,A. et al. 
(2019) Sear ch-and-r eplace genome editing without double-strand 
breaks or donor DNA. Nature , 576 , 149–157. 
23. Tong,Y., Jorgensen,T.S., W hitford,C .M., Weber,T. and Lee,S.Y. 
(2021) A versatile genetic engineering toolkit for E. coli based on 
CRISPR-prime editing. Nat. Commun. , 12 , 5206. 
24. Wang,H.H., Isaacs,F.J., Carr,P.A., Sun,Z.Z., Xu,G., Forest,C.R. and 
Church,G.M. (2009) Programming cells by multiplex genome 
engineering and accelerated evolution. Nature , 460 , 894–898. 
25. Lim,D. and Maas,W.K. (1989) Re v erse-transcriptase dependent 
synthesis of a covalently linked, branched DNA RNA compound in 
Esc heric hia coli B. Cell , 56 , 891–904. 
26. Millman,A., Bernheim,A., Stokar-Avihail,A., Fedorenko,T., 
Voichek,M., Leavitt,A., Oppenheimer-Shaanan,Y. and Sorek,R. 
(2020) Bacterial retrons function in anti-phage defense. Cell , 183 , 
1551–1561. 
27. Wang,Y., Guan,Z., Wang,C., Nie,Y., Chen,Y., Qian,Z., Cui,Y., 
Xu,H., Wang,Q., Zhao,F. et al. (2022) Cryo-EM structures of 
Esc heric hia coli Ec86 retron complexes re v eal architecture and 
defence mechanism. Nat. Microbiol. , 7 , 1480–1489. 
28. Farzadfard,F. and Lu,T.K. (2014) Genomically encoded analog 
memory with precise in vivo DNA writing in living cell populations. 
Science , 346 , 825–833. 
29. Simon,A.J., Morrow,B.R. and Ellington,A.D. (2018) 
Retroelement-based genome editing and evolution. ACS Synth Biol , 
7 , 2600–2611. 
30. Farzadfard,F., Gharaei,N., Citorik,R.J. and Lu,T.K. (2021) Efficient 
retroelement-mediated DNA writing in bacteria. Cell Syst. , 12 , 
860–873. 
31. Schubert,M.G., Goodman,D.B., Wannier,T.M., Kaur,D., 
Farzadfard,F., Lu,T.K., Shipman,S.L. and Church,G.M. (2021) 
High-throughput functional variant screens via in vivo production of 
single-stranded DNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. , 118 , 
e2018181118. 
32. Reis,A.C., Halper,S.M., Vezeau,G.E., Cetnar,D.P., Hossain,A., 
Clauer,P.R. and Salis,H.M. (2019) Simultaneous r epr ession of 
multiple bacterial genes using nonrepetiti v e e xtra-long sgRNA 
arrays. Nat. Biotechnol. , 37 , 1294–1301. 
33. Morrison,D.A. (1977) Transformation in Esc heric hia coli : cryogenic 
preservation of competent cells. J. Bacteriol. , 132 , 349–351. 
34. Xiao,F., Wang,H., Shi,Z., Huang,Q., Huang,L., Lian,J., Cai,J. and 
Xu,Z. (2020) Multi-le v el metabolic engineering of Pseudomonas 
mutabilis ATCC31014 for efficient production of biotin. Metab Eng. , 
61 , 406–415. 
35. Ren,Q., Henes,B., Fairhead,M. and Th ¨ony-Meyer,L. (2013) High 
le v el production of tyrosinase in recombinant Esc heric hia coli . BMC 
Biotechnol. , 13 , 18–28. 
36. HamediRad,M., Chao,R., Weisberg,S., Lian,J., Sinha,S. and Zhao,H. 
(2019) Towards a fully automated algorithm driven platform for 
biosystems design. Nat. Commun. , 10 , 5150. 
37. Datsenko,K.A. and Wanner,B.L. (2000) One-step inactivation of 
chromosomal genes in Esc heric hia coli K-12 using PCR products. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. , 97 , 6640–6645. 
38. Ronda,C., Pedersen,L.E., Sommer,M.O. and Nielsen,A.T. (2016) 
CRMAGE: CRISPR optimized MAGE recombineering. Sci. Rep. , 6 , 
19452. 
39. Egbert,R.G., Rishi,H.S., Adler,B.A., McCormick,D.M., Toro,E., 
Gill,R.T. and Arkin,A.P. (2019) A versatile platform strain for 
high-fidelity multiplex genome editing. Nucleic Acids Res. , 47 , 
3244–3256. 
40. Dalia,T.N., Yoon,S.H., Galli,E., Barre,F.X., Wa ters,C .M. and 
Dalia,A.B. (2017) Enhancing multiplex genome editing by natural 
transformation (MuGENT) via inactivation of ssDNA exonucleases. 
Nucleic Acids Res. , 45 , 7527–7537. 
41. Gallagher,R.R., Li,Z., Lewis,A.O. and Isaacs,F.J. (2014) Rapid 
editing and evolution of bacterial genomes using libraries of synthetic 
DNA. Nat. Protoc. , 9 , 2301–2316. 
42. Mosberg,J .A., Gregg,C.J ., Lajoie,M.J ., Wang,H.H. and Church,G.M. 
(2012) Improving lambda red genome engineering in Esc heric hia coli 
via rational removal of endogenous nucleases. Plos One , 7 , e44638. 
43. Sawitzke,J.A., Costantino,N., Li,X.T., Thomason,L.C., 
Bubunenko,M., Court,C. and Court,D.L. (2011) Probing cellular 
processes with oligo-mediated recombination and using the 
knowledge gained to optimize recombineering. J. Mol. Biol. , 407 , 
45–59. 
44. Lampson,B.C., Inouye,M. and Inouye,S. (2005) Retrons, msDNA, 
and the bacterial genome. Cytogenet. Genome Res. , 110 , 491–499. 
45. Simon,A.J., Ellington,A.D. and Finkelstein,I.J. (2019) Retrons and 
their applications in genome engineering. Nucleic Acids Res. , 47 , 
11007–11019. 
46. Palka,C ., Fishman,C .B., Bha ttar ai-Kline,S., My ers,S.A. and 
Shipman,S.L. (2022) Retron re v erse transcriptase termination and 
phage defense are dependent on host RNase H1. Nucleic Acids Res. , 
50 , 3490–3504. 
47. Li,X.T., Costantino,N., Lu,L.Y., Liu,D.P., Watt,R.M., Cheah,K.S.E., 
Court,D.L. and Huang,J.D. (2003) Identification of factors 
influencing strand bias in oligonucleotide-mediated recombination in 
Esc heric hia coli . Nucleic Acids Res. , 31 , 6674–6687. 
48. Mutalik,V.K., Guimaraes,J.C., Cambray,G., Lam,C., 
Christoffersen,M.J., Mai,Q.A., Tran,A.B., Paull,M., Keasling,J.D., 
Arkin,A.P. et al. (2013) Precise and reliable gene expression via 
standard transcription and translation initiation elements. Nat. 
Methods , 10 , 354–360. 
Nucleic Acids Research, 2023, Vol. 51, No. 15 8307 
49. Kosuri,S., Goodman,D.B., Cambray,G., Mutalik,V.K., Gao,Y., 
Arkin,A.P., Endy,D. and Church,G.M. (2013) Composability of 
regulatory sequences controlling transcription and translation in 
Esc heric hia coli . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. , 110 , 14024–14029. 
50. Wannier,T.M., Nyerges,A., Kuchwara,H.M., Czikkely,M., 
Balogh,D., Filsinger,G.T., Borders,N.C., Gregg,C.J., Lajoie,M.J., 
Rios,X. et al. (2020) Improved bacterial recombineering by 
parallelized protein discovery. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. , 117 , 
13689–13698. 
51. Moore,S.J., Lai,H.E., Kelwick,R.J., Chee,S.M., Bell,D.J., 
Polizzi,K.M. and Freemont,P.S. (2016) Ecoflex: a multifunctional 
moclo kit for E. coli synthetic biology. ACS Synth. Biol. , 5 , 
1059–1069. 
52. Tang,Q., Lou,C. and Liu,S.J. (2017) Construction of an easy-to-use 
CRISPR-Cas9 system by patching a newly designed EXIT circuit. J. 
Biol. Eng. , 11 , 32. 
53. McKenna,R., Lombana,T.N., Yamada,M., Mukhyala,K. and 
Veeravalli,K. (2019) Engineered sigma factors increase full-length 
antibody expression in Esc heric hia coli . Metab Eng. , 52 , 315–323. 
54. Chen,M., Liang,H., Han,C., Zhou,P., Xing,Z., Chen,Q., Liu,Y., 
Xie,G.A. and Xie,R. (2022) Engineering of global transcription 
factor FruR to r edir ect the carbon flow in Esc heric hia coli for 
enhancing L-phenylalanine biosynthesis. Microb Cell Fact , 21 , 222. 
55. Zhang,H., Chong,H., Ching,C.B. and Jiang,R. (2012) Random 
mutagenesis of global transcription factor cAMP receptor protein for 
improved osmotolerance. Biotechnol. Bioeng. , 109 , 1165–1172. 
56. Martinez-Antonio,A., Janga,S.C. and Thieffry,D. (2008) Functional 
organisation of Esc heric hia coli transcriptional regulatory network. J. 
Mol. Biol. , 381 , 238–247. 
57. Martinez-Antonio,A. and Collado-Vides,J. (2003) Identifying global 
regulators in transcriptional regulatory networks in bacteria. Curr. 
Opin. Microbiol. , 6 , 482–489. 
58. Bali,A.P., Lennox-Hvenekilde,D., Myling-Petersen,N., Buerger,J., 
Salomonsen,B., Gronenberg,L.S., Sommer,M.O.A. and Genee,H.J. 
(2020) Improved biotin, thiamine, and lipoic acid biosynthesis by 
engineering the global regulator IscR. Metab Eng. , 60 , 97–109. 
59. Cravens,A., Jamil,O.K., Kong,D., Sockolosky,J.T. and Smolke,C.D. 
(2021) Polymerase-guided base editing enables in vivo mutagenesis 
and rapid protein engineering. Nat. Commun. , 12 , 1579. 
60. Park,H. and Kim,S. (2021) Gene-specific mutagenesis enables rapid 
continuous evolution of enzymes in vivo . Nucleic Acids Res. , 49 , e32. 
61. Brakmann,S. and Grzeszik,S. (2001) An err or-pr one T7 RNA 
pol ymerase m utant generated by directed evolution. Chem. Bio. 
Chem. , 2 , 212–219. 
62. Gay,P., Coq,D.L., Steinmetz,M., Berkelman,T. and Kado,C.I. (1985) 
Positi v e selection procedure for entrapment of insertion sequence 
elements in gram-negati v e bacteria. J. Bacteriol. , 164 , 918–921. 
63. Raga-Carbajal,E., Diaz-Vilchis,A., Rojas-Trejo,S.P., 
Rudino-Pinera,E. and Olvera,C. (2021) The molecular basis of the 
nonprocessi v e elongation mechanism in levansucrases. J. Biol. Chem. , 
296 , 10078. 
64. Meng,G. and Futterer,K. (2003) Structural frame wor k of fructosyl 
transfer in Bacillus subtilis levansucrase. Nat. Struct. Biol. , 10 , 
935–941. 
65. Banno,S., Nishida,K., Arazoe,T., Mitsunobu,H. and Kondo,A. 
(2018) Deaminase-mediated multiplex genome editing in Escherichia 
coli . Nat. Microbiol. , 3 , 423–429. 
66. Cao,Z., Mueller,C.W. and Julin,D.A. (2010) Analysis of the recJ gene 
and protein from Deinococcus r adiodur ans . DNA Repair , 9 , 66–75. 
67. Prada Medina,C.A., Aristizabal Tessmer,E.T., Quintero Ruiz,N., 
Serment-Guerrero,J. and Luis Fuentes,J. (2016) Survival and SOS 
response induction in ultraviolet B irradiated Esc heric hia coli cells 
with defecti v e repair mechanisms. Int. J. Radiat Biol. , 92 , 321–328. 
68. Halv as,E.K., Sv arovskaia,E.S. and Pathak,V.K. (2000) Role of 
murine leukemia virus re v erse transcriptase deoxyribonucleoside 
triphosphate-binding site in retroviral replication and in vivo fidelity. 
J. V ir ol. , 74 , 10349–10358. 
69. Roberts,J.D., Bebenek,K. and Kunkel,T.A. (1988) The accuracy of 
re v erse-transcriptase from HIV-1. Science , 242 , 1171–1173. 
C ⃝ The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic Acids Research. 
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creati v e Commons Attribution-NonCommercial License 
(http: // creati v ecommons.org / licenses / by-nc / 4.0 / ), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work 
is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals .permissions@oup .com