1Scientific  Repo RtS |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreports
Genome mining and 
characterisation of a novel 
transaminase with remote 
stereoselectivity
D. p. Gavin1,2,9, F. J. Reen3,4,9, J. Rocha-Martin  3,9, I. Abreu-castilla3, D. F. Woods3, 
A. M. fole
y5, P . A. Sánchez-Murcia  6, M. Schwarz1, P . o’nei ll 7, A. R. Maguire2,5* & 
f. o’Gara2,3,8*
Microbial enzymes from pristine niches can potentially deliver disruptive opportunities in synthetic 
routes to Active pharmaceutical ingredients 
and intermediates in the pharmaceutical industry
. 
Advances in green chemistry technologies and the importance of stereochemical control, further 
underscores the application of enzyme-based solutions in chemical synthesis. 
the rich 
tapestry of 
microbial diversity in the oceanic ecosystem encodes a capacity for novel biotransformations arising 
from the chemical complexity of this largely unexplored bioactive reservoir. Here we report a novel 
ω-transaminase discovered in a marine sponge Pseudovibrio sp. isolate. Remote stereoselection 
using a transaminase has been demonstrated for the first time using this novel protein. Application 
to the resolution of an intermediate in the synthesis of sertraline highlights the synthetic potential of 
this novel biocatalyst discovered through genomic mining. 
integrat
ed chemico-genomics revealed a 
unique substrate profile, while molecular modelling provided structural insights into this ‘first in class’ 
selectivity at a remote chiral centre.
Biocatalysis has emerged as an important technology in the ‘toolkit’ of the asymmetric chemist, especially in the 
last decade
1–4. The integration of biocatalytic steps in syntheses can have positive implications for the environ-
mental impact of a process but it can also alter synthetic routes, since exploiting the chemo-, regio- and stere-
oselectivity of biocatalysts can open the door to alternative, shorter syntheses
5,6. Chiral amines, and functional 
groups derived from amines, are found in many pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals 7. These stereogenic cen -
tres are often embedded in complex structures. The Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API), or target molecule, 
often contains at least one other stereocentre, and controlling the overall stereochemistry is challenging. Despite 
numerous advances in organic synthesis over the last number of decades, classical resolution remains a reliable 
and prominent technique in pharmaceutical manufacture
8,9. Due to their prevalence in pharmaceuticals and fine 
chemicals, chiral amine subunits are high value synthetic targets and biocatalysis represents a highly enantioselec-
tive and sustainable route to them. Indeed, many elegant biocatalytic routes to chiral amines have been reported 
utilising a range of enzymatic families, including hydrolases, monoamine oxidases, imine reductases and reduc-
tive aminases in the (dynamic) kinetic resolution and asymmetric synthesis of pharmaceutical intermediates
10–20.
Transaminases have received much attention in the context of chiral amine synthesis21–25. ω-Transaminases 
(ω-TAs, E.C. 2.6.1.X) are pyridoxal-5′-phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzymes that catalyse the reversible transfer 
1School of Chemistry; Analytical and Biological Chemistry Research Facility, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. 
2Synthesis and Solid State Pharmaceutical Centre, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. 3BIOMERIT Research 
Centre, School of Microbiology, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. 4School of Microbiology, University College 
Cork, T12 K8AF, Cork, Ireland. 5School of Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Analytical and Biological Chemistry 
Research Facility, University College Cork, Cork, Ireland. 6Institute of Theoretical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, 
University of Vienna, Währinger Str. 17, A-1090, Vienna, Austria. 7Pfizer Process Development Centre, Loughbeg, 
Cork, Ireland. 8Human Microbiome Programme, School of Pharmacy and Biomedical Sciences, Curtin Health 
Innovation Research Institute, Curtin University, Perth, WA 6102, Australia and Telethon Kids Institute, Perth, WA, 
6008, Australia. 9These authors contributed equally: D. P . Gavin, F. J. Reen and J. Rocha Martin. *email: a.maguire@
ucc.ie; f.ogara@ucc.ie
open
There are amendments to this paper
2Scientific  Repo R t S |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
of an amine group from a donor molecule (e.g. alanine) to an acceptor molecule containing a carbonyl group. 
Structurally, ω-TAs are typically dimeric proteins which have a large and small binding pocket within their active 
site, although tetrameric forms have been reported 26. Almost without exception, the small pocket can accom -
modate only a methyl group or a quasi-methyl group such as a -CH 2- within the framework of a cyclohexyl or 
cyclopentyl moiety. As such, a major limitation of these enzymes is their limited substrate scope27. However, their 
synthetic power has ensured that they have become valuable tools in the synthesis of stereogenically pure primary 
amines
28,29. The challenge therefore is to discover or engineer transaminases with unique biocatalytic properties 
such that stereo-specific resolution of a broader range of substrates is feasible.
The marine ecosystem sustains a rich microbial biodiversity, the biocatalytic potential of which is largely 
unexplored when compared with its terrestrial counterpart. Studies reporting the isolation of novel bioactive 
compounds from the marine environment have become more prominent in recent years with anti-cancer, 
anti-microbial, and anti-inflammatory therapeutics being among the most well studied
30. It is becoming increas-
ingly apparent that the functional novelty encoded within the rich genetic diversity of marine polymicrobial com-
munities extends also to the enzymatic activities that sustain microbial life in this ecosystem. While technologies 
such as directed evolution and rational design have provided further added value to existing enzyme frameworks, 
identifying source proteins with novel functionality has several benefits, particularly where previously pristine 
niches have revealed their rich and biodiverse bioactive potential
31. There are several routes currently available 
to access these novel activities, from high-throughput metagenomics based functional screens, to more targeted 
genome mining approaches based on a fundamental understanding of process and structure. In many cases, 
approaches that utilise multiple components of the genome technology toolkit are favoured. Within the marine 
niche, a significant concentration of bioactive potential resides within the microbial communities that colonise 
marine sponges of the Porifera phylum
30. Accessing culturable microbes from marine sponges remains chal-
lenging, although several species have emerged with interesting bioactive and biosynthetic profiles. They are an 
untapped source of proteins with novel favourable functionality and/or substrate scope based on the unique bio-
transformations required of them e.g. accessing halogenated metabolites. These enzymes could also be expected 
to exhibit additional properties such as salt and osmotic tolerance offering robustness in synthetic bioreactor 
pipelines
31,32.
Most biocatalytic transformations focus on enantioselection at or near to the site of reaction. There are some 
examples of biocatalytic resolution of remote stereogenic centres, for example using hydrolases33–39. In contrast, 
transaminase-mediated resolution of compounds bearing even a second stereocentre are very rare. To the best 
of our knowledge there has been only two such reports and both of these studies were conducted on compounds 
with a stereogenic centre at the α -carbon (adjacent to the reactive site), 2  and 3, taking advantage of the enol 
equilibrium in a dynamic process (Fig. 1)
40,41.
Sertraline 4 (Fig. 1) is a Selective Seretonin Reuptake Inhibitor (SSRI) which is produced by Pfizer and it is one 
of the most prescribed antidepressants in the world. Along with a (1
 S)-s
econdary amine, sertraline contains a 
stereogenic centre at the 4-position of the aminotetralin core. The aminotetralin bicycle is a privileged subunit in 
drug discovery, also being present in dasotraline (5) and the deschloro (1
 R)-ep
imer of sertraline, tametraline (6). 
Figure 1. S tructures of compounds of interest for transaminase mediated resolution.
3Scientific  Repo R t S |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
Dasotraline is the (1 R)-p rimary amine equivalent of sertraline and is also a compound of therapeutic interest42. 
Desmethylsertraline (norsertraline) 8b is the active metabolite of sertraline and the API can be synthesised from 
this primary amine precursor. Indatraline 7 is a nonselective monoamine reuptake inhibitor43.
The key intermediate in the synthesis of sertraline itself is the (4
 S
)-tetralone 1 (Fig. 1). rac-1 Can be accessed 
via the reaction of 1-napthol and 1,2-dichlorobenzene in the presence of a strong Lewis acid44. Reductive amina-
tion with methylamine yields the product in a 95:5 cis:trans ratio45. Due to the importance of the API, many syn-
theses have been reported44,46–48. Despite these efforts, an environmentally friendly, operationally simple method 
of acquiring (S)-1 remains an important synthetic goal.
Here we report the first isolation and characterisation of a ω-transaminase with selectivity at a remote chiral 
centre. A domain-oriented genome mining search of culturable marine sponge isolates identified a transaminase 
with a unique sequence compared to existing databases. Substrate profiling revealed that transaminase from 
Pseudovibrio sp. WM33 exhibited an acceptance of bulky substrates, including amine 8b. Remote stereoselectiv-
ity was validated and shown to be a characteristic of the marine transaminase, but not of the well-characterised 
Chromobacterium violaceum transaminase. Molecular modelling provided insights into the structural basis of this 
selectivity and to our knowledge previously unreported enantiodiscrimination at the remote stereocentre in the 
biotransformation of amine 8b.
Results
isolation of a novel ω- transaminase activity from marine sponge Pseudovibrio sp WM33.   
Having envisioned a transaminase-mediated resolution of the sertraline intermediate (Fig.  2a) and inspired by 
the elegant work of Bornscheuer and co-workers on transaminase evolution towards bulky substrates 49, we set 
about the task of finding a transaminase with synthetically useful activity towards interconversion of 1  and 8b. 
Importantly, we noted that in Bornscheuer’s study, low levels of activity were detected with several in-house wild-
type transaminases and mutant variants against compounds 9 and 10, while the diaryl compound 11, a “bulky-
bulky” diaryl substrate, was not accepted by any transaminase tested. Given that fold type I transaminases can 
have activity against 1-aminotetralin 14 and 1-aminoindan 13 (Fig. 2)
41,50–52, with in some cases higher activity 
than against the benchmark compound a- methylbenzylamine 12, we postulated that this type of transaminase 
could in theory bestow remote selectivity in the resolution of substrates bearing a second stereocentre. We theo-
rised that we could find this activity with a fold class I transaminase as the bulky dichlorophenyl-substitution is 
“away” from the small binding pocket, at the 4-position of the aminotetralin core (Fig. 2).
The genomes of marine sponge isolates were investigated for genes encoding for potential transaminase activ-
ity, with particular emphasis on the class 1 fold domain. Presumptive ‘hits’ were identified in several marine 
sponge isolate genomes, including in the culturable isolate Pseudovibrio  WM33 (GenPept Accession No. 
WP_063301853). The sequence encoding the putative transaminase was predicted to encode for a 445 amino 
acid protein with a predicted molecular weight of 49.8
 kD
a. Sequence analysis using the BLASTN and BLASTP 
algorithms revealed a novel sequence compared with existing sequences in the NCBI database. Cluster tree anal-
ysis (Fig. 3) demonstrated that the transaminase enzymes grouped into four discrete clusters, defined as Cluster 
I-IV . Interestingly, Pseudovibrio WM33 transaminase sequence branched distinct from all the major transami-
nase clusters. An alignment was subsequently performed using the Pseudovibrio WM33 transaminase (hereafter 
termed P-ω-TA) with the nine non- Pseudovibrio ‘best hits’ exhibiting the highest sequence identity from the 
BLASTP analysis. The well characterised Chromobacterium violaceum  transaminase (Cv-ω-TA), which shares 
56% identity to P-ω-TA, was also included in the alignment. This transaminase is in the same fold class as P-ω-TA. 
Moreover, the active sites within Cv-ω-TA are conserved with the novel P-ω-TA, with the exception of Asn 118′ 
(G121 in P-ω-TA)
53. The amino acids Ser 124 ′ (S121 in Cv-ω-TA) and Tyr 156′ (Y153 in Cv-ω-TA) which are 
involved in forming hydrogen bonds with phosphate oxygen atoms of Pyridoxal 5′-Phosphate (PLP) are present 
in P-ω-TA. Several amide nitrogen atoms, such as those of Thr 325′ and Tyr 326′ (T321 and Y322 in Cv-ω-TA), 
take part in hydrogen bonding with PLP . The amino acid Lys 291′ (K288 in Cv-ω-TA), which covalently binds 
PLP , is also conserved in P-ω-TA, as is Asp262′ (D259 in Cv-ω-TA), which plays an important role when forming 
bonds with PLP . However, significant differences and unique regions were identified in the comparative analysis, 
suggesting the possibility of unique functionality when compared with the extensively used Cv-ω-TA.
Heterologous expression of P -ω-tA and validat ion of transaminase activity.  A molecular 
approach was undertaken to express the putative transaminase encoding gene in E. coli BL21 DE RIPL. Gene 
specific primers were used to generate a P-ω-TA amplicon and directional cloning was undertaken to successfully 
generate an in-frame N-terminal His-Tag P -ω- TA fusion (pET- P -ω-TA) in the pET28a expression plasmid. 
Sequence analysis confirmed the fidelity of the inserted DNA, and SDS PAGE analysis confirmed the production 
of a ~50
 kD
a protein in both P -ω-TA and Cv-ω-TA (Supplementary Data Fig. S1). Lysate from IPTG-induced 
pET- P-ω-TA expressed in E. coli BL21 DE RIPL cells was subsequently used to confirm and characterise the 
transaminase activity of P -ω-TA. Lysate from similarly induced E. coli BL21 DE RIPL cells carrying an empty 
plasmid was included in each assay to establish a baseline control.
Enantioselectivity. P-ω-T
A was tested for enantioselectivity using a standard methyl-benzylamine (MBA) sub-
strate. As predicted for class I fold transaminases, purified P -ω-TA protein showed (S)-enantioselectivity for 
MBA. Conversion of substrate to acetophenone was observed when (S)-α-MBA was used, whereas no acetophe-
none was produced when the (R)-α-MBA version was used (Supplementary Data Fig. S2).
Temperature and pH.
 Th
e effect of temperature and pH on enzyme activity during the reaction was measured 
using (S)-MBA as amino donor with pyruvate providing the ketone group. This revealed an optimum tem-
perature and pH of 40°C and 10, respectively. Total loss of activity was recorded at temperatures above 60°C 
4Scientific  Repo R t S |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
(Supplementary Data Fig. S2). P-ω-TA exhibited measurable activity in the basic pH range of 8–11, being highest 
at pH 10, perhaps a reflection of its oceanic origin (Supplementary Data Fig. S2).
Solvent tolerance.
 A ra
nge of DMSO concentrations were tested to investigate solvent tolerance of the P-ω-TA 
enzyme. As above, (S)-MBA as amino donor with pyruvate providing the ketone group. The optimum reaction 
conditions were observed at 10% DMSO, with a dramatic loss in activity at higher, and indeed lower concentra-
tions (Supplementary Data Fig. S3).
P-ω-tA  shows no unusual activity towards model substrates compared to Cv - ω-tA . A range 
of model substrates were tested against the novel biocatalyst P-ω-TA and, for comparison, the well-characterised 
Cv-ω-TA (heterologously expressed as above) for activity in the oxidative deamination reaction. For the majority 
of the substrates, only the conversion was measured (Fig.  4). Compounds in group I were chosen to determine 
if the active site can accommodate larger groups than R
 = M
e, as this is traditionally a limitation of wild-type 
transaminases. Notably, both transaminases successfully processed a range of substrates bearing one methyl 
substituent (Group II), while neither accepted substrates bearing two bulky substituents (Group I) to any great 
degree. Cyclic substrates (aminoindane and amino tetralins, Group III) were also chosen as these motifs are pres-
ent in a wide range of pharmaceutically active compounds.
Overall the reactivity profile of the novel transaminase with these substrates was remarkably similar to that of 
Cv-ω-TA. Interestingly, the use of (±)-1-aminotetralin 14 resulted in poor conversion but the use of enantiopure 
(S)-1-aminotetralin (S)-14 showed a higher degree of conversion in each case. In the majority of these cases 
Cv-ω-TA outperformed the novel P-ω-TA biocatalyst (Fig. 4).
Figure 2. (a) Potential resolution of the tetralone intermediate remote stereocentre in the synthesis of 
s
ertraline. (b) Schematic overview of the pipeline approach for the isolation of ‘first in class’ transaminase 
activity.
5Scientific  Repo R t S |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
Figure 3. (a) Clustering tree analysis of transaminase protein sequences. Transaminase sequences clearly 
g
roup into four distinct clusters, I-IV . An aminotransferase from Pseudovibrio WM33 and Pseudovibrio 
axinellae were found between Cluster I and Cluster IV , these ω-transaminases from Pseudovibrio do not 
group within these cluster due to low identities with other transaminases. The closest aminotransferase to 
the Pseudovibrio transaminases is from Cohaesibacter marisflavi with 74% sequence identity. The tree is 
drawn to scale, with branch lengths measured in the number of substitutions per site. The analysis involved 
104 amino acid sequences and all positions containing gaps and missing data were eliminated. A total of 436 
positions were contained in the final dataset. Identifiers are as follows: C. gel, Cohaesibacter gelatinilyticus; C. 
hal, Cohaesibacter haloalkalitolerans; C. mar, Cohaesibacter marisflavi; C. sp., Cohaesibacter sp. ES.047; T. eik a, 
Thiothrix eikelboomii aspartate aminotransferase; T. eik p, Thiothrix eikelboomii putrescine aminotransferase; Tr. 
sed, Tropicimonas sediminicola; L. muc, Leucothrix mucor; Rhodo, Rhodobacteraceae bacterium). b Alignment 
of P-ω-TA with related transaminases including Cv-ω-TA. Amino acids strongly conserved are highlighted in 
black whereas residues less conserved are shown in grey shading. Alignment was performed with T-Coffee and 
processed using BoxShade. Key active site residues are highlighted with an *
53.
6Scientific  Repo R t S |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
p-ω-tA exhi bits enantioselectivity for a remote stereocentre.  On the basis that P-ω-TA represented 
a novel class I fold transaminase, with a natural structural variation relative to available and previously character-
ised transaminases, we investigated P-ω-TA in terms of its potential for remote stereoselectivity using the amine 
substrates 8a and 8b. As our primary objective was the remote stereoselection, for clarity we investigated the 
thermodynamically favoured oxidative deamination reaction using the cis- and trans-diastereomers (8b and 8a, 
respectively) separately.
Gratifyingly, P-ω-TA showed activity and enantioselectivity in experiments against the cis-substrate 8b. In 
order to further investigate the novelty of this transformation and to gauge if the activity was indeed unusual, 
we examined the viability of the well-studied Cv -ω-TA in the same reactions. As previously stated, Cv -ω-TA 
is in the same fold class as P -ω-TA and hence is also (S)-selective
51. In these experiments, the same conditions 
were used. Cv -ω-TA was found to be active against both 8b and 8a (Fig.  5). Due to the (S )-selectivity at the 
reacting site, the trans-stereoisomer 8a gave rise to the (4
 R)-t
etralone, thereby showing that this enzyme is not 
stereo-sensitive to the remote site. Importantly, the novel transaminase only showed significant activity against 
8b, giving the (4
 S
)-tetralone product (4
 
S)-6 in 92% ee, while Cv-ω-TA processed both the cis- and trans-amines 
with no evidence of discrimination at the remote stereocentre (Fig.  5). When both transaminases were used as 
biocatalyst, kinetic resolution of cis-8b proceeded with high efficiency within 16
 h le
ading to essentially 50% con-
version with highly enantioenriched substrates and products. Contrastingly, exposing the novel transaminase to 
trans-8a under the same reaction conditions resulted in poor conversion (Fig. 5). Both transaminases exhibited 
(S)-selectivity at the site of reaction, as anticipated. The selectivity of the enzyme was confirmed by comparing 
the reaction HPLC trace with that of a sample of the (4
 S)-t
etralone, (4
 S)-
1 (Supplementary data). Interestingly, 
the transaminases showed greater activity towards the amine 8b than the unsubstituted 1-aminotetralin 14. Less 
than 10% of 1-Aminotetralin 14 was converted to product in comparison to cis-8b (up to 55% conversion, details 
in Fig. 5).
Building on these exciting results using the individual diastereomers, an equimolar mixture of the cis-amine 
8b and trans-amine 8b was used as substrate in the presence of both transaminases (Fig.  6). P-ω-TA displayed 
Figure 4. S ubstrate profiling of P-ω-TA against a panel of substrates grouped based on physical and structural 
characteristics. Conversion: (+++)
 >
 
30%, (++) 10–30%, (+) 0–10%, (−) no conversion; ND – not detected 
(no starting material or product was recovered from the reaction mixture). Duplicate and triplicate independent 
biological replicate assays were performed for Group II and Group III, respectively.
7Scientific  Repo RtS |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
excellent discrimination at the remote stereocentre, leading to tetralone 1  with 21% conversion (90% ee , 4S) – 
close to the kinetic limit of 25%. The lack of discrimination of Cv-ω-TA at the remote stereocentre was similarly 
confirmed as both diastereomers were processed, resulting in 50% conversion to tetralone 1 , in 12% ee. Thus, 
P-ω-TA exhibits excellent diastereoselection at the remote stereocentre even when using a mixture of cis- and 
trans-diastereomers, highlighting the synthetic potential of this novel biocatalyst.
The fact that transaminase P-ω-TA is (S)-selective at the 4-position as well, means that the sertraline API could 
be accessed via two different methods. The reductive amination reaction could successfully resolve tetralone 1, the 
key intermediate in the synthesis of sertraline. After separation of the product, oxidative deamination using the 
same biocatalyst will furnish the enantiopure tetralone. Reductive amination with methylamine furnishes the API45. 
Alternatively, it is possible to synthesise the API directly from the (1S)-primary amine desmethylsertraline 8b46,47.
Modelling of the chemical transformation of 8a and 8b by P-ω-tA. In order to understand the 
remote enantioselectivity shown by P-ω-TA in the transamination reaction towards 8b (Fig. 5), we modelled the 
external aldimines EA8a and EA8b at the active site of P-ω-TA (Fig. 7). The EA:P-ω-TA complexes were built by 
homology modelling and manual docking of the ligand at the active site of the enzyme. Further refinement was 
achieved by means of a restrained Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulation protocol (see Computational methods).
In the proposed mechanism for the deamination reaction in ω-transaminases
54, once the substrate condenses 
with the PLP to form the external aldimine EA , the general base of the reaction (neutral Lys291) abstracts the 
proton H1 of 8a/ 8b to form the quinonoid intermediate Q , where the generated negative charge after proton 
Figure 5. Activity of P-ω-TA and Cv-ω-TA a gainst (a) cis-amine 8b and (b) trans-amine 8a. Data is from a 
representative experiment of three independent biological replicates with excellent repeatability.
a
Transaminase Conv. NMR (%) Conv. Calc (%) 63 ee product 1 (%) ee substrate 8b (%) E 80
P-ω-TA 54 52 93 (4S) >99 145
Cv-ω-TA 55 52 91 (4S) >99 111
*30 mg whole cells used, cells were sonicated to lyse.
b
Transaminase Conv. NMR (%) Conv. Calc (%) 63 ee product 1 (%) ee substrate 8a (%) E 80
P-ω-TA 5 -** 5 (4R) 2 -**
Cv-ω-TA 44 54 80 (4R) 95 33
*30 mg whole cells used, cells were sonicated to lyse.
**Conversion too low to calculate.
8Scientific  Repo R t S |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
abstraction is conjugated with the aldimine system and the pyridine ring. The deprotonation of the EA by Lys291 
occurs by the re-face of the aldimine and it is the first key step for the stereospecificity of the reaction. Therefore, 
we focused on this intermediate in our MD simulation studies. Amongst others, we measured the (i) the distance 
between the general base of the reaction (NZ of Lys291) and the proton H1 (named d1, Fig. 7a) and (ii) the dihe-
dral angle defined by the bonds C11-C6 and the N1
 =
 C1 a
ldimine unit (a1). The latter dihedral gives a measure-
ment of the planarity of the former conjugated system. If these two bonds are coplanar, the dihedral would have a 
value equal to zero. We found that the distance between H1 of 8a and the NZ of Lys291 is larger than the distance 
of the former residue with the H1 of 8b (Fig. 7b). In addition, whereas the mean value of a
1 in EA8a is 0 °, the value 
for a1 of the external aldimine EA8b is −144°. That is, only EA8b adopts a proficient conformation for the proton 
abstraction and formation of the quinonoid intermediate Q8b in the active site of P-ω-TA. The visual inspection 
of the model shows that the chlorinated ring in EA 8a and EA8b forms a ππ-stacking interaction with the Phe25 
located in the N-terminal helical domain (Fig. 7a). In such a disposition, the external aldimine is constrained at 
the active site of P-ω-TA. The side chains of Phe91# on one face, and of Leu62, Trp63, and Ala234 on the other 
face, prevent by steric impediment the rotation around the bond N1-C6 in EA8a and EA8b. Therefore, the remote 
Figure 6. A ctivity of P-ω-TA and Cv -ω-TA against a mix of 8a and 8b. Data is from a representative experiment 
of two independent biological replicates with excellent repeatability.
Figure 7. (a) External aldimines EA8a and EA8b at the active site of P-ω-TA. (b) Distribution of the distance 
d1 along the MD simulations of the external aldimines of EA8a (red line) and EA8b (green line) at the active 
site of P-ω-TA. (c) PMF (kcal mol-1) for the abstraction of H1 of EA8a and EA8b by Lys291 of P-ω-TA. On the 
bottom it is shown the structural superimposition of final Q8a and Q8b with the initial external aldimines. The 
π-conjugated system of the aldimine is highlighted with a dashed circle.
9Scientific  Repo R t S |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
stereogenic centre on the tetralone determines the orientation of the substrate at the binding site due to steric 
effects.
Guided by this finding, we simulated the proton abstraction reaction by Lys291 using quantum mechanics/
molecular mechanics (QM/MM) MD simulations (Fig. 7c). We defined the shortening of the distance between 
the N7 of Lys291 and the proton H1 on EA 8a and EA8b as reaction coordinate (RC). In Fig.  7c, the mean force 
potential (PMF , kcal mol−1) for this reaction towards both substrates is shown. The abstraction of H1 in EA8a costs 
almost double the energy of that required in EA8b. Comparing the geometry of the obtained high-energy inter-
mediates Q8a and Q8b (carbon atoms coloured in orange, bottom of Fig. 7c) with the parental external aldimines 
EA8a and EA8b, respectively, it can be seen in Q8b that the system has relaxed to accommodate the extra negative 
charge, whereas in Q8a the conjugated system described above is not completely coplanar. Noteworthy, in our 
computations, the intermediate Q was obtained as a high energy state, which could indicate that a conformational 
change in the protein may follow to relax Q.
Regarding the differences of stereoselectivity shown between P -ω-TA and Cv-ω-TA in Fig. 5, we also simu-
lated 8a and 8b at the active site of Cv-ω-TA by means of MD simulations (Fig. 8). Whereas in P-ω-TA the two 
substrates adopt different conformations as described above (highlighted by an arrow, Fig. 8b), in Cv-ω-TA both 
populate the pre-reactive conformation for the proton abstraction reaction by Lys288 (Fig. 8a). These differences 
can be ascribed to the changes in the sequence of the regions that cover the active site, like the N-terminal helical 
region (helices α
1-α2, residues 1–35) and the C-terminal residues 300–320 (Supplementary Data Fig. S4), rather 
than changes at the active site. However, the subtle changes in the former three regions may differentially orien-
tate the loops around the active site (e.g. α
1-α2, loop), thus covering the active site, and thereby, the orientation of 
the critical residues for the stereoselectivity. This hypothesis is supported by the experimental evidence that the 
N-terminal helical region and the former C-terminal segment have been shown to be quite flexible and to change 
their conformation upon binding of PLP and substrates
53.
Finally, a structural alignment of our molecular model of P-ω-TA was carried out using the server DALI55,56. 
The best matches with a Z-score value
 ≥ 50 (11 s
tructures) are listed in Supplementary Data Fig. S5 and a 
WebLogo57,58 of the structural alignment is shown in Supplementary Data Fig. S6. Structural identity with P-ω-TA 
ranged from 36–59% across the 11 TA ’s. When compared with Cv- ω-TA, the best structural homologue shows 
variability in the residues shown in Fig.  8 (Ph25, Trp63, Phe91 and Ala234). Therefore, these positions, as well 
as those located at the N-terminal helical region (helices alpha1-alpha2, residues 1–35) and at the C-terminal 
(residues 300–320), are considered potential sites for future mutagenesis studies to modulate the stereoselectivity 
of P-ω-TA.
Discussion
The surge in interest in biocatalysis has been fuelled in recent years by the attractive promise of access to bio-
transformations which are currently out of reach of chemical catalysts
59. Apart from the alignment of biocatalysis 
with green chemistry directives and factors such as mild operating conditions and lower operating costs, micro-
bial enzymes have the capacity to deliver on the enantioselective conversion of challenging drug intermediates 
and APIs
32. Hydrolases have been comprehensively investigated as biocatalysts and have found application in 
(dynamic) kinetic resolutions of chiral amines11,14,20, including in the synthesis of norsertraline 8b19. Monoamine 
oxidases have been used extensively in the deracemisation of racemic amines12,15. A number of biocatalysts have 
Figure 8. R epresentative structures of 8a and 8b at the active site of Cv -ω-TA (a) and P-ω-TA (b) obtained by 
means of MD simulations. The arrow highlights the different conformation of 8a at the active site of P-ω-TA.
10Scientific  Repo R t S |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
been employed in the reductive amination of imine precursors, often using super-stoichiometric amounts of the 
amine donor18. Recent work has identified a reductive aminase which can enantioselectively transfer primary and 
secondary amines to a carbonyl moiety, giving rise to a range of secondary and tertiary amine products, in some 
cases with 1 molar equivalent of the amine donor
10.
Hydrolases can be used to resolve remote stereocentres 35–37, and have been particularly important bio-
catalysts in the context of resolution of APIs and pharmaceutical intermediates 33,34,39,60. In some cases, more 
than one stereocentre can be resolved 38. Kroutil and co-workers tested 3 transaminases for activity against 
2-methylcyclohexanone 2, revealing a strong preference by the transaminase from C. violaceum (referred to here 
as Cv-ω-TA) for one enantiomer of the ketone starting material41. Limanto and colleagues used a cyclohexanone 
derivative 3 with a bulky ether substituent, again at the 2-position of the substrate 40. The amine product is an 
intermediate in the synthesis of vernakalant, a drug in development for atrial fibrillation. Interestingly, the origi-
nal transaminase variant used showed a preference for the wrong ketone enantiomer and three rounds of directed 
evolution (with in-silico design) were conducted to find an enzyme with the desired stereo preference. Apart from 
these two examples, transaminases have been used to set the stereochemistry at the reacting site (i.e. the primary 
amine) only.
In light of the dearth of direct or convenient syntheses of the API and cognisant of the exquisite selectivity 
of enzymes, we envisaged a biocatalytic resolution of the remote stereocentre of the Sertraline intermediate 1 . 
Essential to this is the discovery of the biocatalytic enantiodiscrimination of the remote stereocentre exhibited 
by P-ω-TA. The use of a biocatalyst to set the stereochemistry at the remote chiral centre could represent a sub-
stantial improvement on other reported syntheses, which revolve around classical resolution of the API with 
mandelic acid or the use of continuous chromatography to separate the enantiomers of 1
45. The former synthesis 
necessitates recycling of the unwanted stereoisomers via epimerisation of both the methine centre and the sec-
ondary amine separately. The methine racemisation of rac-8b requires a toluene reflux in the presence of 50
 m
ol% 
KOtBu46–48. Contrastingly, the presence of the electron-withdrawing ketone in tetralone 1 means that the methine 
centre can be racemised in the presence of 6
 m
ol% NaOH at 50
 °C, w
hich is utilised in the continuous chromatog-
raphy route44. Enantioselective resolution of this remote stereocentre appears to be a unique trait of the marine 
transaminase P-ω-TA uncovered in this study.
Owing to the limited structure of compounds which are accepted by wild type transaminases, the successful 
utilisation of a transaminase in a process has typically relied upon finding a mutant variant of natural enzymes 
with the desired substrate profile via  directed evolution and/or (semi-) rational design. Our study highlights 
the untapped potential of harnessing novel biodiversity from pristine niches for existing framework proteins 
with previously unseen functionality. Transaminases have been used in the synthesis of pharmaceutical inter -
mediates and APIs, notably in the synthesis of Januvia
® (sitagliptin phosphate) 61. In the case of sitagliptin, an 
(R)-selective fold type IV transaminase was used and 11 rounds of directed evolution, resulting in 27 mutations 
(8% of the entire sequence), were needed to reach the optimal protein with all of the required properties. Recently, 
another study described how bulky substrate acceptance could be engineered with just 4 mutations in a Fold I 
class transaminase
49. More recently, dual substrate recognition for biogenic diamines and readily available mono-
amines has enabled researchers to adopt a Pseudomonas putida putrescine transaminase for the synthesis of ben-
zylamine derivatives with excellent product conversions and extremely broad substrate tolerance62. Despite these 
and other successes, the search for enzymes with novel functionality and/or broad substrate scope is paramount 
to the continued development of the field, not least because these new enzymes can act as templates for further 
evolution of the biocatalyst. The discovery of P-ω-TA, a novel transaminase from the marine sponge bacterium 
Pseudovibrio WM33, offers proof of concept that natural enzymes with unique and valuable properties exist and 
are accessible through molecular technologies. The ability of P-ω-TA to accept bulky substrates, while exhibiting 
remote stereoselectivity, marks this enzyme as a ‘first in class’ with significant potential for synthetic optimisation.
The complexity of drug synthesis pipelines is such that single enzyme mediated resolution is limited to specific 
parts of the pipeline. While some success has been achieved in combining several enzymatic steps within syn-
thesis pipelines, one-pot cascade systems remain an attractive target for biocatalytic development
63. The Turner 
lab have developed cascade systems for the production of chiral 2,5-disubstituted pyrrolidines64, deracemization 
of chiral benzylic amines65, and production of mono- and disubstituted piperidines and pyrrolidines66. Cascade 
combination with acyl transferases 67, and transketolases 68,69, has also been reported. As the complexity of the 
cascades increases, new challenges arise. These include the propensity for side reactions and maintaining the 
naturally biodiverse expression systems (either homologous or heterologous) used in these one-pot cascade sys-
tems
70. A greater understanding of the interactome dynamics between industrially relevant expression systems 
will provide a platform for the development of integrated and efficient cascade based systems, within which 
enzymes with attractive properties such as P-ω-TA could operate.
The unique activity of the P-ω-TA marine enzyme also underpins its potential as an advanced framework for 
directed evolutionary studies. Studies using the Cv -ω-TA have identified several residues in the protein frame-
work whose substitution leads to improved properties relative to the wild-type protein
71. A Y168F substitution 
was shown to increase the reaction rate 2-fold and P- ω-TA contains a natural Y168A substitution at this posi-
tion relative to Cv-ω-TA. The Cv-ω-TA residue in all other active site substitutions in this study (A231
 S, S156A,
 
R416K, and W60C) was conserved in P- ω-TA. In another study, use of the proline substitution method identi-
fied several positions whose substitution resulted in increased stability and half-life 72. The K167P substitution 
was found to confer enhanced melting point properties to the enzyme and P- ω-TA contains a natural K167S 
substitution relative to Cv- ω-TA. Dourado and colleagues described the successful directed evolution of var -
iant (S)-selective-transaminases for asymmetric synthesis of (1S)-1-(1,1 ′-biphenyl-2-yl)ethanamine, achieving 
1716-fold increased activity when compared with the wild-type enzyme 73. Indeed, the explosion in available 
sequence data has led some researchers to develop new biocatalysts using ancestral sequence reconstruction 74, 
and the growth of sequence-based databases combined with enhanced data analytics is sure to open new 
11Scientific  Repo R t S |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
possibilities in TA design. Liquid and solid-phase screening technologies have emerged in recent years enabling 
greater access to evolved TA protein variants. These screening platforms enable access to natural biodiversity75, 
as well as evolved variants76. However, notwithstanding these advances, the industrial application of these novel 
TAs remains limited by factors such as disfavoured reaction equilibrium, poor substrate scope, and product inhi-
bition
77. Future studies will focus on continuous improvement of the biocatalytic activity and stability of P-ω-TA. 
This will include efforts to engineer activity in the reductive amination direction. The process of evolving opti-
mised biocatalytic properties will be aided by combinations of high throughput technologies both for modifica-
tion and detection
78, as well as by powerful computer driven rational design79.
conclusion
A ω-transaminase from Pseudovibrio WM33 was identified and sequenced, showing a high degree of sequence 
novelty when compared against publicly available databases. This sequence novelty suggested a possible novel 
enzymatic function, having been isolated from an ecosystem known to contain unique chemical profiles when 
compared with the terrestrial environment. Further characterisation and substrate profiling demonstrated the 
first example of remote stereoselectivity using a transaminase biocatalyst. The unique selectivity of this enzyme 
isolated from a marine sponge enables the resolution of amine 8b, a potential intermediate in the synthesis of the 
important antidepressant, sertraline. This resolution could fit into a synthetic route of the API. Biochemical anal-
ysis demonstrated the robustness of the enzyme at pH 8–11 and at temperatures up to 50
 °
C. The unique remote 
stereoselectivity of this enzyme, aligned with its robust biochemical profiles, makes it an excellent platform for 
future rational design and directed evolution studies. Furthermore, the success of the biodiscovery approach out-
lined in this study will serve to underpin continued investigation into biodiversity from marine niches, to harness 
the full potential of this ecosystem.
Methods
In silico capture of putative aminotransferase genes in the Pseudovibrio sp. WM33 genome.   
The genome of Pseudovibrio  sp. WM33 (GenBank NID: LMCK00000000.1), isolated from the marine sponge 
Axinella dissimilis off the west coast of Ireland, was obtained from the NCBI database. Sequences of aminotrans-
ferase genes were analysed using Clustal Omega81. Enzymes encoded by these genes were subjected to preliminary 
domain identification. Candidate gene P-ω-TA was identified by annotation as a putative ω-amino acid–pyruvate 
aminotransferase. The putative aminotransferase gene was consistent with the structural characteristics of an 
ω-aminotransferase from C. violaceum. The NCBI Conservation Domain Database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/cdd/) was employed to analyse the amino acid sequence of the P-ω-TA conserved domain. Specific sites were 
identified with the aspartate aminotransferase (AAT) superfamily (fold type I) of pyridoxal phosphate (PLP)-
dependent enzymes.
Alignment of protein sequences was performed by input of FASTA sequences into the T-Coffee programme 
(http://tcoffee.crg.cat/apps/tcoffee/do:regular)
82. The fasta.aln file from that output was transferred to BoxShade 
(http://www.ch.embnet.org/software/BOX_form.html) selecting “other” as input sequence and “RTF_New” 
as output. Phylogenetic reconstruction of the 100 top BLASTP ‘hits’ was performed using the MEGA X pro-
gramme
83. The evolutionary history was inferred using the Maximum Likelihood method (JTT matrix-based 
model).
Heterologous expression and protein purification.  The predicted transaminase from Pseudovibrio   
sp WM33 was amplified using oligonucleotides purchased from Eurofins Genomics (Germany) for subcloning  
of the genes into a pET28a(+ ). The primers used were BamPTAF 5′  GAA GGATCCATGGACTATATCG 
CTAATTCTTCCG 3′  and XhoPTAR 5′ CGTCCTCGAGTTATTTGATGCTTTGGGCAGT 3′ . Similarly, the  
transaminase from C. violaceum was amplified using the primers BamCTAF 5′  GCGGGATCCATGCAG  
AAGCAACGTACGACCA 3′  and XhoCTAR 5′  CTATCTCGAGACTAAGCCAGCCCGCGCGCCTTC 3′ . 
Restriction sites BamHI and XhoI were incorporated when designing the primers, respectively. The PCR condi-
tions were as follows heated lid at 111
 °C, ini
tial denaturation for 3
 min a
t 95
 °C, t
hen 30 cycles of: denaturation 
at 95
 °C f
or 15
 s
ec, annealing at 51
 °C f
or 15
 s
ec and finally extension for 3
 min a
t 72
 °C. Q5 H
igh-Fidelity DNA 
Polymerase (New England Biolabs) was used for all amplifications. After the 30 cycles were complete a final elon-
gation for 5
 min a
t 72
 °C wa
s done. The amplicon was subjected to restriction digest using the BamHI and XhoI 
enzymes at 37
 °C f
or 16
 hr a
nd purified by column extraction using a QIAGEN PCR Purification Kit (QIAGEN). 
The pET28a expression plasmid was similarly digested and purified to create compatible sticky ends. Ligation 
of insert and plasmid was carried out with the T4 Ligase (Roche) at 16
 °
C overnight and the reaction was subse-
quently transformed into E. coli CH3-Blue Competent Cell (Bioline). Positive clones carrying the recombinant 
insert were selected by PCR and conjugation was performed to introduce the construct into E. coli BL21(DE) 
RIPL for heterologous protein expression.
E. coli BL21(DE) RIPL cells carrying a pET28a(+) plasmid with the P-ω-TA and Cv-ω-TA were grown at 37
 °C
 
for 4
 hr 
at which time 0.5
 mM 
of IPTG was added to induce protein expression. The temperature was reduced 
down to 23
 °C a
nd induction was allowed to proceed for a further 4
 hr
. The pellet was collected by centrifuging 
the culture at 12,000 r
pm at 4 °
C for 10 m
in. The cells were lysed using CelLytic ™ B Cell Lysis Reagent (Sigma) 
5
 m
l/g of pellet, lysozyme 0.2
 m
g/ml, Benzonase 50 unit/ml and protease inhibitor cocktail 10
 µL/m
l. The lysing 
cells were agitated gently on a shaker at room temperature for 15 m
in before centrifugation at 4 °
C and 12,000 r
pm 
for 10
 
min.
The enzymes were purified using Poly-Prep® Chromatography Columns (Bio-Rad) and 1 m l of High Density 
Nickel Affinity Gel. The proteins were subsequently purified by different concentrations of Imidazole 50, 100 and 
500
 mM in a s
olution of 0.5
 M N
aCl and 20
 mM T
ris-HCl. Alternatively, proteins were also purified using the 
PrepEase Histidine-Tagged Protein Purification Kit (USB Corporation, USA).
12Scientific  Repo R t S |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
Biochemical enzyme characterisation.  Enzyme activity assays were carried out at 25  °C w ith 2.5  mM  
(S)-α-Methylbenzylamine or 2.5
 mM 
(R)-α-Methylbenzylamine (both in 50
 mM p
hosphate buffered to pH 10), 
2.5
 mM p
yruvate, 0.25% DMSO and 0.1
 mM P
LP . The activity was confirmed by the production of acetophenone 
which was measured at Abs245nm
84. The purified enzymes were stored at −80 °C un til used. The reaction was car-
ried out at different temperatures: 20–60
 °C.
Th
e enzymes were also assessed for pH activity in order to establish the optimal conditions for enzyme activ-
ity. A pH range of 3 to 12 was assessed using sodium citrate-acetic acid and sodium phosphate-NaOH buffers.
General procedure for the oxidative deamination of amines.  From the induced transaminase 
enzymes in E. coli, 30
 m
g were each suspended in 50
 mM s
odium phosphate buffer (pH 8.5). The suspension 
was sonicated at 30% intensity for 10
 s
ec, followed by 30
 s
ec on ice. This process was repeated 5 times to lyse the 
cells. PLP solution (in 50
 μl o
f buffer, final concentration of 1
 mM26,49,85,86) and sodium pyruvate (in 50 μl o f buffer, 
overall 1 equiv.) were added to the reaction, followed by 20
 mM a
mine substrate in 100
 μ
l DMSO, taking the total 
volume to 1  m
l. The solution was shaken at 400  r
pm at 30
 °
C for 16
 hr
. The reaction was stopped through the 
addition of 400
 μl 5
 M aq
ueous NaOH solution. To this 4
 m
l of ethyl acetate was added and the tubes were cen-
trifuged to pellet the cells. The organic phase was passed through a silica plug containing Na2SO4 and the solvent 
was removed in vacuo. The crude products were analysed by 1H NMR and chiral HPLC (detailed methodology is 
provided in Supplementary Data).
comput ational methods.  For the MD simulations the 3D structure of P -ω-TA (UniProtKB id. 
A0A165YA85) was generated by homology modelling using the server Phyre2.0 in the intensive mode87. As tem-
plates, the chain A of the crystal structure of the class III AT from Silicibacter pomeroyi (PDB id. 3HMU) and the 
chain A of the crystal structure of the ω -TA from C. violaceum in complex with PLP (PDB id. 4A6T) was used 
to model the enzyme with high confidences (>90%) 53. The external aldimines (EA) of the substrates 8a and 8b 
(named EA8a and EA8b, respectively) were docked manually into the active site of P-ω-TA and the active site of 
Cv-ω-TA after molecular superimposition with the PLP molecule in the latter template used for the modelling of 
the proteins. Care was taken to protonate properly the titratable residues at the active site. As an example, Asp259, 
which is hydrogen-bonded with the pyridine of PLP , has to be protonated in its side chain (as ASH) and His154 
protonated in his delta nitrogen (as HID). In order to get the force-field parameters for the EA
8a and EA8b, their 
ground state geometries were first optimised in gas phase and their electrostatic potential were computed at the 
standard level of theory (HF/6–31
 G
**//HF/3–21
 G) 
and fitted to the atoms as RESP charges using the program 
antechamber (AmberTools18, http://ambermd.org). AMBER atom types were used to describe EA 8a and EA8b, 
and the phosphate groups were considered to be deprotonated (total charge −2). The leaprcff14SB force filed 
was used in all the MD simulations. The MD simulations were run on GPUs using the pmemd.cuda module of 
Amber16 in the Single-Precision-Fixed-Precision (SPFP) mode. The EA:enzyme complex was simulated as a 
protein dimer. EA
8a and EA8b were placed in each of the active sites and the total complex was embedded in a 
truncated octahedral box of ca. 30400 TIP3P water molecules that extended 12 Å away from any solute atom and 
32 Na
+ ions were added to ensure charge neutrality88. The system was relaxed by energy minimisation in three 
consecutive steps (3
 × 5000 
cycles), in which after the first 1000 cycles the minimisation method was switched 
from steepest descendent to conjugate graduate. The resulting system was heated from 100 to 300
 K d
uring 200
 ps
 
with a time step of 0.2
 fs a
nd with the position of all the solute atoms restrained with a harmonic constant of 
20 k
cal m
ol−1 Å−2. The Langevin thermostat (collision frequency of 1.0 ps−1) was employed for the temperature 
regulation and the simulation was run with fixed volume (NVT ensemble)89. The harmonic restraints were grad-
ually reduced in four steps from 40 to 10 kcal mol−1 Å−2. Then, the density of the system was equilibrated for 20 
ps using a time step of 0.2 fs by fixing the pressure, using the Langevin thermostat with isotropic pressure scaling 
(NPT ensemble), and allowing the volume of the box to change. The system was simulated for 30 ns at 300 K 
with a time step of 2 fs without any restraint. The cut-off distance for the nonbonded interactions was 10 Å and 
periodic boundary conditions were used. Electrostatic interactions were treated by using the smooth particle 
mesh Ewald (PME) method with a grid spacing of 1 Å
90. The SHAKE algorithm was applied to all bonds involving 
hydrogen atoms.
QM/MM MD simulations and umbrella sampling.
 A
fter the MD simulation, the final snapshots were mini-
mised with a QM/MM MD protocol to obtain a representative model of the complex 8a:TA/8b:TA. The external 
aldimine and the side chains of Lys291 (general base of the reaction) and Asp287 were included into the QM 
region (77 atoms
 + 2 lin
k atoms). The AA side chains included into the QM region were cut from the ß-carbon 
atoms. The density functional tight-binding 3 (DFTB3) semiempirical method was used to treat the QM region 
and the rest of the system was treated classically as described above
91. The effect of the environment into the QM 
region was included using the electrostatic embedding scheme. The system was minimised for 500 cycles where 
the last 300 cycles were run using conjugate gradient. The reaction for the proton abstraction of the external 
aldimines EA
8a and EA8b by Lys291 in P-ω-TA was simulated by steered QM/MM MD simulations where the 
reaction coordinate (RC) was defined as the shortening of the distance between the NZ of the neutral Lys291 and 
the H1 on the external aldimine of the nor-sertraline (spring constant 200 kcal mol
−1 Å−2). After that, the PMF 
energy profile was computed by QM/MM umbrella sampling MD simulation from the geometries obtained on 
the previous sMD simulations (20 geometries). Each of these points (from RC
 = 4.7 t
o RC
 = 1.0 
Å
) was allowed 
to oscillate in a window of 2 ps. The free energy profile was calculated by the variational free energy profile (vFEP) 
method
92.
Substrate synthesis.  Racemic tetralone intermediate 1 was synthesised from 1-napthol and 
1,2-dichlorobenzene in the presence of a strong Lewis acid. Subsequent reduction furnished a pair of 
13Scientific  Repo R t S |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
diastereomeric alcohols. These diastereomers were separated via  flash chromatography. Mitsunobu chemistry 
provided the trans- and cis-azides with inversion of stereochemistry, which were converted to the target amines 
8a and 8b via a Staudinger reduction (Supplementary data).
Data availability
All data generated or analysed during this study are included in this published article (and its supplementary 
information files).
Received: 21 June 2019; Accepted: 20 November 2019;
Published: xx xx xxxx
References
 1.  C hoi, J. M., Han, S. S. & Kim, H. S. Industrial applications of enzyme biocatalysis: Current status and future aspects. Biotechnol Adv  
33, 1443–1454 (2015).
 2
. R
eetz, M. T. Biocatalysis in Organic Chemistry and Biotechnology: Past, Present, and Future. J Am Chem Soc 135, 12480–12496 
(2013).
 3
. S
un, H. H., Zhang, H. F ., Ang, E. L. & Zhao, H. M. Biocatalysis for the synthesis of pharmaceuticals and pharmaceutical 
intermediates. Bioorgan Med Chem 26, 1275–1284 (2018).
 4.
 T
orrelo, G., Hanefeld, U. & Hollmann, F . Biocatalysis. Catal Lett 145, 309–345 (2015).
 5
. de 
Souza, R. O. M. A., Miranda, L. S. M. & Bornscheuer, U. T. A Retrosynthesis Approach for Biocatalysis in Organic Synthesis. 
Chem-Eur J 23, 12040–12063 (2017).
 6.
 T
urner, N. J. & O’Reilly, E. Biocatalytic retrosynthesis. Nat Chem Biol 9, 285–288 (2013).
 7.
 N
ugent, T. C. Chiral Amine Synthesis: Methods, Developments and Application (WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, 2010).
 8.
 K
ellogg, R. M. & Leeman, M. In Comprehensive Chirality Vol. 9 (eds. Y amamoto, H. & Carreira, E.) 367–399 (Elsevier Inc., 2012).
 9.
 K
iwala, D. et al. Separation of Stereoisomeric Mixtures of Nafronyl as a Representative of Compounds Possessing Two Stereogenic 
Centers By Coupling Crystallization, Diastereoisomeric Conversion and Chromatography. Org Process Res Dev 20, 615–625 (2016).
 10.
 A
leku, G. A. et al. A reductive aminase from Aspergillus oryzae. Nat Chem 9, 961–969 (2017).
 11.
 B
lacker, A. J., Stirling, M. J. & Page, M. I. Catalytic racemisation of chiral amines and application in dynamic kinetic resolution. Org 
Process Res Dev 11, 642–648 (2007).
 
12. G
hislieri, D. et al. Engineering an Enantioselective Amine Oxidase for the Synthesis of Pharmaceutical Building Blocks and Alkaloid 
Natural Products. J Am Chem Soc 135, 10863–10869 (2013).
 1
3. G
hislieri, D. & Turner, N. J. Biocatalytic Approaches to the Synthesis of Enantiomerically Pure Chiral Amines. Top Catal 57, 284–300 
(2014).
 1
4. G
otor-Fernandez, V ., Brieva, R. & Gotor, V . Lipases: Useful biocatalysts for the preparation of pharmaceuticals. J Mol Catal B-Enzym 
40, 111–120 (2006).
 
15.
 H
erter, S. et al. Mapping the substrate scope of monoamine oxidase (MAO-N) as a synthetic tool for the enantioselective synthesis 
of chiral amines. Bioorgan Med Chem 26, 1338–1346 (2018).
 16.
 H
ohn, M. & Bornscheuer, U. T. Biocatalytic Routes to Optically Active Amines. Chemcatchem 1, 42–51 (2009).
 
17.
 K
routil, W . et al. Asymmetric Preparation of prim-, sec-, and tert-Amines Employing Selected Biocatalysts. Org Process Res Dev 17, 
751–759 (2013).
 18.
 S
chrittwieser, J. H., Velikogne, S. & Kroutil, W . Biocatalytic Imine Reduction and Reductive Amination of Ketones. Adv Synth Catal 
357, 1655–1685 (2015).
 1
9. Th
alen, L. K. et al. A Chemoenzymatic Approach to Enantiomerically Pure Amines Using Dynamic Kinetic Resolution: Application 
to the Synthesis of Norsertraline. Chem-Eur J 15, 3403–3410 (2009).
 2
0. va
n Rantwijk, F . & Sheldon, R. A. Enantioselective acylation of chiral amines catalysed by serine hydrolases. Tetrahedron  60, 
501–519 (2004).
 21.
 G
uo, F . & Berglund, P . Transaminase biocatalysis: optimization and application. Green Chem 19, 333–360 (2017).
 22.
 M
athew, S. & Yun, H. omega-Transaminases for the Production of Optically Pure Amines and Unnatural Amino Acids. ACS Catal 
2, 993–1001 (2012).
 2
3. P
aul, C. E. et al. Transaminases Applied to the Synthesis of High Added-Value Enantiopure Amines. Org Process Res Dev 18, 788–792 
(2014).
 2
4. S
imon, R. C., Richter, N., Busto, E. & Kroutil, W . Recent Developments of Cascade Reactions Involving omega-Transaminases. ACS 
Catal 4, 129–143 (2014).
 25.
 S
labu, I., Galman, J. L., Lloyd, R. C. & Turner, N. J. Discovery, Engineering, and Synthetic Application of Transaminase Biocatalysts. 
ACS Catal 7, 8263–8284 (2017).
 
26.
 B
orner, T. et al. Explaining Operational Instability of Amine Transaminases: Substrate-Induced Inactivation Mechanism and 
Influence of Quaternary Structure on Enzyme-Cofactor Intermediate Stability. ACS Catal 7, 1259–1269 (2017).
 27.
 H
ohne, M., Schatzle, S., Jochens, H., Robins, K. & Bornscheuer, U. T. Rational assignment of key motifs for function guides in silico 
enzyme identification. Nat Chem Biol 6, 807–813 (2010).
 2
8. F
eng, Y . H. et al. Development of an Efficient and Scalable Biocatalytic Route to (3R)-3-Aminoazepane: A Pharmaceutically 
Important Intermediate. Org Process Res Dev 21, 648–654 (2017).
 2
9. T
ruppo, M. D., Rozzell, J. D. & Turner, N. J. Efficient Production of Enantiomerically Pure Chiral Amines at Concentrations of 50 
g/L Using Transaminases. Org Process Res Dev 14, 234–237 (2010).
 30.
 R
een, F . J., Romano, S., Dobson, A. D. W . & O’Gara, F . The Sound of Silence: Activating Silent Biosynthetic Gene Clusters in Marine 
Microorganisms. Mar Drugs 13, 4754–4783 (2015).
 3
1. P
arages, M. L., Gutierrez-Barranquero, J. A., Reen, F . J., Dobson, A. D. W . & O’Gara, F . Integrated (Meta) Genomic and Synthetic 
Biology Approaches to Develop New Biocatalysts. Mar Drugs, 14 (3), (2016).
 3
2. C
astilla, I. A., Woods, D. F ., Reen, F . J. & O’Gara, F . Harnessing Marine Biocatalytic Reservoirs for Green Chemistry Applications 
through Metagenomic Technologies. Mar Drugs, 16(7), (2018).
 3
3. B
arbayianni, E. & Kokotos, G. Biocatalyzed Regio- and Chemoselective Ester Cleavage: Synthesis of Bioactive Molecules. 
Chemcatchem 4, 592–608 (2012).
 3
4. C
unha, R. L. O. R., Ferreira, E. A., Oliveira, C. S. & Omori, A. T. Biocatalysis for desymmetrization and resolution of stereocenters 
beyond the reactive center: How far is far enough? Biotechnol Adv 33, 614–623 (2015).
 3
5. D
easy, R. E., Brossat, M., Moody, T. S. & Maguire, A. R. Lipase catalysed kinetic resolutions of 3-aryl alkanoic acids. Tetrahedron-
Asymmetr 22, 47–61 (2011).
 3
6. D
easy, R. E., Moody, T. S. & Maguire, A. R. Influence of the position of the substituent on the efficiency of lipase-mediated 
resolutions of 3-aryl alkanoic acids. Tetrahedron-Asymmetr 24, 1480–1487 (2013).
 3
7. F
oley, A. M., Gavin, D. P ., Joniec, I. & Maguire, A. R. Impact of variation of the acyl group on the efficiency and selectivity of the 
lipase-mediated resolution of 2-phenylalkanols. Tetrahedron-Asymmetr 28, 1144–1153 (2017).

14Scientific  Repo R t S |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
 3 8.  Ga vin, D. P . et al . Hydrolase-mediated resolution of the hemiacetal in 2-chromanols: The impact of remote substitution. Tetrahedron-
Asymmetr 28, 577–585 (2017).
 3
9. M
endez-Sanchez, D., Lopez-Iglesias, M. & Gotor-Fernandez, V . Hydrolases in Organic Chemistry. Recent Achievements in the 
Synthesis of Pharmaceuticals. Curr Org Chem 20, 1186–1203 (2016).
 
40.
 L
imanto, J. et al. A Highly Efficient Asymmetric Synthesis of Vernakalant. Org Lett 16, 2716–2719 (2014).
 
41.
 R
ichter, N. et al. omega-Transaminases for the amination of functionalised cyclic ketones. Org Biomol Chem 13, 8843–8851 (2015).
 4
2. K
oblan, K. S. et al . Dasotraline for the Treatment of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder: A Randomized, Double-Blind, 
Placebo-Controlled, Proof-of-Concept Trial in Adults. Neuropsychopharmacol 40, 2745–2752 (2015).
 4
3. B
ogeso, K. P ., Christensen, A. V ., Hyttel, J. & Liljefors, T. 3-Phenyl-1-Indanamines - Potential Antidepressant Activity and Potent 
Inhibition of Dopamine, Norepinephrine, and Serotonin Uptake. J Med Chem 28, 1817–1828 (1985).
 4
4. L
ee, S. H. et al . Stereoselective Amination of Chiral Benzylic Ethers Using Chlorosulfonyl Isocyanate: Total Synthesis of 
(+)-Sertraline. J Org Chem 76, 10011–10019 (2011).
 45.
 Q
uallich, G. J. Development of the commercial process for Zoloft((R))/sertraline. Chirality 17, S120–S126 (2005).
 4
6. C
handrasekhar, S. & Reddy, M. V . An expedient total synthesis of cis-(+ )-Sertraline from D-phenylglycine. Tetrahedron  56, 
1111–1114 (2000).
 
47.
 F
ustero, S. et al. Asymmetric Allylation/Ring Closing Metathesis: One-Pot Synthesis of Benzo-fused Cyclic Homoallylic Amines. 
Application to the Formal Synthesis of Sertraline Derivatives. Org Lett 15, 3770–3773 (2013).
 48.
 W
ang, G. Y ., Zheng, C. W . & Zhao, G. Asymmetric reduction of substituted indanones and tetralones catalyzed by chiral dendrimer 
and its application to the synthesis of (+)-sertraline. Tetrahedron-Asymmetr 17, 2074–2081 (2006).
 4
9. P
avlidis, I. V . et al. Identification of (S)-selective transaminases for the asymmetric synthesis of bulky chiral amines. Nat Chem  8, 
1076–1082 (2016).
 5
0. C
ho, B. K. et al. Redesigning the substrate specificity of omega-aminotransferase for the kinetic resolution of aliphatic chiral arnines. 
Biotechnol Bioeng 99, 275–284 (2008).
 5
1. K
aulmann, U., Smithies, K., Smith, M. E. B., HaileS, H. C. & Ward, J. M. Substrate spectrum of omega-transaminase from 
Chromobacterium violaceum DSM30191 and its potential for biocatalysis. Enzyme Microb Tech 41, 628–637 (2007).
 5
2. K
oszelewski, D., Tauber, K., Faber, K. & Kroutil, W . omega-Transaminases for the synthesis of non-racemic alpha-chiral primary 
amines. Trends Biotechnol 28, 324–332 (2010).
 5
3. H
umble, M. S. et al. Crystal structures of the Chromobacterium violaceum ω-transaminase reveal major structural rearrangements 
upon binding of coenzyme PLP . FEBS J 279, 779–792 (2012).
 54.
 va
n Oosterwijk, N. et al. Structural Basis of the Substrate Range and Enantioselectivity of Two (S)-Selective omega-Transaminases. 
Biochemistry 55, 4422–4431 (2016).
 55.
 H
olm, L. & Laakso, L. M. Dali server update. Nucleic Acids Res 44, W351–355 (2016).
 56.
 H
olm, L. & Sander, C. Dali: a network tool for protein structure comparison. Trends Biochem Sci 20, 478–480 (1995).
 57.
 Cr
ooks, G. E., Hon, G., Chandonia, J. M. & Brenner, S. E. WebLogo: a sequence logo generator. Genome Res 14, 1188–1190 (2004).
 5
8. S
chneider, T. D. & Stephens, R. M. Sequence logos: a new way to display consensus sequences. Nucleic Acids Res 18, 6097–6100 
(1990).
 5
9. R
osenthal, K. & Lutz, S. Recent developments and challenges of biocatalytic processes in the pharmaceutical industry. Curr Opin 
Green Sust 11, 58–64 (2018).
 6
0. B
lasco, M. A. & Groger, H. Enzymatic resolution of racemates with a ‘remote’ stereogenic center as an efficient tool in drug, flavor 
and vitamin synthesis. Bioorgan Med Chem 22, 5539–5546 (2014).
 6
1. Sa
vile, C. K. et al. Biocatalytic Asymmetric Synthesis of Chiral Amines from Ketones Applied to Sitagliptin Manufacture. Science  
329, 305–309 (2010).
 62.
 Ga
lman, J. L. et al. Characterization of a Putrescine Transaminase From Pseudomonas putida and its Application to the Synthesis of 
Benzylamine Derivatives. Front Bioeng Biotech, 6, (2018).
 63.
 K
elly, S. A. et al. Application of omega-Transaminases in the Pharmaceutical Industry. Chem Rev 118, 349–367 (2018).
 
64. O
’Reilly, E. et al . A Regio-and Stereoselective ω -Transaminase/Monoamine Oxidase Cascade for the Synthesis of Chiral 
2,5-Disubstituted Pyrrolidines. Angew Chem Int Edit 53, 2447–2450 (2014).
 65.
 O
’Reilly, E., Iglesias, C. & Turner, N. J. Monoamine Oxidase- ω- Transaminase Cascade for the Deracemisation and Dealkylation of 
Amines. Chemcatchem 6, 992–995 (2014).
 6
6. F
rance, S. P . et al. One-Pot Cascade Synthesis of Mono- and Disubstituted Piperidines and Pyrrolidines using Carboxylic Acid 
Reductase (CAR), omega-Transaminase (omega-TA), and Imine Reductase (IRED) Biocatalysts. ACS Catal 6, 3753–3759 (2016).
 6
7. L
and, H., Hendil-Forssell, P ., Martinelle, M. & Berglund, P . One-pot biocatalytic amine transaminase/acyl transferase cascade for 
aqueous formation of amides from aldehydes or ketones. Catal Sci Technol 6, 2897–2900 (2016).
 
68. L
orilliere, M. et al. One-pot, two-step cascade synthesis of naturally rare L-erythro (3S,4S) ketoses by coupling a thermostable 
transaminase and transketolase. Green Chem 19, 425–435 (2017).
 
69.
 B
awn, M. et al. One-pot, two-step transaminase and transketolase synthesis of l-gluco-heptulose from l-arabinose. Enzyme Microb 
Technol 116, 16–22 (2018).
 
70.
 M
uschiol, J. et al. Cascade catalysis–strategies and challenges en route to preparative synthetic biology. Chem Commun (Camb) 51, 
5798–5811 (2015).
 7
1. A
lmahboub, S. A., Narancic, T., Fayne, D. & O’Connor, K. E. Single point mutations reveal amino acid residues important for 
Chromobacterium violaceum transaminase activity in the production of unnatural amino acids. Sci Rep 8, 17397 (2018).
 7
2. L
and, H., Campillo-Brocal, J. C., Svedendahl Humble, M. & Berglund, P . B-factor Guided Proline Substitutions in Chromobacterium 
violaceum Amine Transaminase: Evaluation of the Proline Rule as a Method for Enzyme Stabilization. Chembiochem 20, 1297–1304 
(2019).
 7
3. D
ourado, D. F . A. R. et al. Rational Design of a (S)-Selective-Transaminase for Asymmetric Synthesis of (1S)-1-(1,1 ‘-biphenyl-2-yl)
ethanamine. ACS Catal 6, 7749–7759 (2016).
 
74. W
ilding, M. et al. Reverse engineering: transaminase biocatalyst development using ancestral sequence reconstruction. Green Chem 
19, 5375–5380 (2017).
 
75. C
oscolin, C. et al. Bioprospecting Reveals Class III omega-Transaminases Converting Bulky Ketones and Environmentally Relevant 
Polyamines. Appl Environ Microb 85(2), e02404–18 (2019).
 76.
 P
lanchestainer, M., Hegarty, E., Heckmann, C. M., Gourlay, L. J. & Paradisi, F . Widely applicable background depletion step enables 
transaminase evolution through solid-phase screening. Chem Sci 10, 5952–5958 (2019).
 7
7. P
atil, M. D., Grogan, G., Bommarius, A. & Yun, H. Recent Advances in omega-Transaminase-Mediated Biocatalysis for the 
Enantioselective Synthesis of Chiral Amines. Catalysts, 8,(2018).
 78.
 Z
eymer, C. & Hilvert, D. Directed Evolution of Protein Catalysts. Annu Rev Biochem 87, 131–157 (2018).
 79.
 B
ornscheuer, U. T., Hauer, B., Jaeger, K. E. & Schwaneberg, U. Directed Evolution Empowered Redesign of Natural Proteins for the 
Sustainable Production of Chemicals and Pharmaceuticals. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 58, 36–40 (2019).
 8
0. C
hen, C. S., Fujimoto, Y ., Girdaukas, G. & Sih, C. J. Quantitative-Analyses of Biochemical Kinetic Resolutions of Enantiomers. J Am 
Chem Soc 104, 7294–7299 (1982).
 81.
 S
ievers, F . & Higgins, D. G. Clustal Omega. Curr Protoc Bioinformatics 48(3), 13.1–16 (2014).
15Scientific  Repo RtS |         (2019) 9:20285  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7
www.nature.com/scientificreportswww.nature.com/scientificreports/
 82. Di Tommaso, P . et al. T-Coffee: a web server for the multiple sequence alignment of protein and RNA sequences using structural 
information and homology extension. Nucleic Acids Res 39, W13–17 (2011).
 83
. Kum
ar, S., Stecher, G., Li, M., Knyaz, C. & Tamura, K. MEGA X: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis across Computing 
Platforms. Mol Biol Evol 35, 1547–1549 (2018).
 84
. Sc
hatzle, S., Hohne, M., Redestad, E., Robins, K. & Bornscheuer, U. T. Rapid and Sensitive Kinetic Assay for Characterization of 
omega-Transaminases. Anal Chem 81, 8244–8248 (2009).
 85. Kosze
lewski, D., Pressnitz, D., Clay, D. & Kroutil, W . Deracemization of mexiletine biocatalyzed by omega-transaminases. Org Lett 
11, 4810–4812 (2009).
 86. Shin, J
. S., Yun, H., Jang, J. W ., Park, I. & Kim, B. G. Purification, characterization, and molecular cloning of a novel amine:pyruvate 
transaminase from Vibrio fluvialis JS17. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol 61, 463–471 (2003).
 87. Ke
lley, L. A., Mezulis, S., Y ates, C. M., Wass, M. N. & Sternberg, M. J. E. The Phyre2 web portal for protein modeling, prediction and 
analysis. Nat Protoc 10, 845–858 (2015).
 88
. Jo
rgensen, W . L., Chandrasekhar, J., Madura, J. D., Impey, R. W . & Klein, M. L. Comparison of Simple Potential Functions for 
Simulating Liquid Water. J Chem Phys 79, 926–935 (1983).
 89
. Pa
stor, R. W ., Brooks, B. R. & Szabo, A. An Analysis of the Accuracy of Langevin and Molecular-Dynamics Algorithms. Mol Phys 65, 
1409–1419 (1988).
 90. Da
rden, T., Y ork, D. & Pedersen, L. Particle Mesh Ewald - an N.Log(N) Method for Ewald Sums in Large Systems. J Chem Phys 98, 
10089–10092 (1993).
 91
. Se
abra, deM., Walker, G., Elstner, R. C., Case, M. & Roitberg, D. A. A. E. Implementation of the SCC-DFTB method for hybrid QM/
MM simulations within the amber molecular dynamics package. J Phys Chem A 111, 5655–5664 (2007).
 92
. Le
e, T. S., Radak, B. K., Huang, M., Wong, K. Y . & Y ork, D. M. Roadmaps through Free Energy Landscapes Calculated Using the 
Multidimensional vFEP Approach. J Chem Theory Comput, 10(1), 24–34, (2014).
Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by funding from Enterprise Ireland (CF-2017-0757-P; IP-2015-0390), the 
Health Research Board (HRB-ILP-POR-2019-004), the Health Research Board/Irish Thoracic Society (MRCG-
2018-16; MRCG-2014-6), the European Commission (EU2020-634486-2015), Science Foundation Ireland 
(SSPC-3, 12/RC/2275_2; SSPC-2, 12/RC/2275; 15/TIDA/2977; SFI09/RFP/BMT2350), the Irish Research Council 
for Science, Engineering and Technology (GOIPG/2014/647), Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, USA (OG1710). 
P .A.S.-M. thanks the Austrian FWF (Project M 2260) for financial support.
Author contributions
F .O.G. and A.M. conceived the study. D.G., I.A., F .J.R., J.R.-M., D.W ., A.F ., M.S. and P .S.-M. performed the work. 
F .J.R. and D.G. wrote the manuscript with contributions from all authors. F .O.G., A.M., D.G. and F .J.R. finalised 
the manuscript. P .O.N. provided substrates for profiling.
competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary information is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-56612-7.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.R.M. or F .O.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 
format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2019, corrected publication 2022