Citation: Zhou, Y.; Wang, Y.; Vong,
C.T.; Zhu, Y.; Xu, B.; Ruan, C.-C.;
Wang, Y.; Cheang, W.S. Jatrorrhizine
Improves Endothelial Function in
Diabetes and Obesity through
Suppression of Endoplasmic
Reticulum Stress. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
2022, 23, 12064. https://doi.org/
10.3390/ijms232012064
Academic Editors:
Manikandan Panchatcharam,
Sumitra Miriyala and Ara Hosne
Received: 10 September 2022
Accepted: 7 October 2022
Published: 11 October 2022
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
 International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences
Article
Jatrorrhizine Improves Endothelial Function in Diabetes and
Obesity through Suppression of Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
Yan Zhou 1,† , Yuehan Wang1,† , Chi Teng Vong1
 , Yanyan Zhu 1, Baojun Xu 2
 , Cheng-Chao Ruan 3,
Yitao Wang1
 and Wai San Cheang 1, *
1 State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese Medicine, Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences,
University of Macau, Avenida da Universidade, Taipa, Macau 999078, China
2 Food Science and Technology Program, BNU-HKBU United International College, Zhuhai 519087, China
3 Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200437, China
* Correspondence: annacheang@um.edu.mo; Tel.: +853-8822-4914
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract: Jatrorrhizine (JAT) is one of the major bioactive protoberberine alkaloids found in rhizoma
coptidis, which has hypoglycemic and hypolipidemic potential. This study aimed to evaluate the
vasoprotective effects of JAT in diabetes and obesity and the underlying mechanism involved. Mouse
aortas, carotid arteries and human umbilical cord vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) were treated with
risk factors (high glucose or tunicamycin) with and without JAT ex vivo and in vitro. Furthermore,
aortas were obtained from mice with chronic treatment: (1) control; (2) diet-induced obese (DIO)
mice fed a high-fat diet (45% kcal% fat) for 15 weeks; and (3) DIO mice orally administered JAT
at 50 mg/kg/day for the last 5 weeks. High glucose or endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress inducer
tunicamycin impaired acetylcholine-induced endothelium-dependent relaxations (EDRs) in mouse
aortas, induced oxidative stress in carotid arteries and HUVECs, downregulated phosphorylations
of Akt at Ser473 and eNOS at Ser1177 and enhanced ER stress in mouse aortas and HUVECs, and
these impairments were reversed by cotreatment with JAT. JAT increased NO release in high-glucose-
treated mouse aortas and HUVECs. In addition, chronic JAT treatment restored endothelial function
with EDRs comparable to the control, increased Akt/eNOS phosphorylation, and attenuated ER
stress and oxidative stress in aortas from DIO mice. Blood pressure, glucose sensitivity, fatty liver
and its morphological change, as well as plasma levels of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and plasma lipid proﬁle, were also normalized by JAT treatment.
Collectively, our data may be the ﬁrst to reveal the vasoprotective effect of JAT that ameliorates
endothelial dysfunction in diabetes and obesity through enhancement of the Akt/eNOS pathway
and NO bioavailability, as well as suppression of ER stress and oxidative stress.
Keywords: diabetes; endothelial dysfunction; jatrorrhizine; endoplasmic reticulum stress;
oxidative stress
1. Introduction
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is the main cause of death worldwide, and diabetes
and obesity are major risk factors [1]. Endothelial dysfunction plays a key role in the patho-
genesis of CVD and often occurs in diabetes, obesity, atherosclerosis, hyperglycemia and
other vascular diseases [2]. Endothelial dysfunction is positively correlated with vascular
diseases, and thus, it is important to study for therapeutic implications [ 3]. Endothelial
dysfunction is mainly reﬂected in the reduction of vasodilators such as nitric oxide (NO)
bioavailability and increased levels of vasoconstrictive substances, such as endothelin-1
(ET-1), angiotensin II, prostaglandin H 2, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and so on. [ 4].
Oxidative stress and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) uncoupling are important
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 12064. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232012064 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 12064 2 of 14
indicators of endothelial cell function [5]. Activity of eNOS controls vascular NO bioavail-
ability under physiological conditions, while under pathological conditions, reduced eNOS
activity will promote ROS levels and thereby endothelial dysfunction [6]. Protein kinase B
(Akt) is known as the main signal modulator in vascular homeostasis to stimulate eNOS,
and the Akt/eNOS pathway is suppressed in the diabetic vasculature [7].
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a vital organelle for the synthesis, folding and
transport of various secreted and membrane proteins [8]. Once this function is disrupted,
the ER is unable to fold and transport newly synthesized proteins, resulting in ER stress,
which is associated with cellular dysfunction by activating various pathways in cells [8].
The signaling cascade triggers the activation of three typical ER-associated proteins: PKR-
like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) and
inositol requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) [9]. These proteins are involved in complex downstream
signaling pathways and cause oxidative stress, inﬂammation and apoptosis in vascular
tissues [10,11]. Excessive nutrients such as high glucose [ 12], glucosamine [13] and oxi-
dized low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (ox-LDL) [14] induce vascular inﬂammation and
endothelial dysfunction. On the other hand, alleviation of ER stress ameliorates cardio-
vascular complications induced by metabolic syndrome [15,16]. Considering the severe
consequences of these diseases, strategies to prevent and treat endothelial dysfunction are
worth exploring.
Compelling evidence has supported that Chinese herbal compounds or herbs are
effective in preventing and treating diabetes mellitus and vascular dysfunction. Rhizoma
coptidis (RC) is the dried rhizome of Coptis chinensis France that belongs to the Ranun-
culaceae family, exhibiting clinical applications for more than two thousand years and
a wide range of pharmacological activities, including antibacterial, anti-inﬂammatory,
anti-viral, anticancer, antiatherosclerotic, antiobesity and antidiabetes effects [17]. These
properties are mainly attributed to protoberberine alkaloids in RC, including jatrorrhizine
(JAT) (Figure 1), coptisine, berberine, epiberberine and palmatine. Previous studies have
shown that berberine [18] and coptisine [19] improve endothelial function by inhibiting en-
doplasmic reticulum stress in hypertension and diabetes. However, only a few studies have
reported the vascular activity of JAT. JAT possesses hypoglycemic [20] and hypolipidemic
activities [21], but it remains unknown whether JAT protects against diabetes-associated
endothelial dysfunction. This study aimed to investigate whether JAT has a protective
effect against endothelial dysfunction in diabetes and obesity by modulating the Akt/eNOS
pathway, ER stress, oxidative stress and NO bioavailability.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 16 
 
 
dysfunction is mainly reflected in the reduction of vasodilators such as nitric oxide (NO) 
bioavailability and increased levels of vasoconstrictive substances, such as endothelin-1 
(ET-1), angiotensin II, prostaglandin H2, reactive oxygen species (ROS) and so on. [4]. Ox-
idative stress and endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) uncoupling are important in-
dicators of endothelial cell function [5]. Activity of eNOS controls vascular NO bioavaila-
bility under physiological conditions, while under pathological conditions, reduced eNOS 
activity will promote ROS leve ls and thereby endothelial dysf unction [6]. Protein kinase 
B (Akt) is known as the main signal modulator in vascular homeostasis to stimulate eNOS, 
and the Akt/eNOS pathway is suppressed in the diabetic vasculature [7]. 
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a vital organelle for the synthesis, folding and 
transport of various secreted and membrane proteins [8]. Once this function is disrupted, 
the ER is unable to fold and transport newly synthesized proteins, resulting in ER stress, 
which is associated with cellular dysfunction by activating various pathways in cells [8]. 
The signaling cascade triggers the activation of three typical ER-associated proteins: PKR-
like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), activating transcription factor 6 (ATF6) and 
inositol requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) [9]. These proteins are involved in complex down-
stream signaling pathways and cause oxidative stress, inflammation and apoptosis in vas-
cular tissues [10,11]. Excessive nutrients such as high glucose [12], glucosamine [13] and 
oxidized low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (ox-LDL) [14] induce vascular inflammation 
and endothelial dysfunction. On the other hand, alleviation of ER stress ameliorates car-
diovascular complications induced by metabolic syndrome [15,16]. Considering the se-
vere consequences of these diseases, strategi es to prevent and treat endothelial dysfunc-
tion are worth exploring. 
Compelling evidence has supported that Chinese herbal compounds or herbs are ef-
fective in preventing and treating diabetes mellitus and vascular dysfunction. Rhizoma 
coptidis (RC) is the dried rhizome of Coptis chinensis France that belongs to the Ranuncu-
laceae family, exhibiting clinical applications for more than two thousand years and a 
wide range of pharmacological activities, including antibacterial, anti-inflammatory, anti-
viral, anticancer, antiatherosclerotic, antiobesity and antidiabetes effects [17]. These prop-
erties are mainly attributed to protoberberi ne alkaloids in RC, including jatrorrhizine 
(JAT) (Figure 1), coptisine, berberine, epiberberine and palmatine. Previous studies have 
shown that berberine [18] and coptisine [19] improve endothelial function by inhibiting 
endoplasmic reticulum stress in hypertension and diabetes. However, only a few studies 
have reported the vascular activity of JAT.  JAT possesses hypoglycemic [20] and hypoli-
pidemic activities [21], but it remains unknown whether JAT protects against diabetes-
associated endothelial dysfunction. This st udy aimed to investigate whether JAT has a 
protective effect against endothelial dysfunct ion in diabetes and obesity by modulating 
the Akt/eNOS pathway, ER stress, oxidative stress and NO bioavailability. 
 
Figure 1. Structure of jatrorrhizine. 
Figure 1. Structure of jatrorrhizine.
2. Results
2.1. Jatrorrhizine Improves Vascular Functions in Diabetes
To evaluate the vasoprotective effect of jatrorrhizine (JAT) in mouse aortas ex vivo,
we examined acetylcholine (ACh)-induced EDRs. After precontraction of endothelium-
intact rings by phenylephrine (Phe, 3 µM) stimulation, ACh (3 nM–10 µM) was added
to induce EDRs in the normal glucose control group (NG, mannitol added as osmotic
control). Exposure to high glucose (30 mM, 48 h) mimicked diabetic hyperglycemia in
mouse aortas, and we found that high-glucose induction impaired ACh-induced EDRs
compared with control, which was signiﬁcantly reversed by JAT (48 h) in a concentration-
dependent manner (Figure 2A,B, Table 1). The effect of JAT at 1 µM was more effective
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 12064 3 of 14
than that at 0.1 µM, indicating that JAT at 1 µM exhibited more potent vascular protection.
Endothelium-independent relaxations were measured in response to sodium nitroprusside
(SNP , 1 nM–10µM), reﬂecting that the response of vascular smooth muscle to NO was not
affected (Figure 2C). These results show that JAT was effective in attenuating endothelial
dysfunction in hyperglycemic conditions. The response to NO by smooth muscle in aortas
was not altered.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 16 
 
 
2. Results 
2.1. Jatrorrhizine Improves Vascular Functions in Diabetes 
To evaluate the vasoprotective effect of ja trorrhizine (JAT) in mouse aortas ex vivo, 
we examined acetylcholine (ACh)-induced ED Rs. After precontraction of endothelium-
intact rings by phenylephrine (Phe, 3 μM) stimulation, ACh (3 nM–10 μM) was added to 
induce EDRs in the normal glucose contro l group (NG, mannitol added as osmotic con-
trol). Exposure to high glucose (30 mM, 48 h) mimicked diabetic hyperglycemia in mouse 
aortas, and we found that high-glucose induction impaired ACh-induced EDRs compared 
with control, which was significantly reversed by JAT (48 h) in a concentration-dependent 
manner (Figure 2A,B, Table 1). The effect of JAT at 1 μM was more effective than that at 
0.1 μM, indicating that JAT at 1 μM exhibited more potent vascular protection. Endothe-
lium-independent relaxations were measured in response to sodium nitroprusside (SNP, 
1 nM–10 μM), reflecting that the response of vasc ular smooth muscle to NO was not af-
fected (Figure 2C). These results show that JAT was effective in attenuating endothelial 
dysfunction in hyperglycemic conditions. The response to NO by smooth muscle in aortas 
was not altered. 
We also studied the effect of JAT on a diabetes model to further demonstrate the 
vasoprotection of JAT. Mice were fed a high -fat diet (HFD, 45% kcal% fat for 10 weeks) 
plus a single intraperitoneal injection of streptozotocin (STZ, 120 mg/kg) to induce diabe-
tes, which was confirmed by determination of 6 h fasting blood glucose >11 mM. Aortic 
segments isolated from diabetic mice were treated with JAT (1 μM) for 24 h. The impaired 
EDRs in diabetic mice were enhanced by JAT ex vivo (Figure 2D) without affecting SNP-
induced vasodilatations (Figure 2E). 
 
Figure 2. Vasoprotective effect of jatrorrhizine (JAT) in mouse aortas ex vivo. ( A,B) Effect of JAT 
and high glucose (HG; 30 mM, 48 h) on the acet ylcholine (ACh)-induced endothelium-dependent 
relaxations (EDRs) in aortas from C57BL/6J mice as compared with control (NG; mannitol added as 
osmotic control). ( C) Sodium nitroprusside (SNP)-induced endothelium-independent relaxations 
were not affected. ( D) Diet-induced obese (DIO) and diabetic mouse model was induced by high-
fat diet (HFD; 45% kcal% fat, 10 weeks) plus single intraperitoneal injection of streptozotocin (STZ; 
120 mg/kg) and ex vivo treatment of JAT (1 μM, 24 h) improved ACh-induced relaxations in aortas. 
(E) SNP-induced relaxations were unaffected. Re sults are mean ± SEM of 4 experiments. * p < 0.05 
vs. NG; # p < 0.05 vs. HG; † p < 0.05 vs. DIO. 
Figure 2. Vasoprotective effect of jatrorrhizine (JAT) in mouse aortas ex vivo. ( A,B) Effect of JAT
and high glucose (HG; 30 mM, 48 h) on the acetylcholine (ACh)-induced endothelium-dependent
relaxations (EDRs) in aortas from C57BL/6J mice as compared with control (NG; mannitol added as
osmotic control). ( C) Sodium nitroprusside (SNP)-induced endothelium-independent relaxations
were not affected. (D) Diet-induced obese (DIO) and diabetic mouse model was induced by high-fat
diet (HFD; 45% kcal% fat, 10 weeks) plus single intraperitoneal injection of streptozotocin (STZ;
120 mg/kg) and ex vivo treatment of JAT (1 µM, 24 h) improved ACh-induced relaxations in aortas.
(E) SNP-induced relaxations were unaffected. Results are mean ± SEM of 4 experiments. * p < 0.05
vs. NG; # p < 0.05 vs. HG; † p < 0.05 vs. DIO.
Table 1. Dilator concentrations in negative logarithm inducing 50% of maximum response (pD2) and
maximum relaxation (Emax%) for acetylcholine (ACh)-induced endothelium-dependent relaxations
(EDRs) of mouse aortas treated with high glucose (HG; 30 mM, 48 h) and different concentrations
of jatrorrhizine (JAT), with mannitol as control (NG). Results are mean ± SEM of 4 experiments.
* p < 0.05 vs. NG; # p < 0.05 vs. HG.
Treatment pD2 Emax%
NG 7.48 ± 0.12 95.38 ± 2.96
HG 6.97 ± 0.05 * 65.05 ± 1.29 *
0.1 µM JAT+HG 6.97 ± 0.07 80.96 ± 2.08 #
1 µM JAT+HG 7.57 ± 0.06 # 95.72 ± 1.60 #
We also studied the effect of JAT on a diabetes model to further demonstrate the
vasoprotection of JAT. Mice were fed a high-fat diet (HFD, 45% kcal% fat for 10 weeks) plus
a single intraperitoneal injection of streptozotocin (STZ, 120 mg/kg) to induce diabetes,
which was conﬁrmed by determination of 6 h fasting blood glucose >11 mM. Aortic
segments isolated from diabetic mice were treated with JAT (1 µM) for 24 h. The impaired
EDRs in diabetic mice were enhanced by JAT ex vivo (Figure 2D) without affecting SNP-
induced vasodilatations (Figure 2E).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 12064 4 of 14
2.2. Jatrorrhizine Increases Akt/eNOS Phosphorylation and Alleviates ER Stress
To estimate whether JAT restores endothelial function through the increase in Akt/eNOS
phosphorylation and attenuation of ER stress, we performed Western blotting analyses and
isometric force measurement. High glucose (30 mM, 48 h) induced the phosphorylation of
JNK at Thr183/Tyr185 and eIF2α at Ser51, cleaved ATF6 and spliced XBP1 (sXBP1) in mouse
aortas ex vivo, while these inductions were signiﬁcantly alleviated by cotreatment with JAT
at 1 µM for 48 h (Figure 3A). The upregulated expressions of the phospho-Akt at Ser473 and
phospho-eNOS at Ser1177 in high-glucose-stimulated aortas were also reduced signiﬁcantly
by JAT treatment (1 µM), whereas the total protein levels of Akt and eNOS were not altered
among the different treatment groups (Figure 3B,C). Furthermore, the EDRs of mouse
aortas were directly impaired by ER stress inducer tunicamycin (Tuni; 2 µg/mL, 24 h),
which were effectively improved by coincubation of JAT (1 µM, 24 h) without affecting
SNP-induced relaxations (Figure 3D,E).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 16 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Jatrorrhizine attenuates endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and stimulates Akt/eNOS path-
way in mouse aortas in hyperglycemic conditions ex vivo. (A–C) Western blotting data showing the 
expressions of ER stress markers, including phosphorylation and total JNK and elF2α, cleaved ATF6 
and spliced XBP1; phosphorylation of eNOS at Ser1177 and total eNOS; and phosphorylation of Akt 
at Ser473 and total Akt in mouse aortas treated with HG (30 mM) and JAT (1 μM) for 48 h ex vivo. 
(D,E) JAT (1 μM) improved ACh-induced EDRs in mouse aortas treated with ER stress inducer 
tunicamycin (Tuni; 2 μg/mL, 24 h) ex vivo; with no effect on SNP-induced relaxations. Results are 
mean ± SEM of 4–5 experiments. * p < 0.05 vs. NG or Control; # p < 0.05 vs. HG or Tuni. 
 
Figure 4. Effect of jatrorrhizine on endoplasmic reti culum stress and Akt/eNOS pathway in aortas 
from DIO mice ex vivo. (A–C) Western blotting of ER stress markers, phosphorylation and total Akt 
Figure 3. Jatrorrhizine attenuates endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and stimulates Akt/eNOS
pathway in mouse aortas in hyperglycemic conditions ex vivo. (A–C) Western blotting data showing
the expressions of ER stress markers, including phosphorylation and total JNK and elF2α, cleaved
ATF6 and spliced XBP1; phosphorylation of eNOS at Ser1177 and total eNOS; and phosphorylation
of Akt at Ser473 and total Akt in mouse aortas treated with HG (30 mM) and JAT (1 µM) for 48 h ex
vivo. (D,E) JAT (1 µM) improved ACh-induced EDRs in mouse aortas treated with ER stress inducer
tunicamycin (Tuni; 2 µg/mL, 24 h) ex vivo; with no effect on SNP-induced relaxations. Results are
mean ± SEM of 4–5 experiments. * p < 0.05 vs. NG or Control; # p < 0.05 vs. HG or Tuni.
In line with the results in high-glucose-stimulated aortas, JAT (1 µM, 24 h) was found
to effectively inhibit ER stress and the enhance Akt/eNOS pathway in the aortas of high-
fat diet (45% kcal% fat)/streptozotocin-induced mice ex vivo (Figure 4A–C). Moreover,
phosphorylation of Akt and eNOS was reduced, while ER stress markers were increased
upon high-glucose exposure (30 mM, 48 h) in human umbilical cord vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs) compared with protein levels in the control group (mannitol added as osmotic
control). These changes were prevented by JAT at 1 µM for 48 h (Figure 5A–C).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 12064 5 of 14
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 16 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Jatrorrhizine attenuates endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and stimulates Akt/eNOS path-
way in mouse aortas in hyperglycemic conditions ex vivo. (A–C) Western blotting data showing the 
expressions of ER stress markers, including phosphorylation and total JNK and elF2α, cleaved ATF6 
and spliced XBP1; phosphorylation of eNOS at Ser1177 and total eNOS; and phosphorylation of Akt 
at Ser473 and total Akt in mouse aortas treated with HG (30 mM) and JAT (1 μM) for 48 h ex vivo. 
(D,E) JAT (1 μM) improved ACh-induced EDRs in mouse aortas treated with ER stress inducer 
tunicamycin (Tuni; 2 μg/mL, 24 h) ex vivo; with no effect on SNP-induced relaxations. Results are 
mean ± SEM of 4–5 experiments. * p < 0.05 vs. NG or Control; # p < 0.05 vs. HG or Tuni. 
 
Figure 4. Effect of jatrorrhizine on endoplasmic reti culum stress and Akt/eNOS pathway in aortas 
from DIO mice ex vivo. (A–C) Western blotting of ER stress markers, phosphorylation and total Akt 
Figure 4. Effect of jatrorrhizine on endoplasmic reticulum stress and Akt/eNOS pathway in aortas
from DIO mice ex vivo. (A–C) Western blotting of ER stress markers, phosphorylation and total Akt
and eNOS in aortas from DIO mice induced by high-fat diet (45% kcal% fat) plus single intraperitoneal
injection of streptozotocin (120 mg/kg) and treated with JAT (1 µM) for 24 h ex vivo. Results are
mean ± SEM of 5–6 experiments. * p < 0.05 vs. DIO.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 16 
 
 
and eNOS in aortas from DIO mice induced by high-fat diet (45% kcal% fat) plus single intraperito-
neal injection of streptozotocin (120 mg/kg) and treated with JAT (1 μM) for 24 h ex vivo. Results 
are mean ± SEM of 5–6 experiments. * p < 0.05 vs. DIO. 
 
Figure 5. Effect of jatrorrhizine on endoplasmic reticulum stress and Akt/eNOS pathway in human 
umbilical cord vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). ( A–C) Western blotting of ER stress markers and 
Akt/eNOS in HUVECs treated with HG (30 mM) and JAT (1 μM) for 48 h. Results are mean ± SEM 
of 5–6 experiments. * p < 0.05 vs. NG; # p < 0.05 vs. HG. 
2.3. Jatrorrhizine Suppresses Oxidative Stress and Increases NO Bioavailability 
The role of oxidative stress and NO bioavailability in high-glucose-induced endothe-
lial dysfunction was further investigated by fluorescence imaging and Griess assay. The 
results show that ROS level was elevated in  mouse carotid arteries and HUVECs after 
treating with high glucose (30 mM), and this increase was decreased by JAT at 1 μM for 
48 h as measured by dihydroethidium (DHE) staining (Figure 6A,B). In addition, incuba-
tion with tunicamycin (2 μg/mL, 1 h) increased ROS level in HUVECs, implying that ER 
stress can lead to oxidative stress. JAT (1 μM, 1 h) and remarkably inhibited tunicamycin-
triggered ROS generation (Figure 6C). The results of nitrite level in culture medium by 
Griess reagent demonstrated that NO release was diminished by high glucose at 30 mM 
in mouse aortas and HUVECs, whereas NO pr oduction was greatly improved by JAT at 
1 μM for 48 h (Figure 6D,E). 
Figure 5. Effect of jatrorrhizine on endoplasmic reticulum stress and Akt/eNOS pathway in human
umbilical cord vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). (A–C) Western blotting of ER stress markers and
Akt/eNOS in HUVECs treated with HG (30 mM) and JAT (1 µM) for 48 h. Results are mean ± SEM
of 5–6 experiments. * p < 0.05 vs. NG; # p < 0.05 vs. HG.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 12064 6 of 14
2.3. Jatrorrhizine Suppresses Oxidative Stress and Increases NO Bioavailability
The role of oxidative stress and NO bioavailability in high-glucose-induced endothelial
dysfunction was further investigated by ﬂuorescence imaging and Griess assay. The results
show that ROS level was elevated in mouse carotid arteries and HUVECs after treating
with high glucose (30 mM), and this increase was decreased by JAT at 1 µM for 48 h as
measured by dihydroethidium (DHE) staining (Figure 6A,B). In addition, incubation with
tunicamycin (2 µg/mL, 1 h) increased ROS level in HUVECs, implying that ER stress can
lead to oxidative stress. JAT (1 µM, 1 h) and remarkably inhibited tunicamycin-triggered
ROS generation (Figure 6C). The results of nitrite level in culture medium by Griess
reagent demonstrated that NO release was diminished by high glucose at 30 mM in mouse
aortas and HUVECs, whereas NO production was greatly improved by JAT at 1 µM for
48 h (Figure 6D,E).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 16 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Jatrorrhizine suppresses oxidative stress and increases nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability. 
(A,B) Representative images and summarized data sh owing exposure to high glucose (30 mM, 48 
h) increased the level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in mouse carotid arteries and HUVECs, and 
such elevation was decreased by JAT at 1 μM as measured by dihydroethidium (DHE) staining. (C) 
JAT (1 μM) treatment inhibited the tunicamycin (tuni; 2 μg/mL, 1 h)-triggered ROS generation in 
HUVECs. (D,E) NO release from mouse aortas and HUVE Cs upon high glucose (30 mM) stimula-
tion and cotreatment with JAT (1 μM) for 48 h as assessed by measuring the nitrite level in culture 
medium using Griess reagent. Results are mean ± SEM of 4-6 experiments. * p < 0.05 vs. NG or 
Control; # p < 0.05 vs. HG or Tuni. 
2.4. Chronic Jatrorrhizine Treatment Attenuates Endothelial Function in Diabetic and Obese 
Mice 
Based on the results from ex vivo and in vitro experiments, we examined the vascular 
benefit of chronic JAT treatment in diabetic and obese mice. High-fat diet feeding for 15 
weeks significantly increased body weight as compared with control mice, but chronic 
administration with JAT did not reduce body weight (Figure 7A). The type 2 diabetic 
mouse model was successfully established as  supported by impaired glucose tolerance 
and insulin sensitivity, as well as elevated fasting blood glucose (>11 mM) (Figure 7B–D). 
JAT was effective in normalizing glucose tolerance, insulin sensitivity and fasting blood 
glucose level. JAT treatment also reduced sy stolic and diastolic blood pressures in DIO 
mice (Figure 7E,F). JAT significantly improved ACh-induced EDRs without affecting 
SNP-induced endothelium-independent relaxation s in the aortas of diabetic and obese 
mice (Figure 7G,H). 
Figure 6. Jatrorrhizine suppresses oxidative stress and increases nitric oxide (NO) bioavailability.
(A,B) Representative images and summarized data showing exposure to high glucose (30 mM, 48 h)
increased the level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in mouse carotid arteries and HUVECs, and
such elevation was decreased by JAT at 1 µM as measured by dihydroethidium (DHE) staining.
(C) JAT (1 µM) treatment inhibited the tunicamycin (tuni; 2 µg/mL, 1 h)-triggered ROS generation in
HUVECs. (D,E) NO release from mouse aortas and HUVECs upon high glucose (30 mM) stimulation
and cotreatment with JAT (1µM) for 48 h as assessed by measuring the nitrite level in culture medium
using Griess reagent. Results are mean ± SEM of 4-6 experiments. * p < 0.05 vs. NG or Control;
# p < 0.05 vs. HG or Tuni.
2.4. Chronic Jatrorrhizine Treatment Attenuates Endothelial Function in Diabetic and Obese Mice
Based on the results from ex vivo and in vitro experiments, we examined the vascular
beneﬁt of chronic JAT treatment in diabetic and obese mice. High-fat diet feeding for
15 weeks signiﬁcantly increased body weight as compared with control mice, but chronic
administration with JAT did not reduce body weight (Figure 7A). The type 2 diabetic mouse
model was successfully established as supported by impaired glucose tolerance and insulin
sensitivity, as well as elevated fasting blood glucose (>11 mM) (Figure 7B–D). JAT was effec-
tive in normalizing glucose tolerance, insulin sensitivity and fasting blood glucose level. JAT
treatment also reduced systolic and diastolic blood pressures in DIO mice (Figure 7E,F). JAT
signiﬁcantly improved ACh-induced EDRs without affecting SNP-induced endothelium-
independent relaxations in the aortas of diabetic and obese mice (Figure 7G,H).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 12064 7 of 14
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 16 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Jatrorrhizine treatment improves blood glucos e, blood pressure and vascular relaxations 
in DIO mice. ( A) Body weight in mice fed a high-fat diet  or normal chow for 15 weeks and oral 
administered with JAT at 50 mg/kg body weight daily for the last 5 weeks. (B) Oral glucose tolerance 
test (OGTT) upon 6 h fasting. ( C) Insulin tolerance test (ITT) upon 2 h fasting. ( D) Fasting blood 
glucose (FBG) upon 6 h fasting. ( E,F) Changes in systolic (SBP) and diastolic (DBP) blood pressure 
measured by tail-cuff method. (G) Effect of oral administration of JAT (50 mg/kg/day, 5 weeks) on 
ACh-induced relaxations in aortas from DIO mice. (H) SNP-induced endothelium-independent re-
laxations. Data are mean ± SEM from six mice for each group. * p < 0.05 vs. Control; # p < 0.05 vs. 
DIO. 
2.5. Jatrorrhizine Improves Liver and Plasma Lipid Profile in DIO Mice 
To examine whether JAT treatment affected  hepatic lipid accumulation, we investi-
gated histopathological changes in the liver. H&E staining showed that the structure of 
hepatocytes changed to cloudy swelling with vacuolization of the cytoplasm, and the cells 
were loosely arranged in the livers of vehicle-treated DIO mice, while these histopatho-
logical changes in liver tissues were restored by JAT treatment (Figure 8A). Oil red O 
staining confirmed that oral administration of JAT significantly reduced lipid droplets in 
the livers as compared with the DIO mice grou p (Figure 8B). These results indicate that 
JAT treatment effectively ameliorated hepatic lipid accumulation. 
In addition, the basic metabolic parameters of DIO mice in the control, DIO and JAT 
groups were detected to further explore the effect of JAT on lipid profile and liver protec-
tion. The results of the plasma lipid profile demonstrated that JAT treatment reduced cho-
lesterol and triglyceride content in DIO mice (Figure 8C,D). Low-density lipoprotein cho-
lesterol (LDL-C) level was elevated, and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) 
level was reduced in plasma from DIO mice, which were reversed by chronic JAT treat-
ment (Figure 8E,F). Furthermore, JAT administ ration decreased the plasma levels of as-
partate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) which were indica-
tors for liver damage (Figure 8G,H). 
Figure 7. Jatrorrhizine treatment improves blood glucose, blood pressure and vascular relaxations
in DIO mice. ( A) Body weight in mice fed a high-fat diet or normal chow for 15 weeks and oral
administered with JAT at 50 mg/kg body weight daily for the last 5 weeks. ( B) Oral glucose
tolerance test (OGTT) upon 6 h fasting. (C) Insulin tolerance test (ITT) upon 2 h fasting. (D) Fasting
blood glucose (FBG) upon 6 h fasting. ( E,F) Changes in systolic (SBP) and diastolic (DBP) blood
pressure measured by tail-cuff method. ( G) Effect of oral administration of JAT (50 mg/kg/day,
5 weeks) on ACh-induced relaxations in aortas from DIO mice. ( H) SNP-induced endothelium-
independent relaxations. Data are mean ± SEM from six mice for each group. * p < 0.05 vs. Control;
# p < 0.05 vs. DIO.
2.5. Jatrorrhizine Improves Liver and Plasma Lipid Proﬁle in DIO Mice
To examine whether JAT treatment affected hepatic lipid accumulation, we investi-
gated histopathological changes in the liver. H&E staining showed that the structure of
hepatocytes changed to cloudy swelling with vacuolization of the cytoplasm, and the cells
were loosely arranged in the livers of vehicle-treated DIO mice, while these histopathologi-
cal changes in liver tissues were restored by JAT treatment (Figure 8A). Oil red O staining
conﬁrmed that oral administration of JAT signiﬁcantly reduced lipid droplets in the livers
as compared with the DIO mice group (Figure 8B). These results indicate that JAT treatment
effectively ameliorated hepatic lipid accumulation.
2.6. Jatrorrhizine Treatment Activates Akt/eNOS Pathway and Suppresses ER Stress and
Oxidative Stress in Aortas of DIO Mice
To ﬁnd whether chronic JAT treatment impacts ER stress and oxidative stress, Western
blotting and dihydroethidium (DHE) staining were conducted. We found that the expres-
sion levels of ER stress markers, including phosphorylation of JNK at Thr183/Tyr185 and
eIF2α at Ser51, cleaved ATF6 and spliced XBP1, were signiﬁcantly higher in aortas from
DIO mice than in the control, whereas JAT treatment reversed these changes (Figure 9A).
JAT elevated Akt and eNOS phosphorylation in DIO mice (Figure 9B,C). Additionally, the
enhanced ROS level was effectively inhibited by JAT treatment in mouse aortas (Figure 9D).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 12064 8 of 14
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 16 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Effect of jatrorrhizine on liver and plasma lipid profile in DIO mice. ( A,B) Representative 
images of H&E staining and oil red O staining sections of livers from mice (scale bar: 50 μm). (C–H) 
Plasma levels of total cholesterol, triglyceride, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), high-
density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotrans-
ferase (ALT) measured by corresponding test kits. Data are mean ± SEM from six mice for each 
group. * p < 0.05 vs. Control; # p < 005 vs. DIO. 
2.6. Jatrorrhizine Treatment Activates Akt/eNOS Pathway and Suppresses ER Stress and 
Oxidative Stress in Aortas of DIO Mice 
To find whether chronic JAT treatment impacts ER stress and oxidative stress, West-
ern blotting and dihydroethidium (DHE) staining were conducted. We found that the ex-
pression levels of ER stress markers, including phosphorylation of JNK at Thr183/Tyr185 and 
eIF2α at Ser 51, cleaved ATF6 and spliced XBP1, were significantly higher in aortas from 
DIO mice than in the control, whereas JAT treatment reversed these changes (Figure 9A). 
JAT elevated Akt and eNOS phosphorylation in DIO mice (Figure 9B,C). Additionally, the 
enhanced ROS level was effectively inhibited by JAT treatment in mouse aortas (Figure 
9D). 
Figure 8. Effect of jatrorrhizine on liver and plasma lipid proﬁle in DIO mice. ( A,B) Representa-
tive images of H&E staining and oil red O staining sections of livers from mice (scale bar: 50 µm).
(C–H) Plasma levels of total cholesterol, triglyceride, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C),
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine amino-
transferase (ALT) measured by corresponding test kits. Data are mean ± SEM from six mice for each
group. * p < 0.05 vs. Control; # p < 005 vs. DIO.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 16 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Chronic jatrorrhizine treatment attenuates endoplasmic reticulum stress and increases 
Akt/eNOS pathway in DIO mice. (A–C) The expressions of ER stress markers (JNK, eIF2α, cleaved 
ATF6 and spliced XBP1) and Akt/eNOS in aortas from DIO mice. (D) Changes in ROS as measured 
by dihydroethidium (DHE) staining. Data are mean ± SEM from 5–6 mice for each group. * p < 0.05 
vs. Control; # p < 0.05 vs. DIO. 
3. Discussion 
Our current findings support the therapeutic value of JAT for ameliorating diabetes-
related endothelial dysfunction by upregula ting the Akt/eNOS pathway to increase NO 
bioavailability, accomplished with inhibition of ER stress and oxidative stress in vitro and 
in vivo. 
First, hyperglycemia and dyslipidemia co ntribute to endothelial dysfunction and 
thus hypertension in patients with metabolic syndrome [22]. A high glucose level de-
creases NO bioavailability and increases gene ration of ROS, impairing vasorelaxations 
[23]. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) is responsible for catalyzing the oxidation 
of L-arginine to form NO and L-citrulline in the presence of cofactors such as tetrahydro-
biopterin [24]. The activity and/or expression of eNOS are particularly important to regu-
late endothelial function. Akt is one of the various modulators controlling eNOS activity. 
In diabetes, the Akt/eNOS si gnaling pathway is downregula ted in the vasculature, and 
strategies to activate Akt/eNOS are effective in ameliorating vascular dysfunction [25]. 
Of note, ER stress is demonstrated to be closely associated with the pathogenesis of 
vascular diseases such as atherosclerosis, obesity and type 2 diabetes [26]. Vascular risk 
factors such as high glucose [16], oxLDL [27] and homocysteine [28] are known to trigger 
ER stress in endothelial cells. Upon induction of ER stress, Akt/eNOS activity is reduced, 
resulting in a decrease in NO production and an increase in ROS level, thereby causing 
endothelial injury [29,30]. In agreement with previous studies, we found that stimulation 
of high glucose attenuated endothelium-depen dent relaxations in aortas ex vivo, down-
regulated Akt/eNOS phosphorylation and upre gulated ER stress markers in aortas and 
HUVECs, elevated ROS generation in carotid arteries and HUVECs, and reduced NO 
level in culture medium. Such impairments were reversed by coincubation with JAT. 
Moreover, our ex vivo experiments using tunicamycin confirmed that alleviation of ER 
Figure 9. Chronic jatrorrhizine treatment attenuates endoplasmic reticulum stress and increases
Akt/eNOS pathway in DIO mice. (A–C) The expressions of ER stress markers (JNK, eIF2α, cleaved
ATF6 and spliced XBP1) and Akt/eNOS in aortas from DIO mice. (D) Changes in ROS as measured by
dihydroethidium (DHE) staining. Data are mean ± SEM from 5–6 mice for each group. * p < 0.05 vs.
Control; # p < 0.05 vs. DIO.
3. Discussion
Our current ﬁndings support the therapeutic value of JAT for ameliorating diabetes-
related endothelial dysfunction by upregulating the Akt/eNOS pathway to increase NO
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 12064 9 of 14
bioavailability, accomplished with inhibition of ER stress and oxidative stressin vitro and
in vivo.
First, hyperglycemia and dyslipidemia contribute to endothelial dysfunction and thus
hypertension in patients with metabolic syndrome [22]. A high glucose level decreases NO
bioavailability and increases generation of ROS, impairing vasorelaxations [23]. Endothelial
nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) is responsible for catalyzing the oxidation of L-arginine to
form NO and L-citrulline in the presence of cofactors such as tetrahydrobiopterin [ 24].
The activity and/or expression of eNOS are particularly important to regulate endothelial
function. Akt is one of the various modulators controlling eNOS activity. In diabetes,
the Akt/eNOS signaling pathway is downregulated in the vasculature, and strategies to
activate Akt/eNOS are effective in ameliorating vascular dysfunction [25].
Of note, ER stress is demonstrated to be closely associated with the pathogenesis
of vascular diseases such as atherosclerosis, obesity and type 2 diabetes [ 26]. Vascular
risk factors such as high glucose [ 16], oxLDL [ 27] and homocysteine [ 28] are known to
trigger ER stress in endothelial cells. Upon induction of ER stress, Akt/eNOS activity is
reduced, resulting in a decrease in NO production and an increase in ROS level, thereby
causing endothelial injury [ 29,30]. In agreement with previous studies, we found that
stimulation of high glucose attenuated endothelium-dependent relaxations in aortas ex
vivo, downregulated Akt/eNOS phosphorylation and upregulated ER stress markers in
aortas and HUVECs, elevated ROS generation in carotid arteries and HUVECs, and reduced
NO level in culture medium. Such impairments were reversed by coincubation with JAT.
Moreover, our ex vivo experiments using tunicamycin conﬁrmed that alleviation of ER
stress can directly lead to impaired endothelium-dependent relaxations and enhanced
oxidative stress in endothelial cells. The present study is the ﬁrst to demonstrate that JAT
can relieve ER stress and subsequently restore endothelial function. The SNP-induced
endothelium-dependent relaxations were similar among different groups, implying that
the response of vascular smooth muscle to NO was unaffected and that the impairment
of ACh-induced relaxations is attributed to the lowered NO production from endothelial
cells. Our in vitro experiments demonstrated that coincubation of JAT greatly increased
NO bioavailability in high-glucose treatment and improved endothelial cell function.
ER stress, oxidative stress and NO bioavailability are closely linked events in modulat-
ing vascular homeostasis [10,11]. ER function is disrupted for various reasons, resulting
in the accumulation of misfolded or unfolded proteins, which causes ER stress. Oxida-
tive stress plays a critical role in endothelial function, occurring due to the unbalanced
production of both ROS and antioxidants. NADPH oxidase is considered a major source
of ROS and can be upregulated and activated in response to risk factors. The excessive
production of ROS leads to the accumulation of toxic products, which affect the normal
function of cells and lead to cell death [31]. There is much evidence that protein misfolding
associated with cardiometabolic diseases stimulates the overproduction of ROS in the vas-
cular wall [32]. Existing evidence has also suggested that ER stress can stimulate oxidative
stress by disrupting the antioxidant defense mechanism [11]. Likewise, we observed that
tunicamycin as an ER stress inducer increased ROS levels in HUVECs, indicating that ER
stress can indeed cause oxidative stress. Moreover, many cardiovascular risk factors such
as diabetes, obesity and hypertension reduce NO bioavailability through NADPH oxidase
and uncoupling of eNOS, resulting in the production of superoxide anion [33]. Decreased
NO production leads to vasoconstriction, platelet aggregation and endothelial dysfunction.
Chronic administration of JAT confers vasoprotection in diabetes and obesity in vivo,
consistent with the ex vivo results in aortas exposed to high glucose or tunicamycin. The
current ﬁndings suggest that JAT treatment for 5 weeks is highly effective in restoring
endothelial function and mitigating hypertension in obese and diabetic mice. As illustrated
by Western blot protein bands and ﬂuorescent images, the decrease in both ER stress and
oxidative stress, as well as upregulation of Akt/eNOS and NO bioavailability, contributed
to the improvement in endothelial function. Among the various active ingredients of RC,
berberine is recognized as an effective hypoglycemic drug for diabetes and has been shown
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 12064 10 of 14
to improve endothelial dysfunction by reducing ER stress [34]. Notably, the hypoglycemic
ability of JAT is signiﬁcantly higher than that of berberine [ 35]. Comparisons of the
vasoprotective activities with berberine and other ingredients of RC remain to be evaluated
in the future to identify potent candidates. The in vivo results are in line with previous
studies. Chronic intake of JAT exerted beneﬁcial effects on glucose tolerance, insulin
sensitivity, lipid proﬁle and liver function.
Metabolic syndromes involving hypertension, diabetes and obesity have been reported
to induce oxidized and glycated LDL cholesterol, free fatty acids and speciﬁc aminotrans-
ferases that contribute to endothelial dysfunction and other vascular diseases [36,37]. In our
in vivo experiments in mice, JAT treatment remarkably reduced hepatic fat accumulation
and morphological deterioration. Liver damage was prevented by JAT as supported by
the suppressed levels of ALT and AST in plasma from DIO mice. Moreover, JAT amelio-
rated dyslipidemia, diminishing plasma levels of total cholesterol, triglyceride and LDL
while augmenting HDL levels. These ameliorations in glucose and lipid metabolism might
partially contribute to the protective effect of JAT on endothelial function; nevertheless, a
direct vascular protective property of JAT is strongly supported in ex vivo experiments
where the ambient glucose and lipid levels were constant.
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Animal Experiments
All animal care and research protocols were approved by the Animal Research Ethical
Committee of the University of Macau (Macao, China) and in accordance with the National
Institutes of Health guidelines for the Care Use of Laboratory Animals. Male C57BL/6J
mice (6–8 weeks old) were obtained from the Faculty of the Healthy Science Animal
Centre of the University of Macau and housed in animal holding rooms with controlled
temperature (22 ± 1 ◦C) with 12 h light/dark cycles. Mice were randomly divided into
three groups for chronic treatment: (1) control fed a normal chow diet for 15 weeks and
orally administered water (vehicle) for the last 5 weeks; (2) diet-induced obese (DIO) mice
fed a high-fat diet (45% kcal% fat) for 15 weeks with 5-week vehicle treatment; and (3) DIO
mice orally administered JAT at 50 mg/kg/day for the last 5 weeks (purity > 97%; Shanghai
Aladdin Bio-Chem Technology Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China). A commercial blood glucose
meter was used to measure fasting blood glucose (6 h fasting), and mice with fasting blood
glucose of >11 mM were considered type 2 diabetic mice. Food intake and body weight of
mice were recorded every 3 weeks.
4.2. Blood Pressure Measurement
After 6 h of fasting, systolic (SBP) and diastolic (DBP) blood pressures were detected
using the tail-cuff method (CODA noninvasive blood pressure system; Kent Scientiﬁc
Corporation, Torrington, CT, USA) in conscious mice.
4.3. Blood Glucose Measurement
After 6 h of fasting, blood was collected from the tail of mice. Fasting blood glucose
(FBG) level was measured by a commercial glucometer (Jiangsu Yuyue Medical Equipment
and Supply Co. Ltd., Jiangsu, China), and mice with FBG >11 mM were considered
diabetic mice. For the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), after fasting for 6 h, mice were
administered glucose solution (1.2 g/kg body weight) by intragastric administration, and
blood glucose levels were detected at 0, 15, 30, 60, 90 and 120 min. For the insulin tolerance
test (ITT), after fasting for 2 h, mice were administered insulin (0.5 U/kg body weight)
by intraperitoneal injection, and blood glucose levels were measured at the same time
intervals as OGTT.
4.4. Determination of Plasma Lipid Proﬁle
Mice were sacriﬁced by CO 2 inhalation, and plasma was collected to detect total
cholesterol (TC), triglyceride (TG; Stanbio Laboratory, Boerne, TX, USA), high-density
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 12064 11 of 14
lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) (Nanjing
Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute, Nanjing, China) levels by corresponding commercial
test kits. Subsequently, plasma alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotrans-
ferase (AST) were analyzed colorimetrically utilizing assay test kits (Nanjing Jiancheng
Bioengineering Institute, Nanjing, China).
4.5. Hematoxylin and Eosin Staining and Oil Red O Staining
To observe histopathologic alterations, the liver tissue at the same location of the
left liver was obtained from each mouse to be ﬁxed in 10% buffered formalin, embed-
ded in parafﬁn, sliced in 3–5 µm thick sections and stained with hematoxylin and eosin
(H&E) (Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai, China). Liver sections were also ﬁxed in 3.7%
formaldehyde, immersed in oil red O solution to observe the lipid droplets and stained
with hematoxylin to visualize nuclei (Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai, China). H&E
samples and oil red O slides were examined using a microscope and photographed under
×400 magniﬁcation.
4.6. Culture of Human Umbilical Cord Vein Endothelial Cells (HUVECs)
Human umbilical cord vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) obtained from Lonza were
grown in F-12K medium (7 mM glucose present in medium) supplemented with 30 µg/mL
endothelial cell growth supplement (ECGS, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and
100 µg/mL heparin (Alfa Aesar, Stoughton, MA, USA). Cells were cultured in 75 cm 2
ﬂasks, 96-well plates, 24-well plates and 6-well plates precoated with 0.2% gelatin and
maintained at 37 ◦C in a humidiﬁed atmosphere of 5% CO2. Medium was changed every
two days and passaged by 0.5% trypsin-EDTA (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA). HUVECs at
4–8 passages were used for experiments. HUVECs were treated with mannitol as osmotic
control, high glucose (30 mM, 48 h; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and cotreated with
JAT (1 µM).
4.7. Ex Vivo Culture of Mouse Aortas
After mice were sacriﬁced by CO 2 inhalation, mouse thoracic aortas and carotid
arteries were dissected and cleaned in sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and then cut
into segments (~2 mm) and incubated in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium (5.55 mM
glucose present in DMEM, Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS, Gibco, Paisley, UK) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (P/S, Gibco, Grand
Island, NY, USA). Mannitol as osmotic control, high glucose (HG; 30 mM, 48 h, Sigma-
Aldrich, ST. Louis, MO, USA), ER stress inducer tunicamycin (Tuni; 2µg/mL, 24 h) and JAT
(0.1 or 1 µM; Shanghai Aladdin Bio-Chem 96 Technology Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China) were
added individually into the culture medium that bathed the aortic rings in an incubator of
5% CO2 at 37 ◦C. After the incubation period, segments were transferred to fresh Krebs
solution for functional studies in a wire myograph and were frozen for Western blotting
and ﬂuorescence imaging.
4.8. Isometric Force Measurement in Wire Myograph
After mice were sacriﬁced, segments of mouse aortas (~2 mm) cultured for 24 or
48 h in DMEM and aortas (~2 mm) dissected directly after modeling were mounted on a
Multi Myograph System (Danish Myo Technology, Aarhus, Denmark) with 5 mL Krebs–
Henseleit solution, and changes in isometric tension were measured. Each experiment was
performed on rings obtained from different mice. Mouse aortas were initially stretched to
an optimal baseline tension of 3 mN and were then equilibrated for 60 min before the start
of the experiments at 37 ◦C. Each ring was contracted by 60 mM KCl and rinsed ﬁve times
in Krebs solution. Subsequently, to examine endothelium-dependent relaxations (EDRs)
and endothelium-independent relaxations, each ring was contracted with phenylephrine
(Phe, 3 µM, α1-adrenoceptor agonist, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) to produce a
sustained contraction and then was relaxed by cumulative addition of acetylcholine (ACh,
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 12064 12 of 14
3 nM—10 µM, muscarinic acetylcholine receptor agonist, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO,
USA) and measured in response to sodium nitroprusside (SNP , 1 nM—10 µM, exogenous
NO donor, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA).
4.9. Western Blotting Assay
Total protein was isolated from the frozen aortas in liquid nitrogen or HUVECs after
treatment with ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer. The supernatant after centrifugation was collected
and measured for protein concentration by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Beyotime
Institute of Biotechnology, Shanghai, China). Proteins in 20µg quantities were separated by
electrophoresis on 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-
PAGE) and transferred onto a polyvinylidene diﬂuoride (PVDF) membrane (Millipore,
Billerica, MA, USA). After blocking with 1% BSA in 1× TBST for 2 h at room temperature,
the membranes were washed and then probed with speciﬁc primary antibodies against
phosphor (p)-Akt at Ser473 (No. 4060S), Akt (No. 4685S), p-eNOS at Ser 1177 (No. 9570S),
eNOS (No. 32027S), p-JNK at Thr 183/Tyr185 (No. 9255S), JNK (No. 9253S), p-eIF2 α
at Ser51 (No. 3398S) (1:1000 dilution; Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA), eIF2 α
(1:1000 dilution; No. 11170; Proteintech Group, Inc., Wuhan, China), Anti-XBP1 (1:1000
dilution; No. ab220783), ATF6 (1:1000 dilution; No. ab203119) (Abcam, Cambridge, UK),
and GAPDH (1:5000 dilution; No. 60004S; Proteintech Group, Inc., Wuhan, China) at 4 ◦C
overnight and secondary antibodies (1:1000 dilution; Beyotime, Shanghai, China). Protein
bands were detected with the American ECLTM Advanced Western Blotting Detection Kit
(GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden) and imaged with the ChemiDocTM MP
Imaging System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).
4.10. Determination of ROS by Dihydroethidium (DHE) Staining
The intracellular ROS levels in HUVECs and cross-sectional areas of aortas were
detected by DHE probe as in our previous study [19]. Segments of mouse thoracic aortas
(ex vivo treatment or in vivo treatment) and carotid arteries (ex vivo treatment) were
embedded in OCT compound (Tissue-Tek, Sakura, Nagano, Japan) and cut into sections
of 10 µm thickness using a Leica CM 1000 cryostat at −20 ◦C. Frozen sections of aortas
and carotid arteries or cultured HUVECs were washed with PBS and incubated for 15 min
with DHE (5 µM)-containing normal physiological saline solution (NPSS) at 37 ◦C in the
dark. After the samples were washed with PBS to remove the dye, ﬂuorescence images
were observed by the Leica TCS SP8 Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope System (Leica
Microsystems, Germany; 515 nm excitation; 585 nm emission). DHE ﬂuorescence intensity
was measured by ImageJ 1.53a software.
4.11. Determination of NO Generation
Aortic segments or HUVECs were treated with high glucose (HG; 30 mM) and JAT
(1 µM) in a 24-well plate for 48 h, and the supernatants were collected to detect the amount
of NO by Griess reagent (Invitrogen, Oregon, USA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The SpectraMax M5 microplate reader (Molecular Devices, Silicon Valley, CA,
USA) was used to read absorbance at 548 nm.
4.12. Statistical Analysis
All data were expressed as mean ± standard error of mean (SEM) of n separate ex-
periments. There were six mice for each group in animal experiments. Relaxations were
expressed as percentage reduction in phenylephrine-induced contraction. Dilator concen-
trations in negative logarithm inducing 50% of maximum response (pD2) and maximum
relaxation (Emax%) were calculated. Comparison was performed using GraphPad Prism 9.0
(version 8, GraphPad Software InC., San Diego, CA, USA) by Student’st-test or one-way
analysis of variance (ANOVA), followed by Bonferroni post hoc tests. Differences with
p < 0.05 were considered statistically signiﬁcant.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 12064 13 of 14
5. Conclusions
The present study uncovers both ex vivo and in vitro that coincubation with JAT ame-
liorates endothelial function to enhance vasodilatation, by increasing Akt/eNOS activity
and NO bioavailability, as well as decreasing ER stress and oxidative stress, which are
consistent with the beneﬁcial effects of chronic administration of JATin vivo. JAT treatment
also normalizes metabolic proﬁles and blood pressure in diabetic and obese mice. These
data provide new mechanistic insights to support the potential therapeutic use of JAT for
combating vascular diseases associated with metabolic disorders.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, W.S.C.; methodology, Y.Z. (Yan Zhou); formal analysis,
Y.Z. (Yan Zhou); investigation, Y.Z. (Yan Zhou), Y.W. (Yuehan Wang), Y.Z. (Yanyan Zhu) and C.T.V .;
writing—original draft preparation, Y.Z. (Yan Zhou); writing—review and editing, B.X., C.-C.R., Y.W.
(Yitao Wang) and W.S.C.; supervision, W.S.C.; funding acquisition, W.S.C. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the Research Committee of the University of Macau (Grant
Number: SRG2019-00154-ICMS and MYRG2019-00157-ICMS), the Major Basic and Applied Ba-
sic Research Projects of Guangdong Province of China (Grant Number: 2019B030302005), and
the Science and Technology Development Fund, Macau SAR (Grant Number: 0117/2020/A and
SKL-QRCM(UM)-2020–2022).
Institutional Review Board Statement: The animal study protocol was conducted according to the
guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Animal Research Ethics Committee of
the University of Macau (Protocol Code: UMARE-024-2021; approved on 31 August 2021).
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: The authors thank the Animal Research Core in the Faculty of Health Sciences,
the University of Macau, for breeding and providing the mice and rats used in the present study.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Benjamin, E.J.; Muntner, P .; Alonso, A.; Bittencourt, M.S.; Callaway, C.W.; Carson, A.P .; Chamberlain, A.M.; Chang, A.R.; Cheng,
S.; Das, S.R.; et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics-2019 Update: A Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation
2019, 139, e56–e528. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Bakker, W.; Eringa, E.C.; Sipkema, P .; van Hinsbergh, V .W. Endothelial dysfunction and diabetes: Roles of hyperglycemia,
impaired insulin signaling and obesity. Cell Tissue Res. 2009, 335, 165–189. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Poredos, P .; Poredos, A.V .; Gregoric, I. Endothelial Dysfunction and Its Clinical Implications. Angiology 2021, 72, 604–615.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Vanhoutte, P .M. Endothelial Dysfunction and Vascular Pathology. Bull. Mem. Acad. R Med. Belg. 2006, 161, 529–537.
5. Tan, Y.; Cheong, M.S.; Cheang, W.S. Roles of Reactive Oxygen Species in Vascular Complications of Diabetes: Therapeutic
Properties of Medicinal Plants and Food. Oxygen 2022, 2, 246–268. [CrossRef]
6. Cheang, W.S.; Wong, W.T.; Tian, X.Y.; Yang, Q.; Lee, H.K.; He, G.W.; Yao, X.; Huang, Y. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase enhancer
reduces oxidative stress and restores endothelial function in db/db mice. Cardiovasc. Res. 2011, 92, 267–275. [CrossRef]
7. Tian, X.Y.; Wong, W.T.; Wang, N.; Lu, Y.; Cheang, W.S.; Liu, J.; Liu, L.; Liu, Y.; Lee, S.S.; Chen, Z.Y.; et al. PPARdelta activation
protects endothelial function in diabetic mice. Diabetes 2012, 61, 3285–3293. [CrossRef]
8. Harding, H.P .; Zhang, Y.; Ron, D. Protein translation and folding are coupled by an endoplasmic-reticulum-resident kinase.
Nature 1999, 397, 271–274. [CrossRef]
9. Yang, Y.; Zhou, Q.; Gao, A.; Chen, L.; Li, L. Endoplasmic reticulum stress and focused drug discovery in cardiovascular disease.
Clin. Chim. Acta 2020, 504, 125–137. [CrossRef]
10. Cheang, W.S.; Wong, W.T.; Zhao, L.; Xu, J.; Wang, L.; Lau, C.W.; Chen, Z.Y.; Ma, R.C.; Xu, A.; Wang, N.; et al. PPARdelta Is
Required for Exercise to Attenuate Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and Endothelial Dysfunction in Diabetic Mice. Diabetes 2017,
66, 519–528. [CrossRef]
11. Zhou, Y.; Murugan, D.D.; Khan, H.; Huang, Y.; Cheang, W.S. Roles and Therapeutic Implications of Endoplasmic Reticulum
Stress and Oxidative Stress in Cardiovascular Diseases. Antioxidants 2021, 10, 1167. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 12064 14 of 14
12. Liu, F.; Fang, S.; Liu, X.; Li, J.; Wang, X.; Cui, J.; Chen, T.; Li, Z.; Yang, F.; Tian, J.; et al. Omentin-1 protects against high
glucose-induced endothelial dysfunction via the AMPK/PPARdelta signaling pathway.Biochem. Pharmacol. 2020, 174, 113830.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Beriault, D.R.; Werstuck, G.H. The role of glucosamine-induced ER stress in diabetic atherogenesis. Exp. Diabetes Res. 2012,
2012, 187018. [CrossRef]
14. Yan, T.; Liang, C.; Fan, H.; Zhou, W.; Huang, L.; Qi, S.; Wang, W.; Ma, P . KAP1 silencing relieves OxLDL-induced vascular
endothelial dysfunction by down-regulating LOX-1. Biosci. Rep. 2020, 40, BSR20200821. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Radwan, E.; Bakr, M.H.; Taha, S.; Sayed, S.A.; Farrag, A.A.; Ali, M. Inhibition of endoplasmic reticulum stress ameliorates
cardiovascular injury in a rat model of metabolic syndrome. J. Mol. Cell. Cardiol. 2020, 143, 15–25. [CrossRef]
16. Cheang, W.S.; Tian, X.Y.; Wong, W.T.; Lau, C.W.; Lee, S.S.; Chen, Z.Y.; Yao, X.; Wang, N.; Huang, Y. Metformin protects endothelial
function in diet-induced obese mice by inhibition of endoplasmic reticulum stress through 5’ adenosine monophosphate-activated
protein kinase-peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor delta pathway. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 2014, 34, 830–836.
[CrossRef]
17. Wang, J.; Wang, L.; Lou, G.H.; Zeng, H.R.; Hu, J.; Huang, Q.W.; Peng, W.; Yang, X.B. Coptidis Rhizoma: A comprehensive review
of its traditional uses, botany, phytochemistry, pharmacology and toxicology.Pharm. Biol. 2019, 57, 193–225. [CrossRef]
18. Liu, L.; Liu, J.; Huang, Z.; Yu, X.; Zhang, X.; Dou, D.; Huang, Y. Berberine improves endothelial function by inhibiting endoplasmic
reticulum stress in the carotid arteries of spontaneously hypertensive rats. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2015, 458, 796–801.
[CrossRef]
19. Zhou, Y.; Zhou, C.; Zhang, X.; Vong, C.T.; Wang, Y.; Cheang, W.S. Coptisine Attenuates Diabetes-Associated Endothelial
Dysfunction through Inhibition of Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress and Oxidative Stress. Molecules 2021, 26, 4210. [CrossRef]
20. Fu, Y.; Hu, B.; Tang, Q.; Fu, Q.; Xiang, J. Hypoglycemic activity of jatrorrhizine.J. Huazhong Univ. Sci. Technol. Med. Sci. 2005, 25,
491–493. [CrossRef]
21. Yang, W.; She, L.; Yu, K.; Yan, S.; Zhang, X.; Tian, X.; Ma, S.; Zhang, X. Jatrorrhizine hydrochloride attenuates hyperlipidemia in a
high-fat diet-induced obesity mouse model. Mol. Med. Rep. 2016, 14, 3277–3284. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Han, K.A.; Patel, Y.; Lteif, A.A.; Chisholm, R.; Mather, K.J. Contributions of dysglycaemia, obesity, and insulin resistance to
impaired endothelium-dependent vasodilation in humans. Diabetes Metab. Res. Rev. 2011, 27, 354–361. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. El-Remessy, A.B.; Abou-Mohamed, G.; Caldwell, R.W.; Caldwell, R.B. High glucose-induced tyrosine nitration in endothelial
cells: Role of eNOS uncoupling and aldose reductase activation. Investig. Ophthalmol. Vis. Sci. 2003, 44, 3135–3143. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
24. Forstermann, U.; Munzel, T. Endothelial nitric oxide synthase in vascular disease: From marvel to menace. Circulation 2006, 113,
1708–1714. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Huang, J.P .; Hsu, S.C.; Li, D.E.; Chen, K.H.; Kuo, C.Y.; Hung, L.M. Resveratrol Mitigates High-Fat Diet-Induced Vascular
Dysfunction by Activating the Akt/eNOS/NO and Sirt1/ER Pathway. J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol. 2018, 72, 231–241. [CrossRef]
26. Zhang, K.; Kaufman, R.J. From endoplasmic-reticulum stress to the inﬂammatory response. Nature 2008, 454, 455–462. [CrossRef]
27. Dong, Y.; Zhang, M.; Wang, S.; Liang, B.; Zhao, Z.; Liu, C.; Wu, M.; Choi, H.C.; Lyons, T.J.; Zou, M.H. Activation of AMP-activated
protein kinase inhibits oxidized LDL-triggered endoplasmic reticulum stress in vivo. Diabetes 2010, 59, 1386–1396. [CrossRef]
28. San Cheang, W.; Yuen Ngai, C.; Yen Tam, Y.; Yu Tian, X.; Tak Wong, W.; Zhang, Y.; Wai Lau, C.; Chen, Z.Y.; Bian, Z.X.; Huang,
Y.; et al. Black tea protects against hypertension-associated endothelial dysfunction through alleviation of endoplasmic reticulum
stress. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 10340. [CrossRef]
29. Zhang, W.; Feng, J.; Cheng, B.; Lu, Q.; Chen, X. Oleanolic acid protects against oxidative stressinduced human umbilical vein
endothelial cell injury by activating AKT/eNOS signaling. Mol. Med. Rep. 2018, 18, 3641–3648. [CrossRef]
30. Luo, J.; Huang, L.; Wang, A.; Liu, Y.; Cai, R.; Li, W.; Zhou, M.S. Corrigendum: Resistin-Induced Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress
Contributes to the Impairment of Insulin Signaling in Endothelium. Front. Pharmacol. 2018, 9, 1446. [CrossRef]
31. Wang, Z.; Yang, J.; Qi, J.; Jin, Y.; Tong, L. Activation of NADPH/ROS pathway contributes to angiogenesis through JNK signaling
in brain endothelial cells. Microvasc. Res. 2020, 131, 104012. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Saaoud, F.; Drummer, I.V .C.; Shao, Y.; Sun, Y.; Lu, Y.; Xu, K.; Ni, D.; Jiang, X.; Wang, H.; Yang, X. Circular RNAs are a novel type
of non-coding RNAs in ROS regulation, cardiovascular metabolic inﬂammations and cancers. Pharmacol. Ther. 2021, 220, 107715.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Farah, C.; Michel, L.Y.M.; Balligand, J.L. Nitric oxide signalling in cardiovascular health and disease. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 2018, 15,
292–316. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Li, H.Y.; Wang, X.C.; Xu, Y.M.; Luo, N.C.; Luo, S.; Hao, X.Y.; Cheng, S.Y.; Fang, J.S.; Wang, Q.; Zhang, S.J.; et al. Berberine Improves
Diabetic Encephalopathy Through the SIRT1/ER Stress Pathway in db/db Mice. Rejuvenation Res. 2018, 21, 200–209. [CrossRef]
35. Pang, B.; Yu, X.T.; Zhou, Q.; Zhao, T.Y.; Wang, H.; Gu, C.J.; Tong, X.L. Effect ofRhizoma coptidis (Huang Lian) on Treating Diabetes
Mellitus. Evid. Based Complement. Alternat. Med. 2015, 2015, 921416. [CrossRef]
36. Zheng, X.K.; Li, Y.J.; Zhang, L.; Feng, W.S.; Zhang, X. Antihyperglycemic activity of Selaginella tamariscina (Beauv.) Spring. J.
Ethnopharmacol. 2011, 133, 531–537. [CrossRef]
37. Wang, Y.; You, Y.; Tian, Y.; Sun, H.; Li, X.; Wang, X.; Wang, Y.; Liu, J. Pediococcus pentosaceus PP04 Ameliorates High-Fat
Diet-Induced Hyperlipidemia by Regulating Lipid Metabolism in C57BL/6N Mice. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2020, 68, 15154–15163.
[CrossRef]