| Public Health | Research Article
New aspects characterizing non-obese NAFLD by the analysis of 
the intestinal flora and metabolites using a mouse model
Wenji Zhang,1 Wenli Cheng,2,3 JingHui Li,4 Zhenrui Huang,1 Hui Lin,3 Wenjuan Zhang2
AUTHOR AFFILIATIONS See affiliation list on p. 20.
ABSTRACT Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a major public health problem 
due to the high incidence affecting approximately one-third of the world’s population. 
NAFLD is usually linked to obesity and excessive weight. A subset of patients with NAFLD 
expresses normal or low body mass index; thus, the condition is called non-obese NAFLD 
or lean NAFLD. However, patients and healthcare professionals have little awareness and 
understanding of NAFLD in non-obese individuals. Furthermore, preclinical results from 
non-obese animal models with NAFLD are unclear. Gut microbiota and their metabolites 
in non-obese/lean-NAFLD patients differ from those in obese NAFLD patients. There­
fore, we analyzed the biochemical indices, intestinal flora, and intestinal metabolites 
in a non-obese NAFLD mouse model established using a methionine-choline-deficient 
(MCD) diet. The significantly lean MCD mice had a remarkable fatty liver with lower 
serum triglyceride and free fatty acid levels, as well as higher alanine transaminase 
and aspartate transaminase levels than normal mice. 16S RNA sequencing of fecal DNA 
showed that the overall richness and diversity of the intestinal flora decreased in MCD 
mice, whereas the Firmicutes:Bacteroidota ratio was increased. g_ Tuzzerella, s_Bifidobac­
terium pseudolongum , and s_ Faecalibaculum rodentium  were the predominant species 
in non-obese NAFLD mice. Fecal metabolomics using liquid chromatography-tandem 
mass spectrometry revealed the potential biomarkers for the prognosis and diagnosis 
of non-obese NAFLD, including high levels of tyramine glucuronide, 9,12,13-TriHOME, 
and pantetheine 4′-phosphate, and low levels of 3-carbamoyl-2-phenylpropionaldehyde, 
N-succinyl-L,L-2,6-diaminopimelate, 4-methyl-5-thiazoleethanol, homogentisic acid, and 
estriol. Our findings could be useful to identify and develop drugs to treat non-obese 
NAFLD and lean NAFLD.
IMPORTANCE Patients and healthcare professionals have little awareness and 
understanding of NAFLD in non-obese individuals. In fact, about 40% of people with 
NAFLD worldwide are non-obese, and nearly one-fifth are lean. Lean NAFLD unfortu­
nately may be unnoticed for years and remains undetected until hepatic damage is 
advanced and the prognosis is compromised. This study focused on the lean NAFLD, 
screened therapeutic agents, and biomarkers for the prognosis and diagnosis using 
MCD-induced male C57BL/6J mice. The metabolites tyramine glucuronide, 9,12,13-Tri­
HOME, and pantetheine 4 ′-phosphate, together with the predominant flora including 
g_Tuzzerella, s_ Bifidobacterium pseudolongum , and s_ Faecalibaculum rodentium , were 
specific in non-obese NAFLD mice and might be used as targets for non-obese NAFLD 
drug exploration. This study is particularly significant for non-obese NAFLDs that need to 
be more actively noticed and vigilant.
KEYWORDS non-obese non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, intestinal flora, fecal 
metabolomics
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-23 1
Editor Rosie Alegado, University of Hawaii at Manoa, 
Honolulu, Hawaii, USA
Address correspondence to Hui Lin, 
linhui@gdph.org.cn, or Wenjuan Zhang, 
public_health2021@126.com.
Wenji Zhang and Wenli Cheng contributed equally 
to this article. The author order was determined by 
their contribution to the article.
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
See the funding table on p. 20.
Received 25 September 2023
Accepted 29 January 2024
Published 29 February 2024
Copyright © 2024 Zhang et al. This is an open-access 
article distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 International license.
N
on-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most common chronic liver disease 
characterized by an excessive deposition of fat in liver cells caused by pathogenic 
factors, except alcohol, which lead to liver damage. Chronic excessive accumulation of 
fat in the liver leads to NAFLD accompanied by non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and 
liver fibrosis, further progressing into cirrhosis or liver cancer ( 1). It is also associated with 
type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), cardiovascular disease, and other metabolic disorders. 
Individuals with NAFLD are two to five times more likely to develop T2DM than those 
without NAFLD ( 2), and cardiovascular disease is the most common cause of death 
in patients with NAFLD ( 3). According to the latest statistics, the incidence of NAFLD 
worldwide was 32.4% in May 2021 ( 4). This incidence in China was 29.2%, which was 
higher and more alarming than that in Europe and the United States ( 5). Approximately 
40% of people with NAFLD worldwide are non-obese, and nearly one-fifth are lean ( 6). 
Moreover, despite the absence of obesity, several studies indicate that individuals with 
lean NAFLD have an increased risk of developing T2DM and all-cause mortality than 
those with obese NAFLD ( 7). Recent studies mostly focus on obese subjects, but the 
population, the patients themselves, and healthcare professionals have poor awareness 
and understanding of lean NAFLD. Lean NAFLD, unfortunately, may be unnoticed for 
years and can remain undetected until hepatic damage is advanced and the prognosis is 
compromised. At present, no drug has been approved by the Food and Drug Administra­
tion to treat NAFLD. Although several drugs have been developed to treat NAFLD in 
phase III trials, none have been studied in lean-NAFLD patients. Moreover, the results of 
drug development for lean NAFLD and application in animal models have also not been 
fully understood.
Animal models for lean NAFLD should account not only for weight and insulin 
resistance but also for pathological patterns and histological changes. Dietary induction 
models, including those established using a methionine-choline-deficient (MCD) diet, 
choline-deficient–amino acid-defined diet, and high-fat–high-fructose diet, as well as the 
combinations of such diets, have been most extensively used in previous studies ( 8). The 
MCD diet causes histological changes similar to those observed in human steatohepati­
tis, and it can develop into fibrosis ( 9). Usually, MCD-fed mice develop steatohepatitis 
after 3 weeks and liver fibrosis after 5 weeks. The body weight decreases by about 
40% after 8 weeks ( 8, 9). Although the pathogenesis of this model is relatively well 
studied, the changes in their intestinal microenvironment including intestinal flora and 
metabolites are not clear enough.
Multiple factors and molecular pathways are involved in the development of 
NAFLD, including visceral obesity, lipodystrophy-like phenotype, diabetes mellitus, 
insulin resistance, de novo  adipose formation, intestinal disorders, genetic factors, and 
epigenetic modifications (10, 11). The effects of these multiple pathogenic factors on a 
genetically susceptible subject are parallel or sequential, or in some way synergistic ( 12). 
The role of the gut microbiota has been increasingly implicated in the modulation of 
the risk factors of NAFLD, such as energy homeostasis dysregulation, insulin resistance, 
increase in intestinal permeability, endogenous production of ethanol, inflammation, as 
well as choline and bile acid metabolism ( 13). It is worth noting that lean and non-obese 
NAFLDs have some unique characteristics underlying intestinal microbial disorders and 
metabolite reconstruction ( 7). A demographic and clinical study of lean-NAFLD subjects 
(14) showed a significantly different microbial community in their fecal microbiota, and 
the decrease in Desulfovibrionaceae was associated with NAFLD in the lean-NAFLD 
group but not in the obese NAFLD group. Additionally, a pilot study on patients who 
underwent biopsy revealed that lean NASH individuals had a lower abundance of 
Faecalibacterium, Ruminococcus, and Lactobacillus than non-lean individuals with NASH 
(15). Another study conducted in a Chinese population demonstrated that non-obese 
patients with NAFLD exhibited a reduction in Firmicutes, including Lachnospiraceae, 
Ruminococcaceae, and Lactobacillaceae, and an increase in lipopolysaccharide-produc­
ing Gram-negative bacteria (16).
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-23 2
Therefore, in this study, an animal model of lean NAFLD was induced using an MCD 
diet, and the changes in serum and liver biochemical indices were analyzed. Moreover, 
the intestinal microenvironment, including the intestinal flora and its metabolites, was 
also studied to provide a reference for the diagnosis and treatment of NAFLD and for the 
development of appropriate drugs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Mice and treatment
Seven-week-old specific pathogen-free C57BL/6J (Guangzhou, SCXK [Yue] 2022-0002) 
male mice were purchased from the Guangdong Medical Laboratory Animal Center 
(Foshan, China). The mice were subjected to a 12 h/12 h light/dark cycle and a constant 
temperature (22°C ± 2°C) and were provided free access to a standard chow diet and 
water. After 7 days of adaptive feeding, the mice were randomly divided into a normal 
control (NC) group fed a standard diet (CAS: 1010009; Jiangsu Xietong Pharmaceutical 
Bio-engineering Co., Ltd.) (n = 6) and NAFLD mice fed the MCD diet (CAS: MCD; Shanghai 
Yitong Biotechnology Co., Ltd.) ( n = 6) for 60 days. The body weights of mice were 
recorded during feeding every 3 days. The stools of mice were collected before sacrifice. 
All mice were fasted overnight at the end of the prescribed feeding period. The whole 
blood was collected from the retro-orbital plexus, allowed to stand at room temperature 
for at least 30 min, and then centrifuged (2,500 rpm for 20 min) to obtain the serum. 
A small portion of the freshly isolated and weighed livers was fixed in 4% paraformal­
dehyde, and the remaining liver samples and sera were immediately frozen in liquid 
nitrogen and stored at −80°C until further analysis.
Biochemical and histopathological analyses
The biochemical indicators in the serum and liver were measured using the following 
kits: triglyceride (TG) (A110-1-1), total cholesterol (TC) (A111-1-1), high-density lipopro­
tein cholesterol (HDL-c) (A112-1-1), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (A113-1-1), free 
fatty acid (FFA) (A042-2-1), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (C009-2-1), and aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST) (C010-2-1) (all from Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute, 
Nanjing, China).
The fixed livers were dehydrated using graded concentrations of alcohol, embedded 
in paraffin, and cut into 4- μm-thick slides, deparaffinized, rehydrated, and stained with 
hematoxylin and eosin using a standard protocol (cat # CO105S; Beyotime Biotechnol­
ogy, Shanghai, China). The slides were observed using a motorized multifunctional 
upright fluorescence microscope (DM6000B; Leica, Germany).
Determination of biomarkers of inflammation using enzyme-linked immuno­
sorbent assay
Mouse enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits for the determination of tumor necrosis 
factor α ( TNF-α) (MM-0132M1), interleukin-β ( IL-1β) (MM-0040M1), IL-6 (MM-0163M1), 
and IL-10 (MM-0176M1) were purchased from Jiangsu MeiMian Industrial Co., Ltd 
(Yancheng, China). Briefly, the serum and standard were separately added to a 96-well 
plate. Then, horseradish peroxidase-conjugated reagent was added to each well and 
incubated for 60 min at 37°C. After washing five times with the wash buffer, chromogen 
solutions were added to each well, mixed gently, and incubated for 15 min at 37°C away 
from light. Lastly, the stop buffer was added to the 96-well plate, and the absorbance of 
each well was measured using an Imark microplate reader.
16S rRNA sequencing and bioinformatics analysis
Sample preparation
Total DNA was extracted (Omega Bio-Tek, Norcross, GA, USA) from 50- to 100-mg fecal 
samples and amplified using PCR with the primers 338F: ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAG 
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-23 3
and 806R: GGACTACNNGGGTATCTAAT targeting the 16S V3–V4 rRNA gene with indexing 
barcodes. AxyPrep DNA Gel Extraction kit (Axygen Biosciences, Union City, CA, USA) 
was used to purify the recovered products, and the proteins were separated using 
2% agarose gel electrophoresis. Proteins were detected and quantified using Qubit 
(v.4.0; Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The NEXTFLEX Rapid DNA-Seq Kit was used to 
build the library. Purified amplicons were pooled in equimolar amounts and paired-end 
sequenced on the Illumina PE300 platform (Illumina, San Diego, USA) according to the 
standard protocols of Majorbio Bio-Pharm Technology Co. Ltd. (Shanghai, China).
Sequence analysis
The 16S rRNA sequencing data have been made publicly available on the National 
Center for Biotechnology Information database (accession number PRJNA1064694). In 
our study, raw sequence tags were generated from FLASH (v.1.2.11, https://github.com/
OpenGene/fastp). Quality filtering on the basic tags was performed under specific 
conditions to obtain high-quality clean labels according to the QIIME quality-control­
led process (v.1.9.1, http://qiime.org/install/index.html). The tags were compared with 
the reference database (Gold database) using the UCHIME algorithm (UCHIME, 2019) 
to detect the chimera sequences that were removed, and effective tags were finally 
obtained. De novo  operational taxonomic unit (OTU) clustering was carried out using 
Uparse (v.11, http://www.drive5.com/uparse/), which identifies highly accurate OTUs 
from amplicon sequencing data with an identity threshold of 97%. The taxonomy of 
each OTU representative sequence was analyzed using RDP Classifier (v.2.13,  https://
sourceforge.net/projects/rdp-classifier/) against the 16S rRNA gene database using a 
confidence threshold of 0.7. OTUs with an alignment ratio lower than 0.8 were excluded. 
Usearch (v.11, http://www.drive5.com/usearch/) was used for OTU count. Next, the OTUs 
were used to find the effective sequences using Mothur ( https://www.mothur.org/wiki/
Download_mothur).
The representative sequences of OTUs were used to analyze the alpha-diversity 
(Chao1, ACE, Coverage, Sobs, Shannon, and Simpson diversity indices) based on the 
relative abundances. The similarities among microbial communities in different samples 
were determined using principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) based on Bray-Curtis 
dissimilarity using the Vegan (v.2.5–3) package. The permutational multivariate analysis 
of variance test in the Vegan package was used to assess the percentage of variation due 
to the treatment, along with its statistical significance. Linear discriminant analysis effect 
size (LEfSe) was performed to identify the significantly abundant taxa (phylum to genera) 
of bacteria among different groups (linear discriminant analysis [LDA] score >2, P < 0.05). 
The variance inflation factor for each variable was estimated using the vif function in the 
car package (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/car/car.pdf).
Ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry 
of fecal metabolites
Sample preparation
Feces (100 mg) were added to a 2-mL centrifuge tube, and a 6-mm-diameter grinding 
bead was added. Extraction solution (400 µL, methanol:water = 4:1 [vol/vol]) containing 
0.02 mg/mL of the internal standard (L-2-chlorophenylalanine) was used for metabolite 
extraction. Samples were ground using a Wonbio-96c frozen tissue grinder (Shanghai 
Wanbo Biotechnology Co., Ltd.) for 6 min (–10°C, 50 Hz), followed by low-temperature 
ultrasonic extraction for 30 min (5°C, 40 kHz). The samples were left at –20°C for 30 min 
and centrifuged for 15 min (4°C; 13,000 × g), and the supernatant was transferred to 
an injection vial for liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). A 
pooled quality control (QC) sample was prepared by mixing equal volumes of all samples 
and injecting at regular intervals (every 5–15 samples) for system conditioning and QC.
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-23 4
Chromatographic conditions
LC-MS/MS was performed using a Thermo UHPLC-Q Exactive HF-X system equipped 
with an ACQUITY HSS T3 column (100 mm × 2.1 mm internal diameter, 1.8 µm; Waters 
Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) at Majorbio Bio-Pharm Technology Co. Ltd. The mobile 
phases consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water:acetonitrile (95:5, vol/vol) (solvent A) and 
0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile:isopropanol:water (47.5:47.5, vol/vol) (solvent B). The 
other parameters were as follows: flow rate, 0.40 mL/min; column temperature, 40 ℃; 
and injection volume, 1 µL in both positive and negative ion modes. The mobile phase 
gradient for the positive ion mode was as follows: 0–3 min at 0%–20% B; 3.0–4.5 min at 
10%–35% B; 4.5–5.0 min at 35%–100% B; 5.0–6.3 min at 100% B; 6.3–6.4 min at 100%–0% 
B; and 6.4–8.0 min at 0% B. The separation gradient in the negative ion mode was as 
follows: 0–1.5 min at 0%–5% B; 1.5–2.0 min at 5%–10% B; 2.0–4.5 min at 10%–30% B; 
4.5–5.0 min at 30%–100% B; 5.0–6.3 min at 100% B; 6.3–6.4 min at 100%–0% B; and 
6.4–8.0 min at 0% B.
Mass spectrometry conditions
Mass spectrometry data were collected using a Thermo UHPLC-Q Exactive HF-X mass 
spectrometer equipped with an electrospray ionization source operating in both positive 
and negative modes. The optimal conditions were as follows: source temperature, 425℃; 
sheath gas flow rate, 50 arb; aux gas flow rate, 13 arb; ion-spray voltage floating, –3,500 
V in the negative mode and 3500 V in the positive mode; normalized collision energy, 
20–40–60 V rolling for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS); full mass spectrometry 
resolution: 60,000; and MS/MS resolution: 7,500. Data acquisition was performed in the 
data-dependent acquisition mode. The detection was performed over a mass range of 
70–1,050 m/z.
Substance identification and analysis
The liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC/MS) raw data from our study have 
been made available on the MetaboLights database, under the accession number 
MTBLS9365. In our study, pretreatment of LC/MS raw data was performed using 
Progenesis QI software (Waters Corporation) through baseline filtering, peak identifica-
tion, integration, retention time correction, and peak alignment. Internal standard peaks, 
as well as any known false-positive peaks (including noise, column bleed, and derivatized 
reagent peaks), were removed from the data matrix as deredundant and peak pooled. 
The metabolites were identified using the Human Metabolome Database (HMDB) (http://
www.hmdb.ca/) and the Metlin (https://metlin.scripps.edu/) database.
At least 80% of metabolic features detected in any set of samples in the data 
matrix were retained. The minimum metabolite value was estimated after filtering 
specific samples with metabolite levels below the lower limit of quantification, and 
each metabolic signature was normalized to the sum. The response intensity of mass 
spectrometry peaks of the sample was normalized using the sum-normalization method 
to reduce errors caused by sample preparation and instrument instability. Furthermore, 
variables of QC samples with relative standard deviation of >30% were excluded and 
subjected to log10 transformation to obtain the final data matrix for subsequent analysis.
Next, principal component analysis using the R package “ropls” (v.1.6.2), orthog­
onal partial least squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA), and seven-cycle interac­
tive validation was performed to evaluate model stability. Metabolites with variable 
importance in projection (VIP) of >1, P < 0.05, and one-time fold change were deter­
mined as significantly different metabolites based on the VIP values obtained using 
the OPLS-DA model, and the P value was generated using Student’s t-test. The Kyoto 
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used for metabolic pathway 
annotation. Python package “scipy.stats” ( https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/) was used 
to perform enrichment analysis to obtain the most relevant biological pathways for 
experimental treatments using Fisher exact test.
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-23 5
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism (v.7.0) for Windows (GraphPad 
Software Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). Groups were compared using Student’s t-test. Results 
are presented as mean ± standard deviation of at least three independent experiments. A 
P value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.
RESULTS
Successful establishment of the lean-NAFLD model
The body weight of NC mice at the end of the experiment did not change significantly 
(26.38 ±  2.40 g), whereas that of MCD-fed mice decreased significantly (14.27 ±  0.56 g) 
(P < 0.0001) ( Fig. 1A). MCD feeding also caused a significant decrease in liver weight ( P 
= 0.0001) ( Fig. 1B ), which was proportionally associated with weight loss, as the liver 
weight-to-body weight ratio in MCD-fed mice was comparable with that of mice fed a 
normal diet ( Fig. 1C). Hepatic cell vacuolation and steatosis were observed in the livers 
of mice in the MCD group, which was consistent with the fatty liver phenotype ( Fig. 
1D). Some hepatic cells showed evident ballooning and swelling, with inflammatory 
infiltration in the hepatic lobes. Hepatic cell necrosis was also observed around the 
cracks. The liver cells of mice in the NC group were polygonal and arranged as hepatic 
cords and radially distributed around the central vein. The centers of cells were occupied 
by large and round nuclei; the cells had uniform cytoplasm, no lipid droplets, and no 
steatosis or inflammatory cell infiltration. An increase in TG and FFA levels in the livers 
of mice in the MCD group was observed ( P < 0.01), whereas no significant changes 
were noted in TC levels ( Fig. 1E). The levels of the proinflammatory factors TNF- α, IL-6, 
and IL-1β were obviously upregulated in MCD-fed mice compared with those in the NC 
group ( P < 0.05), whereas the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10 decreased significantly 
in MCD-fed mice ( P = 0.025) ( Fig. 1F). The levels of TC, TG, FFA, LDL, and high-density 
lipoprotein (HDL) in the serum were lower in the MCD group than in the NC group ( Fig. 
2A through E). The liver function enzymes ALT and AST ( Fig. 2F and G) were significantly 
increased, indicating that fat accumulation and degeneration seriously affected the 
normal function of the liver. These results indicated that the MCD diet had successfully 
induced a lean mouse model of NAFLD.
High-throughput 16S rRNA sequencing
The alpha-diversity of intestinal microbiota was evaluated using Chao, ACE, Shannon, 
coverage, Sobs, and Simpson indices in normal mice and those with NAFLD. Sobs 
index reflects the actual observed richness, ACE and Chao indices reflect the commun­
ity richness, Shannon and Simpson indices reflect the community diversity, and the 
Good’s Coverage index estimates the proportion of individuals in the (whole) community 
that belong to the species present in a sample. Figure 3A  shows that the Sobs, ACE, 
Chao, and Shannon indices of MCD-fed mice were significantly lower than those of 
NC mice. The Simpson index of lean-NAFLD mice did not change significantly. The 
coverage index was significantly higher in MCD-fed mice compared with that in NC 
mice. These results indicated that the diversity and abundance of microbial species 
in the feces of MCD-induced lean mouse model of NAFLD were reduced. PCoA and 
hierarchical clustering based on weighted UniFrac distances were performed to reveal 
differences in the bacterial community structure of samples ( Fig. 3B ). PCoA of OTU 
levels using the ANOSIM test (R = 0.8741, P = 0.003) showed that the gut microbiome 
composition among the NC and MCD groups was separated. In agreement with the 
findings from PCoA, clustering analysis showed that the NC and MCD groups showed 
clustering in their own groups. The composition of the intestinal microbiota at the 
phylum and genus level was analyzed to reveal the relative abundance of the main 
bacteria. The top 10 phyla and genera with the highest abundance are shown in 
Fig. 3C  and D . The dominant phyla were Firmicutes, Bacteroidota, Actinobacteriota, 
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-23 6
Campilobacterota, and Desulfobacterota. The relative abundance of Bacteroidota and 
Patescibacteria was significantly higher in NC mice than in MCD-fed mice. The relative 
abundance of Actinobacteriota, Desulfobacterota, and Deferribacterota was significantly 
higher in MCD-fed mice than in NC mice. The ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidota 
was higher in MCD-fed mice (13.1 ± 2.47) than in NC mice (1.99 ± 1.19). The rel­
ative abundance of the dominant 10 genera was 78%–74%. Six genera, including 
FIG 1 Body and liver weight, liver histopathology, lipid content, and inflammation state of mice in the normal control 
(NC) and NAFLD (MCD) groups. ( A) Body weight changes in NC and MCD mice after 60 days. ( B and C ) Liver weight and 
hepatic index. ( D) Representative pictures of hematoxylin and eosin staining of the liver (×400 magnification). Dark arrows 
indicate hepatic cell steatosis; green arrow indicates hepatic cell acidophilic necrosis; and red arrow indicates focal necrosis. 
(E) Changes in lipid levels (free fatty acid [FFA], triglycerides [TGs], and total cholesterol [TC]) in the liver of control mice and 
mice with NAFLD. (F) Levels of inflammatory factors (TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6, and IL-10) in serum.
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-23 7
Faecalibaculum, Bifidobacterium, norank_f__Desulfovibrionaceae, norank_f__Oscillospira­
ceae, Mucispirillum, and Colidextribacter, were significantly increased in the MCD 
group than in the NC group. The relative abundance of seven genera, including 
FIG 2 Serum lipid profiles and liver function indicators in normal control (NC) and NAFLD (MCD) mice. ( A) Triglyceride (TG), 
(B) total cholesterol (TC), ( C) free fatty acid (FFA), ( D) low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c), ( E) high-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol (HDL-c) ( F) alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and ( G) aspartate aminotransferase (AST). ( H) Change profile of lipid 
index and liver function enzyme index, where the numbers indicate the measured averages.
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-23 8
FIG 3 Changes in gut microbiota composition. ( A) Alpha-diversity analysis including Sobs, ACE, Chao, Shannon, Simpson, and coverage indices of the bacterial 
community in the feces of normal control (NC) mice and mice with NAFLD (MCD). ( B) Beta-diversity analysis between NC mice and MCD using principal 
coordinate analysis (PCoA) and hierarchical clustering analysis. ( C) Relative abundance of bacteria at the phylum level, ratio of Firmicutes to Bacteroidota, and 
Wilcoxon rank-sum test to compare differences between the NC and MCD groups at the phylum level. ( D) Relative abundance of bacteria at the genus level, and 
the Wilcoxon rank-sum test to compare differences between the NC and MCD groups at the genus level.The symbols *, **, and *** indicate that the P-value is less 
than 0.05, 0.01, and 0.001, respectively.
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-23 9
FIG 4 Linear discriminant analysis effect size (LEfSe) of microbiota. ( A) LEfSe multilevel species at the level tree between the normal control (NC) and NAFLD 
(MCD) groups (α = 0.05, logarithmic linear discriminant analysis [LDA] score threshold = 3.0). Different color nodes representing the microbial groups significantly 
enriched in the corresponding group and with a significant effect on the difference between groups. Light yellow nodes represent the microbial groups that
(Continued on next page)
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-2310
norank_f__Muribaculaceae, Lachnospiraceae_NK4A136_group, Dubosiella, Lactobacillus, 
norank_f__norank_o__Clostridia_UCG-014, Alistipes, and Candidatus_Saccharimonas, was 
significantly reduced in the MCD group.
LEfSe results ( Fig. 4 ) showed that species with LDA scores of >4 were considered 
biological markers. The NC and MCD groups did not have common biomarkers at the 
noted genus levels. The biomarkers in NC mice at the noted genus level were Lach­
nospiraceae_NK4A136_group, Dubosiella, Lactobacillus, Alistipes, and Candidatus_Saccha­
rimonas. The biomarkers of MCD-fed mice at the noted genus level were Faecalibaculum, 
Bifidobacterium, and Mucispirillum. The noted species in the NC group were Lactobacillus 
murinus, whereas Streptococcus respiraculi and Bifidobacterium pseudolongum were those 
in the MCD group. These results implied that abnormal intestinal flora played a key role 
in the development of NAFLD and represented an important factor leading to NAFLD.
Fecal metabolomics profiling of MCD-induced NAFLD in mice
A total of 1,372 metabolites were identified in the feces in both positive and negative 
ion modes ( Fig. 5A ). A total of 667 metabolites were significantly different ( P < 0.05, 
VIP_pred_OPLS-DA >1 and up/down fold change >1): 471 were upregulated in the NC 
group and 196 were upregulated in the MCD group. These metabolites were clustered 
using OPLS-DA, and their validation plots were obtained using 200 permutation tests. 
The variation degrees of metabolite composition and abundance between the NC 
and MCD groups were quantitatively analyzed using correlation data. The closer the 
correlation is to 1, the higher the similarity of metabolic composition and abundance 
between samples. The results showed that the metabolic data clusters in the NC and 
MCD groups were separated from each other; the similarity of the sample in each 
group was high; and the repeatability was good ( Fig. 5B and C ). These results indicated 
that the MCD diet significantly altered the metabolic profile of the intestinal flora. The 
metabolites identified by HMDB mainly included amino acids, carbohydrates, carbohy­
drate conjugates, fatty acids and conjugates, bile acids, alcohols, carbonyl compounds, 
hydroxycinnamic acids and derivatives, medium-chain hydroxy acids and derivatives, 
glycerophosphocholines, and fatty acyl glycosides; many of them were produced or 
regulated by the intestinal bacteria ( Fig. 5D ). KEGG functional prediction analysis of 
intestinal metabolites revealed that they were mainly involved in metabolic pathways 
including amino acid and lipid metabolism (Fig. 5E).
Figure 6A  shows the different pathways of metabolite enrichment. The top 20 
enriched KEGG pathways using BH multiple check correction showed that the path­
ways with differential metabolite enrichment in NAFLD mainly involved tryptophan 
metabolism, ABC transporters, nucleotide metabolism, primary bile acid biosynthesis, 
D-amino acid metabolism, phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan biosynthesis, choline 
metabolism, diabetic cardiomyopathy, alpha-linolenic acid metabolism, biosynthesis 
of phenylpropanoids, histidine metabolism, drug metabolism - cytochrome P450, 
phenylalanine metabolism, taste transduction, insulin resistance, axon regeneration, and 
biosynthesis of alkaloids derived from histidine and purine. The differential abundance 
(DA) scores of the KEGG pathways were further analyzed ( Fig. 6B), which revealed that 
all 14 metabolites were enriched in the tryptophan pathway and were more downregu­
lated in MCD-fed mice than in NC mice. In addition to tryptophan metabolism, the 
other amino acid metabolism including histidine metabolism; phenylalanine metabo­
lism; phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis pathway; and D-amino acid 
metabolism had a DA score of <0, indicating that the overall expression of the amino 
FIG 4 (Continued)
do not significantly differ between the two groups or have no significant effect on the differences between the two groups. if the number of significantly 
different species is <50, the legend position is displayed as one column on the right side; if the number of significantly different species is >50, the legend 
position is displayed as two columns on the right side. ( B) LDA discrimination results between the NC and MCD groups ( α = 0.05, LDA score threshold = 4.0). LDA 
discriminant histogram statistics highlighting the microbial groups with significant effects in different NC and MCD groups. The LDA score obtained using LDA 
indicates that the greater the LDA score, the greater the influence of species abundance on the difference effect.
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-2311
FIG 5 Metabolic profiles of intestinal flora. ( A) Volcano plots of the differential metabolites between the normal control 
(NC) and NAFLD (MCD) groups in both positive and negative ion modes. The horizontal coordinate log2FC is the multiple 
change value of the difference in metabolite expression between the two groups; the vertical coordinate −log10 (P value) is 
the statistical test value of the difference in metabolite expression; the higher the value, the more significant the difference 
in expression. Each dot in the diagram represents a specific metabolite, and the size of the dot represents the variable 
importance in projection value. ( B) OPLS-DA score plots of metabolites in each experimental group in the positive ion 
mode (upper) and negative ion mode (lower). ( C) Correlations between samples using Pearson’s correlation coefficient 
by Euclidean distance algorithm. ( D) Classification of the identified metabolites using the Human Metabolome Database. 
(E) Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes functional prediction analysis of the identified intestinal metabolites.
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-2312
FIG 6 KEGG pathway enrichment analysis of differential metabolites. (A) KEGG pathway analysis of the 667 differential metabolites between the normal control 
(NC) and NAFLD (MCD) groups. The enrichment ratio represents the ratio of metabolite number enriched in this pathway to the background number annotated 
in the pathway. The higher the ratio, the greater the degree of enrichment. The column color gradient indicates the significance of the enrichment. The darker
(Continued on next page)
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-2313
acid metabolism pathway was downregulated in the MCD group. Lipid metabolism, 
including primary bile acid biosynthesis and alpha-linolenic acid metabolism, was 
involved in MCD-induced development of NAFLD. Especially, the metabolites jasmonic 
acid, 9-oxo-non-anoic acid, traumatic acid, and dodecanedioic acid in the alpha-linolenic 
acid metabolism pathway were downregulated and traumatin and 7-epijasmonic acid 
were upregulated in the MCD group. It is worth mentioning that the compounds 
enriched in the insulin resistance pathway that were mainly upregulated were diradylgly­
cerols and uridine diphosphate-N-acetylglucosamine in the MCD group, indicating that 
MCD-induced NAFLD in mice led to easier glucose absorption by regulating PDK1/GLUT4 
signal transduction. Next, the top 200 VIP scores of >1.5 metabolites were evaluated to 
assess the signature, and KEGG pathway analysis was performed ( Fig. 6C ). The most 
enriched pathways were those involving the immune system, including the chemokine 
signaling pathway, Th1 and Th2 cell differentiation, Th17 cell differentiation, B-cell 
receptor signaling pathway, T-cell receptor signaling pathway, and natural killer cell-
mediated cytotoxicity, which might be related to the occurrence of hepatitis induced by 
the long-term MCD diet. It might also be related to acidophilic necrosis and focal diffuse 
cell death as observed in the histopathological sections. The metabolites with KEGG 
pathway annotation information were selected for the subsequent analysis.
The VIP score based on the PLS-DA model represented the potential of the metabolite 
as a biomarker, and the top 50 variables with a VIP score of >2.0 were considered 
important for the classification model ( Fig. 7A ). The metabolites with VIP scores of 
>2.0 and the top 50 variables were intersected with those with VIP scores of >1.5, and 
the top 200 and KEGG components that could be enriched into the KEGG functional 
pathway were analyzed and a total of 10 metabolites were obtained ( Fig. 7B). These 10 
metabolites shown in Fig. 7C reveal a strong positive or negative correlation among each 
other and mainly played roles in the pathway of biosynthesis of cofactors; progesterone, 
androgen, and estrogen receptor agonists/antagonists; styrene degradation; linoleic acid 
metabolism; pantothenate; CoA biosynthesis; thiamine metabolism; and carbapenem 
biosynthesis ( Fig. 7D ). These compounds, including 9,12,13-TriHOME in the linoleic 
acid metabolism pathway, might be potential biomarkers of liver injury in NAFLD or 
steatohepatitis.
Correlation analysis between gut microbiota and metabolomic signatures
A heatmap representing the correlations among significantly altered gut microbiota 
and the differential metabolites was plotted to identify the key gut bacteria and 
metabolites that potentially contribute to the development of non-obese NAFLD 
(Fig. 8A ). Notably, except the species g_ Allobaculum, g_ GCA-900066575, g_ Mucis­
pirillum, g_ Oscillibacter, g_ Rikenellaceae_RC9_gut_group, s_ Desulfovibrio_fairfieldensis, 
s_Enterococcus_faecium, s_ Klebsiella_aerogenes, s_ Lachnospiraceae_bacterium_DW59, 
g_Anaeroplasma, and g_ Colidextribacter, the relative abundance of the other spe­
cies with LDA of >3 and P < 0.05 showed a definite negative or positive 
correlation with the 10 metabolites that were obtained. It also indicated that 
the relative abundances of g_ Alistipes, g_ Alloprevotella, g_ Bacteroides, g_ Candida­
tus_Saccharimonas, g_ Dubosiella, g_ Eubacterium_siraeum_group, g_ Eubacterium_xyla­
nophilum_group, g_ Lachnospiraceae_NK4A136_group, g_ Monoglobus, g_ Muribaculum, 
FIG 6 (Continued)
the default color, the more significantly enriched the KEGG term. * P (or false discovery rate [FDR]) <0.05, ** P (or FDR) <0.01, *** P (or FDR) <0.001. ( B) Differential 
abundance (DA) scores of the KEGG pathways. The DA score reflects the overall change of all metabolites in the metabolic pathway. A score of 1 indicates that 
the expression trend of all annotated differential metabolites in the pathway is upregulated; a score of –1 indicates that the expression trend of all annotated 
differential metabolites in the pathway is downregulated; the length of the line indicates the absolute value of the DA score. The size of the dot indicates the 
number of differential metabolites annotated in the pathway. The larger the dot, the more differential metabolites in the pathway. Dot distribution on the right 
side of the central axis and the longer line segment indicate that the overall expression of pathway trends is upregulated. The dots are distributed to the left 
of the central axis. The longer the line segment, the more inclined the overall downregulated expression of the pathway. ( C) KEGG pathway analysis of the 
differential metabolites with top 200 of variable importance in projection of >1.5.
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-2314
FIG 7 Significantly changed metabolites and markers in the NAFLD (MCD) group. ( A) Top 50 metabolites with variable importance in projection (VIP) score of 
>2.0. ( B) Venn diagram of the common metabolites of VIP score of >2 and top 50 with those of VIP >1.5 and top 200 and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes (KEGG) annotation. ( C) Correlation analysis of the 10 common metabolites using Pearson’s correlation coefficient by Euclidean distance algorithm. 
(D) KEGG analysis of these 10 common metabolites.The symbols ** and *** indicate that the P-value is less than 0.01 and 0.001, respectively.
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-2315
FIG 8 Correlation analysis between gut microbiota and metabolomic signatures. ( A) Heatmap on the correlation among significantly altered gut microbiota 
and the differential metabolites using Pearson correlation analysis. Each cell in the figure represents the correlation between two attributes (metabolites and 
associated features), and different colors represent the size of the correlation coefficient between attributes. ( B) Correlation of gut microbiota, metabolomic 
signatures, and biochemical indices using Cytoscape. Red represents upregulated metabolites and biochemical indices and the specific or predominant 
microbiota in the feces of MCD-fed mice, whereas blue represents the downregulated metabolites and biochemical indices or undetectable microbiota in the 
feces of MCD-fed mice.
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-2316
g_Prevotellaceae_NK3B31_group, s_ Lactobacillus_murinus, and s_ Rikenella_microfu­
sus_DSM_15922 were negatively correlated with tyramine glucuronide, pantetheine 4 ′-
phosphate, and 9,12,13-TriHOME, and were positively correlated with coumarinate, 3-
carbamoyl-2-phenylpropionaldehyde, N-succinyl-L,L-2,6-diaminopimelate, daidzein, 4-
methyl-5-thiazoleethanol, homogentisic acid, and estriol, whereas the correlation 
between the relative abundance of g_ Tuzzerella, s_ Bifidobacterium_pseudolongum, 
s_Faecalibaculum_rodentium, and s_ Streptococcus_respiraculi and these 10 metabolites 
was reversed. A table was also constructed, which only retained the significantly 
changed factors after manual inspection by further removing non-human relative 
metabolite components, including the plant metabolites coumarinate and daidzein ( Fig. 
8B). The red factors were upregulated in or were specific for MCD-fed mice, whereas the 
blue ones were downregulated or undetectable, collectively showing the 26 biomarkers 
characterizing the intestinal flora and intestinal metabolites of non-obese NAFLD.
DISCUSSION
A comprehensive analysis of MCD-induced lean NAFLD was performed to evaluate the 
intestinal flora and intestinal metabolites. An MCD diet is widely used primarily because 
it reduces methyl donors and induces the full spectrum of NAFLD, which ranges from 
steatosis to liver fibrosis. Despite that, detailed reports on this model, which are often 
used as an auxiliary approach for verifications, are not available. Therefore, a more 
in-depth study of this animal model, as undertaken in this study, might potentially 
improve the understanding of the pathological mechanism regulating non-obese or lean 
NAFLD and contribute to the development of new drugs. Non-obese or lean-NAFLD 
disease and its models have unique characteristics that should not be ignored in contrast 
to the obese NAFLD model that has received considerable attention.
The levels of TG, FFA, and total fat in the liver were increased in lean mice with 
NAFLD, which were similar to the values reported for obese individuals with NAFLD ( 17). 
However, the lean-NAFLD mice showed decreased levels of serum TG, TC, HDL, LDL, and 
FFA (Fig. 2A through E). Although a significant difference in ALT and AST levels was found 
between the NC and MCD-fed groups, the levels of both were within the normal range 
(18), indicating that routine physical serum tests are unlikely to detect non-obese or 
lean NAFLD. Furthermore, NAFLD induced by the MCD diet causes lipid disorders, and 
drug treatment may result in several patterns of lipid homeostasis balance in the body. 
Although the effects of drug therapy on liver lipid content in MCD-induced NAFLD were 
evaluated in this study ( 19–21), the changes in serum lipid content have been rarely 
reported (22), probably because these changes are difficult to identify. Indeed, the same 
problem was encountered when this model was used for drug screening in our project 
(data not shown). Therefore, we hope that a further understanding of the model might 
aid in a more comprehensive pharmacodynamic analysis.
MCD-induced inflammation in mice with NAFLD has been reported in some detail 
(23). Our findings revealed that the levels of the biomarkers of inflammation such as 
TNF-α, IL-1 β, IL-6, and IL-10 ( Fig. 1F ) were consistent with those reported previously. 
However, a comprehensive presentation of the gut microbiota and its metabolites is not 
yet available. Thus, our first focus was the upregulation of specific metabolite markers 
(tyramine glucuronide; 9,12,13-TriHOME, and pantetheine 4 ′-phosphate) in MCD-fed 
mice. Tyramine glucuronide is a naturally occurring metabolite of tyramine generated in 
the liver by UDP glucanosyltransferase and is involved in glucuronidation, which is toxic 
to hepatocytes. An increase in tyramine glucuronide has been reported in rats subjected 
to chronic ethanol treatment ( 24). 9,12,13-TriHOME is a trihydroxyoctadecenoic acid 
metabolite of linoleic acid, one of the major fatty acids found in lipids. TriHOMEs are 
linoleic acid-derived lipid mediators; 9,10,13-TriHOME is upregulated in high-fat diet 
(HFD)-induced NAFLD and indicates dysfunction in lipid metabolism ( 25). We found that 
9,12,13-TriHOME was associated with MCD-induced NAFLD. Our findings are supported 
by the correlation of 9,12,13-TriHOME and high cholesterol in hypercholesterolemic 
rabbits ( 26). Pantetheine 4 ′-phosphate provides pantothenic acid for the acyl-carrier 
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-2317
protein in the fatty acid synthase complex ( 27). High levels of pantetheine 4 ′-phosphate 
may lead to lipid metabolic disorder characterized by an increase in the synthesis of 
fatty acid synthase, which may promote NAFLD development or NASH progression ( 28). 
The relative expressions of the five metabolites, 3-carbamoyl-2-phenylpropionaldehyde, 
N-succinyl-L,L-2,6-diaminopimelate, 4-methyl-5-thiazoleethanol, homogentisic acid, and 
estriol, were markedly downregulated in MCD-fed mouse stools compared with those 
of NC mice. 3-Carbamoyl-2-phenylpropionaldehyde, N-succinyl-L,L-2,6-diaminopimelate, 
and 4-methyl-5-thiazoleethanol are the metabolites found in or produced by Escherichia 
coli (Pubchem website). They are related to metabolites of hepatorenal toxicity resulting 
from high doses of certain traditional Chinese medicines ( 29, 30). Homogentisic acid is 
a dihydroxyphenylacetic acid having hydroxy substituents at the 2- and 5-positions. It 
plays a role as a human and plant metabolite (Pubchem website), and it is also known 
as melanic acid. The accumulation of homogentisic acid in patients with alkaptonuria is 
associated with the concomitant deposition of pyomelanin ( 31). Our experiments also 
revealed a decrease in estriol in male mice with NAFLD. Some reports ( 32–34) show 
that increased estrogen levels lead to fatty liver by inhibiting fatty acid oxidation in the 
liver, promoting fatty acid synthesis and damaging mitochondria. Estradiol levels in adult 
male patients with NAFLD were found to be significantly higher than those of individuals 
in the control group and significantly positively correlated with homeostatic model 
assessment for insulin resistance, suggesting that increased estrogen levels may also lead 
to fatty liver by promoting insulin resistance. However, on the other hand, low estrogen 
levels can promote fatty liver disease, as evidenced by aromatase gene–knockout mice 
being unable to synthesize endogenous estrogen, resulting in lipid deposition in the 
liver ( 35). Estrogen also plays a key role in the maintenance of sex-specific expression 
of liver lipid β-oxidase series genome and the maintenance of liver lipid homeostasis 
(36). Thus, the expression of the eight metabolites ( Fig. 8B) might indicate the specific 
characteristics of fecal metabolites in non-obese mice. These compounds associated with 
metabolic pathways, especially linoleic acid metabolism, might play a key role in the 
development of non-obese NAFLD.
Gut microbiota is the key to the treatment of NAFLD and other metabolic syndromes 
(37). The expression profiles of intestinal flora at the genus level were obtained based 
on relative abundance and LEfSe analysis with a relative abundance exceeding 1%. 
The MCD diet reduced microbial diversity, but individual species including g_Tuzzerella, 
s_Bifidobacterium_pseudolongum, s_Faecalibaculum_rodentium, and s_Streptococcus_res­
piraculi were still present at a significantly high relative abundance in the MFD diet-
induced model of non-obese NAFLD. Our results were consistent with those of the 
article reporting that g_ Tuzzerella was also predominant in the HFD-induced NAFLD 
group (38), suggesting it to be the key regulator in NAFLD progression. Bifidobacterium 
pseudolongum brings some benefits to individuals with obesity, such as TG reduction, by 
modulating gut microbiota in HFD-fed mice ( 39). In our study, the high abundance of 
Bifidobacterium pseudolongum in non-obese NAFLD might indicate its fat-reducing effect 
in the serum, which might be critical information for distinguishing between obese 
and non-obese NAFLDs. The abundance of s_ Faecalibaculum_rodentium is increased in 
obese NAFLD and closely and positively correlated with hepatic lipids and immune 
cells ( 40). This might also be a characteristic of non-obese NAFLD, more specifically 
related to hepatic fat deposition. Our results were consistent with those reported 
previously. In addition, the relative abundance of the other 13 species ( Fig. 8B ) was 
extremely low, and some of them were almost undetectable in the MCD group. They are 
also extremely important for the diagnosis of non-obese NAFLD: the genus Alistipes is 
significantly increased in healthy subjects than in individuals with NAFLD ( 41); Alloprevo­
tella is significantly decreased in the NAFLD treatment group ( 42); Bacteroides is more 
prevalent in gut dysbiosis and severe NAFLD ( 43); Candidatus saccharimonas is lower in 
mice with NAFL/NASH than in NC mice ( 42); the increase in the abundance of Dubo­
siella improves liver health by positively modulating the metabolite levels of dimethyl 
fumarate, lactitol, cafestol, and 4-hydroxyphenylacetic acid ( 44); Eubacterium siraeum 
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-2318
abundance is reduced in patients with insulin resistance and is linked to NAFLD, whereas 
in non-human primates, its abundance is positively correlated with HDL-c levels ( 45, 46); 
Eubacterium xylanophilum  is a potent butyrate-producing bacterium in the gut that is 
negatively associated with body weight and serum TC in HFD-fed mice ( 47); Lachnospira­
ceae NK4A136 group is higher in HFD-fed mice than in NC mice and comprises harmful 
bacteria ( 48); the abundance of the Monoglobus genera is relatively high in the normal 
diet group but low in the alcohol-induced mouse model of liver injury and in diabetic 
patients with a diagnosis of NAFLD ( 49, 50); Muribaculum is negatively correlated with 
short-chain fatty acids, which are important for intestinal integrity and are beneficial to 
the host, owing to their anti-obesity and anti-diabetic effects ( 51); the Prevotellaceae 
NK3B31 group is much more abundant in high (>5%)-liver fat groups than in low 
(<5%)-liver fat groups and serves as a gut microbiota biomarker of fatty liver disease ( 52); 
s_Lactobacillus murinus produces anti-bacterial compounds and exerts positive probiotic 
effects on host animals ( 53). Its abundance is reduced in patients with NAFLD having a 
body mass index ≥25 kg/m2 (54); s__Rikenella_microfusus_DSM_15922 is downregulated 
in diabetic animals and is regulated by Rosa roxburghii  fruit polyphenol extracts; this 
species is a positive regulator of hepatic lipid synthesis and gluconeogenesis ( 55). The 
above analyses reveal that the changed flora identified in this study was correlated with 
NAFLD or fatty liver diseases. These bacteria are characteristic and typical of non-obese 
NAFLD. Among them, s_ Bifidobacterium_pseudolongum, g_ Bacteroides, g_ Lachnospira­
ceae_NK4A136_group, and g_ Prevotellaceae_NK3B31_group might be useful in further 
distinguishing between non-obese and lean-NAFLD microbiota.
Conclusions
Fecal metabolomics was used for the identification of the key microbiota and 
the derived metabolites in non-obese NAFLD using MCD-induced male C57BL/6 J 
mice to establish a model of NAFLD. The high levels of tyramine glucuronide, 
9,12,13-TriHOME, and pantetheine 4 ′-phosphate and the low levels of 3-carba­
moyl-2-phenylpropionaldehyde, N-succinyl-L,L-2,6-diaminopimelate, 4-methyl-5-thiazo­
leethanol, homogentisic acid, and estriol might be useful biomarkers in the diagnosis 
of non-obese NAFLD. Among them, tyramine glucuronide, 9,12,13-TriHOME, and 
pantetheine 4 ′-phosphate, together with the predominant flora, including g_ Tuzzer­
ella, s_ Bifidobacterium pseudolongum , and s_ Faecalibaculum rodentium , were spe­
cific for non-obese mice with NAFLD and might be used as targets to identify 
drugs to treat non-obese NAFLD. From a holistic viewpoint, g_ Alistipes, g_ Allopre­
votella, g_ Bacteroides, g_ Candidatus_Saccharimonas, g_ Dubosiella, g_ Eubacterium_sir­
aeum_group, g_ Eubacterium_xylanophilum_group, g_ Lachnospiraceae_NK4A136_group, 
g_Monoglobus, g_ Muribaculum, g_ Prevotellaceae_NK3B31_group, s_ Lactobacillus_mur­
inus, and s_ Rikenella_microfusus_DSM_15922 might be important and distinctive 
components in non-obese NAFLD versus those in normal and obese fatty liver. Gut 
microbiota and the derived metabolites are central regulators of metabolic disorders 
including NAFLD. Thus, the analysis of gut microbiota and their metabolites might be an 
effective methodology to screen therapeutic agents and biomarkers for the prognosis 
and diagnosis of NAFLD, supporting human-associated results found in subjects with 
non-obese NAFLD. It is, therefore, particularly significant for individuals with non-obese 
NAFLD who need to be more actively monitored.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Prov­
ince of China (2021A1515011220 and 2023A1515010353), Administration of Tradi­
tional Chinese Medicine of Guangdong Province of China (20211008), Special Fund 
for Scientific Innovation Strategy-Construction of High-Level Academy of Agriculture 
Sciences (R2022PY-QY004 and R2018YJ-YB3002), and The Science and Technology Plan 
Project of Guangdong Province (2023B1212060038).
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-2319
W.Z.: roles/writing (original draft); W.C.: formal analysis and methodology, reviewing 
and editing, and investigation; J.L. and Z.H.: reviewing and revision; H.L.: data curation 
and validation; W.Z.: project administration and supervision.
AUTHOR AFFILIATIONS
1Guangdong Provincial Engineering and Technology Research Center for Tobacco 
Breeding and Comprehensive Utilization, Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement 
of Guangdong Province, Crops Research Institute, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural 
Sciences, Guangzhou, China
2Department of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, School of Medicine, Jinan 
University, Guangzhou, China
3Department of Radiation Oncology, Guangdong Provincial People's Hospital (Guang­
dong Academy of Medical Sciences), Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China
4Ningbo Psychiatric Hospital, Ningbo, China
AUTHOR ORCIDs
Wenji Zhang 
  http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1500-6627
Hui Lin 
  http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9785-2098
Wenjuan Zhang 
  http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2922-0640
FUNDING
Funder Grant(s) Author(s)
GDSTC | Natural Science Foundation of Guang­
dong Province (廣東省自然科學基金)
2021A1515011220 Wenjuan Zhang
GDSTC | Natural Science Foundation of Guang­
dong Province (廣東省自然科學基金)
2023A1515010353 Wenjuan Zhang
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Wenji Zhang, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing | Wenli Cheng, Data 
curation, Formal analysis, Methodology | JingHui Li, Data curation | Zhenrui Huang, Data 
curation | Wenjuan Zhang, Project administration, Supervision.
DATA AVAILABILITY
The data are available from the authors upon reasonable request. Raw sequence data 
of the microbiota have been deposited into National Center for Biotechnology Infor­
mation’s Sequence Read Archive under accession number PRJNA1064694. Raw liquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry data of the fecal metabolites have been 
made available on the MetaboLights database, under accession number MTBLS9365.
ETHICS APPROVAL
Animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee 
of Jinan University (no. 20230225-0009).
REFERENCES
1. Younossi ZM . 2019. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease - a global public 
health perspective. J Hepatol 70:531–544. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhep.
2018.10.033
2. Loomba R , Abraham M , Unalp A , Wilson L , Lavine J , Doo E , Bass NM , 
Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Clinical Research Network . 2012. 
Association between diabetes, family history of diabetes, and risk of 
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and fibrosis. Hepatology 56:943–951. https:
//doi.org/10.1002/hep.25772
3. Mantovani A , Scorletti E , Mosca A , Alisi A , Byrne CD , Targher G. 2020. 
Complications, morbidity and mortality of nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease. Metabolism 111S:154170. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.
2020.154170
4. Riazi K, Azhari H, Charette JH, Underwood FE, King JA, Afshar EE, Swain 
MG, Congly SE , Kaplan GG , Shaheen A-A . 2022. The prevalence and 
incidence of NAFLD worldwide: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol 7:851–861. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2468-
1253(22)00165-0
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-2320
5. Zhou F, Zhou J, Wang W, Zhang X‐J, Ji Y‐X, Zhang P, She Z‐G, Zhu L, 
Cai J, Li H. 2019. Unexpected rapid increase in the burden of NAFLD in 
China from 2008 to 2018: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Hepatology 70:1119–1133. https://doi.org/10.1002/hep.30702
6. Ye Q, Zou B, Yeo YH, Li J , Huang DQ , Wu Y, Yang H, Liu C , Kam LY, Tan 
XXE, Chien N, Trinh S, Henry L, Stave CD, Hosaka T, Cheung RC, Nguyen 
MH. 2020. Global prevalence, incidence, and outcomes of non-obese or 
lean non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol  5:739–752. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S2468-1253(20)30077-7
7. Kuchay MS , Martínez-Montoro JI , Choudhary NS , Fernández-García JC , 
Ramos-Molina B. 2021. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in lean and non-
obese individuals: current and future challenges. Biomedicines 9:10. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines9101346
8. Xu R, Pan J, Zhou W, Ji G, Dang Y. 2022. Recent advances in lean NAFLD. 
Biomed Pharmacother  153:113331. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopha.
2022.113331
9. Peng C , Stewart AG , Woodman OL , Ritchie RH , Qin CX . 2020. Non-
alcoholic steatohepatitis: a review of its mechanism, models and 
medical treatments. Front Pharmacol  11:603926. https://doi.org/10.
3389/fphar.2020.603926
10. Buzzetti E, Pinzani M, Tsochatzis EA. 2016. The multiple-hit pathogenesis 
of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Metabolism 65:1038–1048. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.metabol.2015.12.012
11. Stefan N , Häring H-U , Cusi K . 2019. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: 
causes, diagnosis, cardiometabolic consequences, and treatment 
strategies. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol  7:313–324. https://doi.org/10.
1016/S2213-8587(18)30154-2
12. Friedman SL , Neuschwander-Tetri BA , Rinella M , Sanyal AJ . 2018. 
Mechanisms of NAFLD development and therapeutic strategies. Nat 
Med 24:908–922. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41591-018-0104-9
13. He X, Ji G, Jia W, Li H. 2016. Gut microbiota and nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease: insights on mechanism and application of metabolomics. Int J 
Mol Sci 17:300. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms17030300
14. Yun Y, Kim H-N, Lee E, Ryu S , Chang Y, Shin H, Kim H-L, Kim TH, Yoo K, 
Kim HY . 2019. Fecal and blood microbiota profiles and presence of 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in obese versus lean subjects. PLoS ONE 
14:e0213692. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0213692
15. Duarte SMB, Stefano JT, Miele L, Ponziani FR, Souza-Basqueira M, Okada 
LSRR, de Barros Costa FG , Toda K , Mazo DFC , Sabino EC , Carrilho FJ , 
Gasbarrini A , Oliveira CP . 2018. Gut microbiome composition in lean 
patients with NASH is associated with liver damage independent of 
caloric intake: a prospective pilot study. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis 
28:369–384. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.numecd.2017.10.014
16. Wang B, Jiang X, Cao M, Ge J, Bao Q, Tang L, Chen Y, Li L. 2016. Altered 
fecal microbiota correlates with liver biochemistry in nonobese patients 
with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Sci Rep 6:32002. https://doi.org/10.
1038/srep32002
17. Yan G, Li S, Wen Y, Luo Y, Huang J, Chen B, Lv S, Chen L, He L, He M, Yang 
Q, Yu Z, Xiao W, Tang Y, Li W, Han J, Zhao F, Yu S, Kong F, Abbasi B, Yin H, 
Gu C. 2022. Characteristics of intestinal Microbiota in C57BL/6 mice with 
non-alcoholic fatty liver induced by high-fat diet. Front Microbiol 
13:1051200. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.1051200
18. Liu D, Wong CC, Zhou Y, Li C, Chen H, Ji F, Go MYY, Wang F, Su H, Wei H, 
Cai Z , Wong N , Wong VWS , Yu J . 2021. Squalene epoxidase induces 
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis via binding to carbonic anhydrase III and is 
a therapeutic target. Gastroenterology 160:2467–2482. https://doi.org/
10.1053/j.gastro.2021.02.051
19. Jian J, Nie M-T, Xiang Bu, Qian H, Yin C, Zhang X, Zhang M, Zhu X, Xie W-
F. 2022. Rifaximin ameliorates non-alcoholic steatohepatitis in mice 
through regulating gut microbiome-related bile acids. Front Pharmacol 
13:841132. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphar.2022.841132
20. Yang G, Jang JH, Kim SW, Han S-H, Ma K-H, Jang J-K, Kang HC, Cho Y-Y, 
Lee HS , Lee JY . 2020. Sweroside prevents non-alcoholic steatohepatitis 
by suppressing activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome. Int J Mol Sci 
21:2790. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms21082790
21. Chen J, Fan X, Zhou L, Gao X. 2016. Treatment with geraniol ameliorates 
methionine-choline-deficient diet-induced non-alcoholic steatohepati­
tis in rats. J Gastroenterol Hepatol  31:1357–1365. https://doi.org/10.
1111/jgh.13272
22. Sámano-Hernández L , Fierro R , Marchal A , Guéant J-L , González-
Márquez H , Guéant-Rodríguez R-M . 2021. Beneficial and deleterious 
effects of sitagliptin on a methionine/choline-deficient diet-induced 
steatohepatitis in rats. Biochimie 181:240–248. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biochi.2020.12.004
23. Matthews DR, Li H, Zhou J, Li Q, Glaser S, Francis H, Alpini G, Wu C. 2021. 
Methionine- and choline-deficient diet-induced nonalcoholic 
steatohepatitis is associated with increased intestinal inflammation. Am 
J Pathol 191:1743–1753. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajpath.2021.06.010
24. Sakallioglu IT , Tripp B , Kubik J , Casey CA , Thomes P , Powers R . 2022. 
Multiomics approach captures hepatic metabolic network altered by 
chronic ethanol administration. Biology (Basel) 12:28. https://doi.org/10.
3390/biology12010028
25. Xu Y , Han J , Dong J , Fan X, Cai Y , Li J , Wang T, Zhou J , Shang J . 2019. 
Metabolomics characterizes the effects and mechanisms of quercetin in 
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease development. Int J Mol Sci  20:1220. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20051220
26. Bojic LA, McLaren DG, Harms AC, Hankemeier T, Dane A, Wang S-P, Rosa 
R, Previs SF, Johns DG , Castro-Perez JM. 2016. Quantitative profiling of 
oxylipins in plasma and atherosclerotic plaques of hypercholesterolemic 
rabbits. Anal Bioanal Chem 408:97–105. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00216-
015-9105-4
27. Sobhy C . 1979. Regulation of fatty acid synthetase activity. The 4'-
phosphopantetheine hydrolase of rat liver. J Biol Chem  254:8561–8566. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0021-9258(19)86929-6
28. Esler WP , Bence KK . 2019. Metabolic targets in nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol  8:247–267. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jcmgh.2019.04.007
29. Zhang Y, Liu L, Feng M, Wu H, Dai Y, Jia Z, Fang C, Liu M, Yan X, Zhu M, 
Huang B , Qu B , Xiao H . 2022. Discovery of hepatotoxic equivalent 
markers and mechanism of Polygonum multiflorum Thunb. by 
metabolomics coupled with molecular docking. Molecules 28:25. https:/
/doi.org/10.3390/molecules28010025
30. Wurihan, Aodungerle, Bilige, Lili, Sirguleng, Aduqinfu, Bai M . 2022. 
Metabonomics study of liver and kidney subacute toxicity induced by 
garidi-5 in rats. Chin Herb Med  14:422–431. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
chmed.2022.05.003
31. Galeb HA, Lamantia A, Robson A, König K, Eichhorn J, Baldock SJ, Ashton 
MD, Baum JV, Mort RL, Robinson BJ, Schacher FH, Chechik V, Taylor AM, 
Hardy JG . 2022. The polymerization of homogentisic acid in vitro  as a 
model for pyomelanin formation. Macromol Chem Phys  223:2100489. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/macp.202100489
32. Zhang G, Nie L. 2004. Leptin and estrogen in pathogenesis of nonalco­
holic fatty liver disease in male adults. Shijie Huaren Xiaohua Zazhi 
12:139–141.
33. O’Sullivan AJ , Martin A , Brown MA . 2001. Efficient fat storage in 
premenopausal women and in early pregnancy: a role for estrogen. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab  86:4951–4956. https://doi.org/10.1210/jcem.86.
10.7941
34. Grimbert S , Fisch C, Deschamps D , Berson A , Fromenty B, Feldmann G, 
Pessayre D . 1995. Effects of female sex hormones on mitochondria: 
possible role in acute fatty liver of pregnancy. Am J Physiol  268:G107–
G115. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpgi.1995.268.1.G107
35. Amano A, Kondo Y, Noda Y, Ohta M, Kawanishi N, Machida S, Mitsuhashi 
K, Senmaru T, Fukui M, Takaoka O, Mori T, Kitawaki J, Ono M, Saibara T, 
Obayashi H , Ishigami A . 2017. Abnormal lipid/lipoprotein metabolism 
and high plasma testosterone levels in male but not female aromatase-
knockout mice. Arch Biochem Biophys  622:47–58. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.abb.2017.03.007
36. Nemoto Y, Toda K, Ono M, Fujikawa-Adachi K, Saibara T, Onishi S, Enzan 
H, Okada T, Shizuta Y. 2000. Altered expression of fatty acid-metaboliz­
ing enzymes in aromatase-deficient mice. J Clin Invest  105:1819–1825. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI9575
37. Bao Y, Han X, Liu D, Tan Z, Deng Y. 2022. Gut microbiota: the key to the 
treatment of metabolic syndrome in traditional Chinese medicine - a 
case study of diabetes and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Front 
Immunol 13:1072376. https://doi.org/10.3389/fimmu.2022.1072376
38. Hu M, Zhang L, Ruan Z, Han P, Yu Y. 2021. The regulatory effects of citrus 
peel powder on liver metabolites and gut flora in mice with non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Foods 10:3022. https://doi.org/10.
3390/foods10123022
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-2321
39. Bo T-B , Wen J , Zhao Y-C , Tian S-J , Zhang X-Y , Wang D-H . 2020. 
Bifidobacterium pseudolongum  reduces triglycerides by modulating gut 
microbiota in mice fed high-fat food. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 
198:105602. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsbmb.2020.105602
40. Lee J-E , Lee SM , Jung J . 2020. Integrated omics analysis unraveled the 
microbiome-mediated effects of Yijin-Tang on hepatosteatosis and 
insulin resistance in obese mouse. Phytomedicine 79:153354. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.phymed.2020.153354
41. Jiang W , Wu N , Wang X, Chi Y , Zhang Y , Qiu X , Hu Y , Li J , Liu Y . 2015. 
Dysbiosis gut microbiota associated with inflammation and impaired 
mucosal immune function in intestine of humans with non-alcoholic 
fatty liver disease. Sci Rep 5:8096. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep08096
42. Li C, Cui L, Wang X, Yan Zi, Wang S, Zheng Y. 2020. Using intestinal flora 
to distinguish non-alcoholic steatohepatitis from non-alcoholic fatty 
liver. J Int Med Res  48:030006052097812. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0300060520978122
43. Xia Y , Ren M , Yang J , Cai C , Cheng W , Zhou X , Lu D , Ji F . 2022. Gut 
microbiome and microbial metabolites in NAFLD and after bariatric 
surgery: correlation and causality. Front Microbiol  13:1003755. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.1003755
44. Zhang Q , Xing W , Wang Q , Tang Z, Wang Y , Gao W . 2022. Gut micro­
biota-mitochondrial inter-talk in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Front 
Nutr 9:934113. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnut.2022.934113
45. Pedersen HK, Gudmundsdottir V , Nielsen HB , Hyotylainen T , Nielsen T , 
Jensen B, Forslund K, Hildebrand F, Prifti E, Falony G, et al. 2016. Human 
gut microbes impact host serum metabolome and insulin sensitivity. 
Nature 535:376–381. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature18646
46. Stols-Gonçalves D, Mak AL, Madsen MS, van der Vossen EWJ, Bruinstroop 
E, Henneman P , Mol F , Scheithauer TPM , Smits L , Witjes J , Meijnikman 
AS, Verheij J , Nieuwdorp M , Holleboom AG , Levin E . 2023. Faecal 
microbiota transplantation affects liver DNA methylation in non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease: a multi-omics approach. Gut Microbes 
15:2223330. https://doi.org/10.1080/19490976.2023.2223330
47. Wei J, Zhao Y, Zhou C, Zhao Q, Zhong H, Zhu X, Fu T, Pan L, Shang Q, Yu 
G. 2021. Dietary polysaccharide from Enteromorpha clathrata attenuates 
obesity and increases the intestinal abundance of butyrate-producing 
bacterium, Eubacterium xylanophilum , in mice fed a high-fat diet. 
Polymers 13:3286. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13193286
48. Hu H , Lin A , Kong M , Yao X, Yin M , Xia H , Ma J , Liu H . 2020. Intestinal 
microbiome and NAFLD: molecular insights and therapeutic perspec­
tives. J Gastroenterol  55:142–158. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00535-019-
01649-8
49. Forlano R , Mullish B , Martinez-Gili L , Blanco JM , Liu T , Triantafyllou E , 
Skinner C , Thursz M , Marchesi J , Manousou P . 2022. Factors associated 
with increased gut permeability and severity of liver disease in diabetic 
patients with NAFLD. J Hepatol  77:S674–S675. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0168-8278(22)01666-X
50. Kim J, Ahn SW, Kim JY, Whon TW, Lim SK, Ryu BH, Han NS, Choi H-J, Roh 
SW, Lee SH . 2022. Probiotic Lactobacilli ameliorate alcohol-induced 
hepatic damage via gut microbial alteration. Front Microbiol  13:13. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2022.869250
51. Liu L, Fu Q, Li T, Shao K, Zhu X, Cong Y, Zhao X. 2022. Gut microbiota and 
butyrate contribute to nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in premenopause 
due to estrogen deficiency. PLoS ONE  17:e0262855. https://doi.org/10.
1371/journal.pone.0262855
52. Driuchina A , Hintikka J , Lehtonen M , Keski-Rahkonen P , O’Connell T , 
Juvonen R, Kuula J , Hakkarainen A , Laukkanen JA , Mäkinen E , Lensu S, 
Pietiläinen KH, Pekkala S. 2023. Identification of gut microbial lysine and 
histidine degradation and CYP-dependent metabolites as biomarkers of 
fatty liver disease. mBio 14:e0266322. https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.
02663-22
53. Toju H, Abe MS, Ishii C, Hori Y, Fujita H, Fukuda S. 2020. Scoring species 
for synthetic community design: network analyses of functional core 
microbiomes. Front Microbiol  11:1361. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.
2020.01361
54. Lee NU, Shin MJ, Youn GS, Yoon SJ, Choi YR, Kim HS , Gupta H, Han SH, 
Kim BK , Lee DY , Park TS , Sung H , Kim BY , Suk KT . 2021. Lactobacillus 
attenuates progression of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease by lowering 
cholesterol and steatosis. Clin Mol Hepatol  27:110–124. https://doi.org/
10.3350/cmh.2020.0125
55. Wang H, Chen Z, Wang M, Long N, Ren T, Chen C, Dai X, Yang S, Tan S. 
2022. The effect of polyphenol extract from Rosa roxburghii  fruit on 
plasma metabolome and gut microbiota in type 2 diabetic mice. Foods 
11:1747. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods11121747
Research Article mSystems
March 2024  Volume 9  Issue 3 10.1128/msystems.01027-2322