Vol.:(0123456789)
Pharmaceutical Research (2025) 42:123–135 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11095-024-03791-2
ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
A Model‑Based Evaluation of Noninvasive Biomarkers to Reflect 
Histological Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease Scores
Iris K. Minichmayr1,2 · Elodie L. Plan2,4  · Benjamin Weber3,5 · Sebastian Ueckert2,6
Received: 25 July 2024 / Accepted: 24 October 2024 / Published online: 19 December 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Background Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) comprises multiple heterogeneous pathophysiological conditions 
commonly evaluated by suboptimal liver biopsies. This study aimed to elucidate the role of 13 diverse histological liver 
scores in assessing NAFLD disease activity using an in silico pharmacometric model-based approach. We further sought to 
investigate various noninvasive patient characteristics for their ability to reflect all 13 histological scores and the NAFLD 
activity score (NAS).
Methods A histological liver score model was built upon 13 biopsy-based pathological features (binary and categorical 
scores) from the extensive NASH-CRN (Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis-Clinical Research Network) observational NAFLD 
Database study (n = 914 adults) using the concept of item response theory. The impact of 69 noninvasive biomarkers poten-
tially reflecting NAFLD activity was quantitatively described across the entire spectrum of all 13 histological scores.
Results The model suggested that four different disease facets underlie the cardinal NAFLD features (steatosis, inflamma-
tion, hepatocellular ballooning (= NAS); fibrosis; highest correlations:  corrballooning-fibrosis = 0.69/corrinflammation-ballooning = 0.62/
corrsteatosis-inflammation  = 0.60). The 13 histological liver scores were best described by contrasting noninvasive biomarkers: 
Age and platelets best reflected the fibrosis score, while alanine and aspartate aminotransferase best described the NAS, with 
diverging contributions of the three individual NAS components to the results of the overall NAS.
Conclusions An in silico histological liver score model allowed to simultaneously quantitatively analyze 13 features beyond 
NAS and fibrosis, characterizing different disease facets underlying NAFLD and revealing the contrasting ability of 69 
noninvasive biomarkers to reflect the diverse histological (sub-)scores.
Keywords histological liver scores · item response theory · liver biopsy · model · nonalcoholic fatty liver disease
The authors shared co-first or co-second authorship for this paper. 
Delacôte C, Lassailly G Yngman G, Bjugård Nyberg H Hardy T, 
Wonders K Forlano R, Mullish BH, Giannakeas N.
 * Elodie L. Plan 
 elodie.plan@farmaci.uu.se; elodie.plan@pharmetheus.com
 Iris K. Minichmayr 
 iris.minichmayr@meduniwien.ac.at; 
iris.minichmayr@farmaci.uu.se
 Benjamin Weber 
 bmwb@novonordisk.com; 
benjamin.weber@boehringer-ingelheim.com
 Sebastian Ueckert 
 sebastian.ueckert@farmaci.uu.se; 
sebastian.ueckert@ribosure.com
1 Present Address: Department of Clinical Pharmacology, 
Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
2 Department of Pharmacy, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden
3 Translational Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology, 
Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Ridgefield, CT, 
USA
4 Present Address: Pharmetheus, Uppsala, Sweden
5 Present Address: Global Translation, Novo Nordisk A/S, 
Måløv, Denmark
6 Present Address: Ribocure, Mölndal, Sweden
124 Pharmaceutical Research (2025) 42:123–135
Introduction
Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), including its 
progressive subtype nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), 
has attained the proportions of a global non‐communicable 
metabolic pandemic, not least fueled by the staggering 
parallel rise in obesity and metabolic syndrome world-
wide [1]. The increasing clinical and economic burden of 
NAFLD is aggravated by the lack of approved drug treat-
ments for this disease and has prompted intensive research 
and numerous studies in a concerted effort to address the 
unmet medical need of NAFLD. The development of novel 
therapies, however, has been challenged by the complex 
‘multi-hit’ pathophysiology of NAFLD, inconsistent diag-
nostic criteria, and a lack of clarity about appropriate treat-
ment endpoints [2 , 3].
To date, NAFLD and NASH diagnoses and trial end-
points have heavily relied on liver biopsies. NAFLD is 
defined as hepatic fatty infiltration (i.e. steatosis) of at 
least 5% in biopsy specimens, but encompasses an entire 
spectrum of disorders associated with diverse lesions and 
highly variable pathological manifestations, ranging from 
simple steatosis (nonalcoholic fatty liver: NAFL) to ste-
atohepatitis (NASH) and cirrhosis [1 , 4]. In addition to 
steatosis, NASH is histologically characterized inter alia  
by the presence of hepatocellular ballooning as well as 
lobular inflammation and may also involve liver fibrosis 
[4]. Due to the wide variation also within the diagnosis of 
NASH and the dynamic nature of NAFLD, experts in the 
field have recommended to move away from categorizing 
NAFLD patients into two groups (NASH/non-NASH) and 
to instead view NAFLD and individual histopathologic 
features in the context of a spectrum [5 ].
To evaluate the severity of NAFLD and different sin-
gle pathological features, a histological scoring system 
has been developed by the NASH Clinical Research Net-
work (NASH-CRN) [6 ]. The scoring system comprises 14 
histological features, each graded (e.g. steatosis: 0–3) or 
recorded as present or absent. The sum of the scores for 
steatosis (0–3), lobular inflammation (0–3) and hepatocel-
lular ballooning (0–2) is referred to as NAFLD activity 
score (NAS, 0–8) and constitutes a widely, often isolat-
edly assessed, histological key metric of NAFLD [6 ]. The 
(draft) guidance for industry on NASH with liver fibrosis 
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration includes (i) 
the NAS score as a histological efficacy endpoint, and (ii) 
the fibrosis stage (score 0–4), which to date is considered 
the major prognostic determinant of clinical outcome of 
NAFLD [7 ]. A multitude of clinical trials have assessed 
one or more histological features of the NASH-CRN scor -
ing system to judge NAFLD severity and/or therapeutic 
success or to compare patient groups at different ends of 
one score [8 –10]. For example, the histological scoring 
system served as the foundation of evaluating liver biop-
sies in the multi-center observational NAFLD Database 
study, which forms part of the publicly available NIDDK 
(National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney 
Diseases) NAFLD Adult Database [10].
Although liver biopsies and derived activity scores like 
NAS are still considered the gold standard for diagnosing 
and assessing NAFLD and NASH–also in clinical trials–, 
this approach suffers from various limitations including 
its invasiveness, associated potential morbidity and life-
threatening complications, poor patient acceptance, limited 
repeatability, technical hurdles including sampling variabil-
ity and/or error, assessor variability and costs. These draw -
backs consequently entail implications for clinical trials, e.g. 
biopsy-based screening and inclusion criteria or treatment 
endpoints [11]. To facilitate the assessment of NAFLD and 
consequently clinical trials, and to at the same time reduce 
harm for patients, noninvasive biomarkers are urgently 
required and efforts for their identification are strongly 
encouraged by regulatory authorities.
Diverse previous studies have investigated potential rela-
tionships between biopsy-based features and noninvasive 
clinical variables. These analyses generally focused on sin-
gle histological scores (e.g. fibrosis) or even one specific 
part of a score (e.g. advanced fibrosis, score 2–4 [12]), and 
on one or few selected patient characteristics (e.g. diabetes 
[13]). Furthermore, most commonly, traditional statistical 
tests or group-wise comparisons between specific patient 
groups have been performed to show the presence/absence 
of a significant association between noninvasive and histo-
logical markers (e.g. a difference in fibrosis between patients 
with different age or sex), thus providing limited quantita-
tive information [8, 10]. To analyze multiple clinical scores 
simultaneously, modelling techniques have proven useful, 
although their application to NAFLD data has been scarce 
and again limited to single histological scores and their pro-
gression over time [14].
Item response theory (IRT) is a statistical methodol-
ogy–originally developed in the field of psychometrics to 
analyze educational assessments–that has increasingly been 
applied to clinical scores quantifying the intensity of dif-
ferent facets of a disease [15]. The fundamental basis of 
IRT are mathematical models that relate the probability of 
the outcome of each item in an assessment (e.g. a histo-
logical liver score) to one or more so-called latent variables, 
which capture particular disease aspects (e.g. underlying 
NAFLD) manifesting in the observed questionnaire-based 
scores. The strength of IRT-based analyses lies in the mod-
els’ inherent ability to combine and implicitly weigh the 
various discrete observations to yield enriched latent vari-
ables on a more informative interval scale. The number of 
latent variables needed to represent the data relates to the 
125Pharmaceutical Research (2025) 42:123–135 
number of constructs, i.e. disease facets, measured by the 
clinical score-based assessments. The value of applying 
IRT to healthcare-related measures has been increasingly 
recognized, as witnessed by an ever-increasing number of 
therapeutic fields (e.g. Parkinson’s disease, schizophrenia, 
multiple sclerosis) [15].
The current study aimed to leverage the benefits of IRT to 
enhance the understanding of the disease aspects underlying 
NAFLD by quantitatively assessing the role of diverse indi-
vidual and composite scores of the NASH-CRN liver scor -
ing system–including the NAS score and its components–in 
determining NAFLD disease activity. In this setting, an 
item represents a histological liver biopsy feature that will 
be related to latent variables, with each one capturing a par-
ticular aspect underlying NAFLD. Furthermore, we sought 
to analyze the correlation of these latent variables with a 
large set of noninvasive biomarkers using a model-based 
approach, with the goal to identify the noninvasive patient 
characteristics best reflecting the full spectrum of the NAS, 
fibrosis and further histological scores.
Methods
Study Population and Data
The study population originated from the public NIDDK 
NAFLD Adult database, more specifically, from the obser -
vational NAFLD Database study, which was undertaken by 
the NASH-CRN and enrolled patients with histologically 
proven or suspected NAFLD at nine U.S. medical centers 
between 2004 and 2009 [10, 16]. Data from the Nonalco-
holic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) Adult Database reported 
here are available for request at the NIDDK Central Reposi-
tory (NIDDK-CR) website, Resources for Research (R4R, 
https:// repos itory. niddk. nih. gov). All patients enrolled in 
the NASH-CRN provided written informed consent before 
data collection. The institutional review board of each par -
ticipating clinical center and a data safety monitoring board 
approved the study protocol, consent statements and data 
collection forms.
Data of 914 adult patients were considered, including 
biopsy information (1 sample/ individual) as well as an 
abundance of (n = 69) diverse, scientifically plausible non-
invasive patient characteristics, covering (among others) 
demographic information (e.g. sex), routine clinical and 
laboratory variables or body size measures (Table  I). The 
raw data containing the relevant histological and biomarker 
information had been recorded using separate forms (e.g. 
laboratory results form or physical examination form), often 
on different days. In case more than one biopsy was avail-
able for an individual, the specimen with the smallest time 
difference to the closest measurement of the liver function 
tests (‘liver panel’) was considered. For all other biomarkers, 
the nearest measurement to the selected biopsy was chosen 
or handled as missing in case the temporal distance between 
biopsy and biomarker exceeded one year. Individuals with-
out biopsy information were disregarded.
Histological Liver Score Model
To quantitatively describe the spectrum of NAFLD sever -
ity, a histological liver score model following the item 
response theory paradigm was developed based on biopsy 
assessments, which had been conducted by the NASH-CRN 
Pathology Committee according to the NASH-CRN histol-
ogy scoring system. The scoring system comprised five his-
tological features with ordered score categories (steatosis 
and lobular inflammation: 0–3; hepatocellular ballooning 
and portal chronic inflammation: 0–2; fibrosis: 0–4), eight 
features recorded as absent or present (0 or 1: microvesicular 
steatosis, microgranulomas, large lipogranulomas, acidophil 
bodies, pigmented macrophages, megamitochondria, Mal -
lory's hyaline, glycogen nuclei) and one qualitative feature 
describing the location of a lesion [6 ]. For analysis, lev -
els 1a, 1b and 1c of the fibrosis score were summarized 
(score = 1).
All 13 ordered and binary histological subscores, reflect-
ing and quantifying the grade of different pathological 
lesions of NAFLD as manifestations of heterogeneous 
underlying disease aspects, were jointly integrated in an item 
response theory model with multiple latent variables. For 
each histological criterion of liver assessment (i.e. item), an 
item model mapped the subject-specific latent variable val-
ues to response probabilities in accordance with the nature 
of the outcome (two-parameter logit models for binary items 
and graded-response models for ordered categorical items 
[15]). Histological liver score models assuming one versus  
more underlying disease aspects were investigated, together 
with potential correlations, which represent a core feature of 
a multidimensional item response theory models. In addi-
tion, the results from an exploratory analysis, freely estimat-
ing latent variable-item associations, served as a guide to 
determine the structure of the final model. Model parameters 
reflected different qualities of the histological subscores, 
including their sensitivity to changes of the disease (i.e. 
their ability to differentiate between low and high disease 
intensity) and in a wider sense their informativeness for the 
assessment of NAFLD severity. For further details on the 
concepts and assumptions of item response theory models, 
the reader is referred to pertinent expert information [15].
Modelling activities were conducted using R3.6.1 and 
the R package mirt (multidimensional item response theory) 
using the MHRM (Metropolis–Hastings Robbins-Monro) 
estimation method [17]. Model evaluation and discrimina-
tion were performed by numerical and visual diagnostics, 
126 Pharmaceutical Research (2025) 42:123–135
Table I  Noninvasive Biomarkers and Clinical Characteristics of the Investigated Population
Biomarker/clinical characteristic Unit Mediana /
Proportionb
P2.5-P97.5
a Influential on NAS 
and/or fibrosis 
 scorec
General information n.i
 Age y 51.3 23.5–69.0 FIB
 Sex % male 35.8 n.a n.i
 Ethnicity % Hispanic/latino 10.1 n.a n.i
 Family history of NAFLD,  NASH4 % yes 8.00 n.a n.i
 Family history of  cirrhosisd % yes 9.36 n.a n.i
 Family history of  diabetesd % yes 57.6 n.a n.i
 Smoking history % never smoked 49.7 n.a n.i
 Regular  smokere % yes 79.5 n.a n.i
 Diabetesf % yes 38.1 n.a FIB
  Ascitesf % yes 1.31 n.a n.i
 Portal hypertensionf % yes 3.61 n.a FIB
 Polycystic ovary  syndromef % yes 6.57 n.a n.i
 Antihyperlipidemic  medication7 % yes 37.0 n.a n.i
 Cardiovascular or antihypertensive medicationg % yes 53.4 n.a FIB
Laboratory results
 Bilirubin (direct) mg/dL 0.1 0–0.4 FIB
 Bilirubin (total) mg/dL 0.7 0.2–2 n.i
 Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) U/L 55.5 16–214 NAS
 Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) U/L 40.5 16–144 NAS, FIB
 AST/ALT 0.77 0.39–1.65 FIB
 Alkaline phosphatase U/L 82 44–187 FIB
 Gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) U/L 49 15–317 FIB
 Total protein g/dL 7.2 6.1–8.5 n.i
 Albumin g/dL 4.2 3.4–5 n.i
 Prothrombin time sec 11.7 8.9–14.9 n.i
 International normalised ratio (INR) 1 0.9–1.3 FIB
 α-fetoprotein ng/mL 3.6 1.3–13.2 FIB
 Triglycerides mg/dL 151 52.3–456 n.i
 Total cholesterol mg/dL 190 119–286 FIB
 HDL cholesterol mg/dL 42 25–73.8 n.i
 LDL cholesterol mg/dL 116 50–195 n.i
 Serum glucose mg/dL 98 70.2–235 n.i
 Serum insulin µU/mL 17.6 4.17–74.1 FIB
 HbA1c % 5.8 4.7–10.1 FIB
 Homeostatic model assessment for insulin resistance 
(HOMA-IR)
4.36 1.02–23.2 FIB
 Metabolic  syndromeh % yes 73.4 n.a n.i
 Hemoglobin g/dL 14.2 11.2–17.3 FIB
 Hematocrit % 42 34.3–50 FIB
 White blood cells (WBC) 109 cells/L 6.6 3.8–11.9 n.i
 Platelet count cells/µL 239000 92000–396500 FIB
 Sodium mEq/L 140 135–145 n.i
 Potassium mEq/L 4.1 3.4–4.9 n.i
 Chloride mEq/L 103 97–109 n.i
 Bicarbonate mEq/L 27 21–31 n.i
 Calcium mg/dL 9.4 8.6–10.3 n.i
 Phosphate mg/dL 3.6 2.5–4.7 n.i
127Pharmaceutical Research (2025) 42:123–135 
including simulation-based assessments (e.g. n = 500 simu-
lations to compare observed and simulated correlations 
between item responses, mirror plots).
Assessment of Noninvasive Biomarkers
To identify the noninvasive clinical biomarkers and other 
patient characteristics best reflecting the biopsy-based dis-
ease scores (e.g. NAS) and thus NAFLD activity, correla-
tions between the latent variables and the biomarker obser -
vations were estimated using a model-based approach. 
This full random effects modelling approach has previ-
ously proven useful in situations with plentiful, potentially 
correlated covariates and/or missing values [18]. Such 
models simultaneously capture the relationships among 
latent variables (i.e., between the different aspects of 
NAFLD), among multiple noninvasive biomarkers, and, 
most importantly, between the latent variables and the 
noninvasive biomarkers. In brief, the distribution of the 
biomarkers was modelled jointly as random effects and the 
impact on all latent variables was quantified by estimating 
a correlation matrix. For example, a high impact of a bio-
marker on a given latent variable translates to a high abso-
lute value of the corresponding correlation. Furthermore, 
the correlation is positive when a high biomarker value is 
associated with a high disease activity and negative for 
an inverse relationship. A non-parametric bootstrap was 
used to obtain the imprecision of the estimated correla-
tions (n  = 200 re-sampled datasets).
Table I  (continued)
Biomarker/clinical characteristic Unit Mediana /
Proportionb
P2.5-P97.5
a Influential on NAS 
and/or fibrosis 
 scorec
 Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) mg/dL 13 6–24 n.i
 Creatinine mg/dL 0.8 0.5–1.3 n.i
 Uric acid mg/dL 5.8 3.4–9 n.i
 Iron μg/dL 86 35–168 n.i
 Ferritin ng/mL 140 16–898 n.i
 Total iron binding capacity μg/dL 370 247–520 n.i
 α-1 antitrypsin mg/dL 143 81.9–214 FIB
 Antinuclear antibody (ANA) % positive 24.1 n.a n.i
 Antismooth muscle antibody (ASMA) % positive 15.8 n.a n.i
 Antimitochondrial antibody (AMA) % positive 1.33 n.a n.i
 Thyroid stimulating hormone μU/mL 1.75 0.28–5.86 n.i
Physical examination
 Weight kg 95.0 63–139 n.i
 Height cm 166 151–188 n.i
 BMI kg/m2 33.7 24.8–48.5 n.i
 Waist circumference cm 108 85.3–135 n.i
 Hip circumference cm 115 95.0–146 n.i
 Waist/hip ratio 0.94 0.79–1.09 n.i
 Mid-upper arm circumference cm 35.6 27.1–46.9 n.i
 Skin fold mm 33 10.6–69.8 n.i
 Blood pressure, systolic mmHg 131 105–163 n.i
 Blood pressure, diastolic mmHg 76 56–96.7 n.i
 Resting radial pulse beats/min 74 53–102 n.i
 Respiratory rate breaths/min 17 14–24 n.i
 Temperature centigrade 36.6 35.7–37.3 n.i
a for continuous covariates; bfor categorical covariates; ccovariates with 2.5 th-97.5th range covering ≥ 25% of the expected score (NAFLD activ -
ity score NAS or fibrosis score FIB; marked in bold); n.i. not influential according to criterion stated in c; n.a. not applicable; percentages refer 
to total respondents (patients with missing values or answers not considered); dAny of the patient’s first-degree relatives (parent, brother, sister, 
child) has fatty liver disease (NAFLD, NASH) / cirrhosis / diabetes (type 1 or type 2; percentage is based on patients who definitely knew); 
eRegular smoking of cigarettes defined as smoking ≥ 20 packs of cigarettes in a lifetime or ≥ 1 cigarette a day for one year; fDiabetes: patient has 
been diagnosed with and treated for diabetes 1 or 2 (diabetes 1: 0.55%) / ascites / portal hypertension / polycystic ovary syndrome previously. 
gPatient has taken antihyperlipidemic medications / cardiovascular or antihypertensive medications in the past six months. hMetabolic syndrome 
was defined according to IDF (International Diabetes Federation) criteria
128 Pharmaceutical Research (2025) 42:123–135
The expected histological scores (e.g. NAS and fibrosis) 
were calculated conditional on the lower and upper ‘end’ 
of the continuous covariates (i.e. 2.5 th-97.5th percentile) or 
for different groups of categorical covariates. Ideally, the 
expected histological scores given these covariate ‘extremes’ 
would span the full range of the score (e.g. 0–8 rather than 
3–5 in case of the NAS score). The impact of relevant, pre-
dictive biomarkers was not merely investigated for the com-
posite NAS score, but also singly for the subscores of its 
elements (steatosis, inflammation, ballooning), the fibrosis 
score, as well as all nine residual histological characteristics 
(items).
The estimation of the correlation between latent variables 
and biomarkers as well as the non-parametric bootstrap were 
performed using NONMEM7.4 (ICON Clinical Research 
LLC, Gaithersburg, MD) assisted by PsN 4.10.0 (https://  
uupha rmaco metri cs. github. io/ PsN). Calculations of associa-
tions between histological and noninvasive characteristics 
and visualization of results were accomplished in R3.6.1.
Results
Study Population and Data
The study population of 914 individuals spanned the full 
spectrum of liver fibrosis (0–4) and NAFLD (NAS 0–8) 
(Fig. 1 and S1, Online Resource). Furthermore, almost all 
possible compositions (i.e. proportions of steatosis/inflam-
mation/ballooning) resulting in the same specific NAS value 
were covered (Fig.  1). Frequencies of all grades of the 13 
histological liver scores are depicted in Fig. S1 (Online 
Resource). More than half (52.3%) of the patients had 
obtained a definite positive and 26.8% a definite negative 
diagnosis of NASH. Patients were as diverse with respect 
to the measured noninvasive characteristics and biomarkers 
as regarding their clinical NAFLD manifestation (Table  I). 
For example, patients displayed an age of 28.6–67.0 years 
 (P0.05-P0.95; median: 51.3 years), a total body weight of 
68.1–131 kg (median: 95.0 kg), aspartate aminotransferase 
(AST) values between 19.0–121 U/l (median: 40.5 U/l), and 
alanine aminotransferase (ALT) between 9–174 U/l (median: 
55.5 U/l). The proportion of missing values of the investi-
gated covariates was generally low (0–34.4%), except for 
α-fetoprotein (56.9%).
Histological Liver Score Model
The histological liver score model (Fig.  2; Table SI in 
the Online Resource) suggested five underlying disease 
aspects of NAFLD to have provoked the documented 
grades of the 13 histological features of interest. In more 
technical words, the model best described the data when 
accommodating five separate latent variables, i.e. four 
separate latent variables exclusively linked to each of the 
four cardinal features of NAFLD (steatosis, inflammation, 
ballooning and fibrosis), and additionally to the nine other 
histological features, and one latent variable merely cover -
ing the residual histological features (but none of the four 
cardinal features). For the latter features, the model involv -
ing the least assumptions performed best, i.e. allowing 
associations of the residual histological features with each 
latent variable. Assuming merely one disease construct 
underlying the histological scores (i.e. one single latent 
Fig. 1  Relative occurrence 
and composition of the NAS 
(NAFLD activity score) 
observed in the study popula-
tion, ordered by total NAS 
(increasing values from left to 
right) and, within one level, by 
the scores of the NAS elements 
steatosis – inflammation – bal-
looning (denoted on the x axis 
as steatosis_inflammation_bal-
looning). Colors of the bars 
and shaded/white areas mark 
different total NAS scores. The 
numbers at the top end of the 
plot represent the absolute count 
of specific NAS compositions 
(shown on the x axis) in the 
study population.

129Pharmaceutical Research (2025) 42:123–135 
variable) was not even sufficient to adequately describe 
the three components of the NAS score. Highest correla-
tion on the latent variable scale was identified between the 
disease aspects reflected by hepatocellular ballooning and 
fibrosis (69%; Fig.  3).
The model enabled to quantitatively assess the NAFLD 
disease status of each patient as well as the role of the diverse 
individual histological metrics in assessing NAFLD severity. 
Of the five ordered scores, hepatocellular ballooning best 
differentiated between low and high disease intensity and 
appeared most sensitive to changes of the underlying disease 
aspect. In other words, changes in the disease activity related 
to ballooning led to larger changes of the ballooning score 
compared to the other features and their underlying disease 
facet. Patients diagnosed with NASH expectedly tended to 
have higher disease activity.
Model evaluation indicated adequate performance of 
the developed multidimensional item response model by 
mimicking different metrics of the observed data (Fig.  4, 
Fig. S2 and S3 in the Online Resource). For instance, cor -
relations between item responses observed in the raw data 
could be replicated by stochastic simulations with the model, 
Fig. 2  Structure of the his-
tological liver score model. 
Elements in the circle represent 
the 13 items (histological liver 
scores) in the model. LV: Latent 
variable.
Fig. 3  Correlations between the latent disease aspects (represented by 
numbers in the figure). LV: Latent variable; color codes carry qualita-
tive rather than quantitative information.
130 Pharmaceutical Research (2025) 42:123–135
indicating good predictive performance (Fig. 4  and Fig. S2 
in the Online Resource).
Assessment of Noninvasive Biomarkers
Distinct noninvasive biomarkers were markedly correlated 
with different biopsy features quantifying NAFLD severity. 
The biomarkers that best reflected the NAS or fibrosis (sub-)
scores, i.e. with their 2.5 th-97.5th percentile (Table  I) cov-
ering at least 25% of the mean expected score range, are 
depicted in Fig.  5 and described below. Fig. S4 (Online 
Resource) indicates associations between these selected 
biomarkers and the nine other histological feature scores 
studied.
Age and platelets constituted the best descriptors of fibro-
sis. The analysis suggested a higher expected fibrosis stage, 
i.e. more advanced disease, in patients displaying higher age 
and–due to an inverse relationship–lower platelet concentra-
tions. For example, a subject with a platelet concentration 
of 396,500/μL (97.5th percentile of the platelet distribution), 
would display an expected fibrosis score of 0.27. The AST/
ALT ratio reflected the fibrosis score considerably better 
than the single biomarkers AST and ALT alone, the latter 
of which was not predictive of fibrosis.
ALT and AST best described the NAS score, followed 
by hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c). These findings, illustrating 
the association of biomarkers with the NAS score, in fact 
represent a summary of the–partly diverging–results for 
each NAS component. Whereas AST and ALT–as the best 
predictors of the overall NAS score–exerted a marked influ-
ence on all three single NAS components, results were more 
heterogeneous for other biomarkers. For the inflammation 
score, for example, only liver enzymes (AST, ALT, gamma 
glutamyl transferase GGT) appeared as important descrip-
tors, while steatosis was further associated with platelets, 
portal hypertension, or cholesterol, though to a lesser extent. 
In contrast, HbA1c, diabetes and insulin resistance (HOMA-
IR: homeostatic model assessment for insulin resistance) 
appeared highly predictive only of hepatocellular balloon-
ing, which consequently propagated to the NAS score.
As for the nine remaining investigated features of the his-
tological scoring system (Fig. S4 in the Online Resource), 
significant relationships were found inter alia between (i) 
acidophil bodies and AST as well as ALT, (ii) large lipogran-
ulomas and age as well as platelets, (iii) Mallory's hyaline 
and e.g. AST, ALT, GGT, α1-antitrypsin as well as HbA1c, 
glucose and platelets, (iv) portal chronic inflammation 
and platelets, portal hypertension, as well as (with < 25% 
Fig. 4  Correlations between histological liver scores (components of the NAFLD activity score NAS and fibrosis) based on 500 simulated 
(green histograms) and observed (red line) data. Results for all histological liver scores are presented in Fig. S2 (Online Resource). Close values 
of correlation in the observed data and the mode of correlations in the simulated data indicate good predictive performance.
131Pharmaceutical Research (2025) 42:123–135 
coverage of the score range) age and AST/ALT, and also 
between (v) microgranulomas and portal hypertension. For 
(vi-xi) glycogen nuclei, megamitochondria, microvesicular 
steatosis and pigmented macrophages, none of the investi-
gated biomarkers exerted a plausible and marked influence. 
A summary illustrating the impact of all 69 noninvasive 
patient characteristics on the NAS and fibrosis score is 
presented in Fig. S5 (Online Resource). The investigated 
biomarkers generally covered a broader span of the fibrosis 
score (overall range: 0.3–3.6 of 0–4) compared to the NAS 
score (2.2–6.6 of 0–8), with a tendency to mirror high scores 
better than low scores. Of the three NAS components, the 
hepatocellular ballooning score was found to be most sensi-
tive to changes of the biomarkers and its range was most 
widely covered (Fig. 5).
Of all 13 investigated histological features, biomarkers 
related to diabetes and insulin resistance were predomi-
nantly indicative of fibrosis and ballooning (diabetes, 
HbA1c, glucose, insulin, HOMA-IR), of Mallory's hya-
line (HbA1c, glucose) and, to a lower extent, of the NAS 
score (HbA1c). As for lipids, total cholesterol was associ-
ated with fibrosis and, though to a minor extent, steatosis 
and portal chronic inflammation, while triglycerides were 
related to ballooning. LDL and HDL cholesterol appeared 
less informative. Ferritin as an indicator of iron overload 
appeared modestly associated with ballooning as well as 
acidophil bodies and inflammation. Sex did not appear to 
reflect the severity of fibrosis or NAS (see Fig. S5 in the 
Online Resource).
Fig. 5  Impact of selected 
noninvasive biomarkers on 
the expected NAFLD activ-
ity score (NAS) and fibrosis 
score (upper panel) and on the 
components of the NAS score 
(lower panel). Green/red bars 
represent expected scores and 
associated uncertainty given 
the 2.5th/97.5th percentile of the 
covariate or categories (cat) of 
the covariate (values are stated 
in the upper right panel); verti-
cal dashed lines depict mean 
scores. The plots present the 
biomarkers best predicting the 
NAS or fibrosis (sub-)scores, 
i.e. with their 2.5th-97.5th 
percentile covering at least 25% 
of the expected score range. 
Results for the same selection of 
noninvasive biomarkers and the 
residual nine histological liver 
scores are depicted in Fig. S4 
(Online Resource). The impact 
of all investigated noninvasive 
biomarkers and patient charac-
teristics on the NAS and fibrosis 
score are presented in Fig. S5 
(Online Resource).

132 Pharmaceutical Research (2025) 42:123–135
Discussion
The developed histological liver score model and subsequent 
biomarker analysis conveyed valuable insights into NAFLD 
as well as biopsy-based and noninvasive features of disease 
evaluation from a hitherto unexplored perspective.
Histological Liver Score Model
Utilizing the concepts of item response theory, 13 clinical 
liver scores quantifying the intensity of histologically dis-
parate NAFLD lesions were jointly analyzed to assess the 
disease qualities underlying NAFLD in a quantitative man-
ner. Our analysis suggested several different disease facets 
(i.e. separate latent variables) to provoke the observed values 
of the histological scoring system, reflecting the complexity 
and multifactorial nature of the disease, i.e., with lesions 
emerging from different pathophysiological mechanisms. 
The model structure with four cardinal features (items) 
reflecting one disease facet each, acknowledging the hetero-
geneous injury pattern, corresponded well with the NASH-
CRN grouping of histological features into five categories 
(steatosis, inflammation, hepatocellular injury, fibrosis, and 
miscellaneous features) [6].
The histological liver score model allowed to determine 
each patient’s disease state and enhances the understanding 
of the role of the diverse individual histological metrics in 
assessing disease severity. Such quantitative assessments 
are challenging particularly given the resource-intensive 
and limited nature of biopsy data. Thus, the well-character-
ized ‘real-world’ patient cohort of the NASH-CRN Adult 
NAFLD database constituted a valuable basis for our analy-
sis, given the variety and myriad of available histological 
and noninvasive patient features and grades that, impor -
tantly, all stemmed from the same patients. Moreover, the 
quality of the biopsy assessments can be valued high owing 
to their central review by an expert committee [10].
Assessment of Noninvasive Biomarkers
A primary focus of the analysis was the identification of 
noninvasive biomarkers predicting the biopsy-based scores. 
While previous studies explored potential relationships 
between clinical variables and NAFLD, even based on 
NASH-CRN data, they focused on different, commonly 
smaller subsets. Furthermore, they generally examined one 
single histological score (e.g. NAS, fibrosis stage or portal 
chronic inflammation [9 , 12, 19]), even one specific grade 
or part of one score (e.g. only advanced fibrosis/cirrhosis, 
i.e. score 2–4 [12]), and/or were limited to one or few highly 
selected patient characteristics (e.g. age/elderly, ethnicity, 
or aminotransferase levels [8 , 12, 20]). Most commonly, 
they reported the presence or absence of statistical associa-
tions between histological and patient features or conducted 
group-wise comparisons (e.g. NASH/non-NASH) [ 10]. In 
contrast, the present analysis addressed one of the declared 
key objectives of NASH-CRN, i.e. finding associations 
between clinical and histological features, from a differ -
ent angle, applying a rather young concept to the field of 
NAFLD. The combination of item response with full random 
effects modelling enabled to consider multiple histological 
scores (13 rather than one), the ranges of a broad palette of 
clinical characteristics and biomarkers, as well as their influ-
ence on the entire observed spectrum of each histological 
score (e.g. fibrosis score 0–4). This approach acknowledges 
that NAFLD assessment rests on a collection of multiple 
histological features rather than any single feature [19] and 
also aligns with the growing recognition of NAFLD as a 
spectrum of histopathological lesions [5 ].
This analysis illustrates the impact of 69 clinical charac-
teristics (Table I) on less commonly addressed histological 
features beyond NAS and fibrosis. A stringent pre-selection 
of biomarkers, as commonly used to identify correlated char-
acteristics and identify the most informative ones, was not 
necessary, as potential correlations between the markers do 
not pose a problem with the modelling approach taken. The 
influence of these biomarkers on the histological scores dif-
fered between the 13 lesions investigated.
For liver fibrosis, a central factor in NAFLD prognosis, 
our study identified thrombocytes and age as the best predic-
tors, consistent with previous evidence for advanced fibrosis 
[8, 21]. A NASH-CRN key publication demonstrated asso-
ciations of demographic, clinical and laboratory variables 
with advanced (stage 3 or 4) fibrosis for a different subset of 
patients, e.g. including those from the treatment trial PIV -
ENS [10]. While several findings aligned with our results, 
comparability is limited owing to distinct data analysis 
approaches (associations with specific score grades versus  
full scores), patients and clinical and histological variables. 
Both studies indicated associations between fibrosis and 
age, platelets, diabetes, hypertension, waist circumference, 
hematocrit and, to a less pronounced extent in the current 
study, prothrombin time, albumin and white blood cells. The 
main difference concerned ALT, which–unlike AST–did not 
significantly predict fibrosis in our study. Previous studies 
also supported the superiority of AST over ALT in detecting 
(advanced) fibrosis in NAFLD patients [22] and the limited 
value of ALT in predicting fibrosis [23], possibly due to 
frequently normal ALT values within the reference range 
even in patients with advanced NAFLD, or declining ALT 
with age [12, 24, 25]. Noteworthy, the AST/ALT ratio better 
reflected the fibrosis score than AST or ALT alone, consist-
ent with its use in several risk scores for advanced fibrosis 
[26].
133Pharmaceutical Research (2025) 42:123–135 
The NASH-CRN key publication also reported indicators 
of definite NASH, suggesting a significant association with 
ballooning [10]. In our study, most clinical variables reflect-
ing ballooning also appeared as significant NASH predic-
tors in the previous study, except for age and international 
normalized ratio (INR). These deviations might stem from 
NASH being diagnosed based on multiple characteristics, 
although ballooning plays a key role.
The similar impact of the most relevant noninvasive bio-
markers on ballooning and fibrosis reflects the 69% correla-
tion of the disease activities associated with these features 
in the model. This strong interrelationship supports the idea 
that hepatocellular injury triggers fibrogenesis and fibrosis 
progression [27]. Fibrosis was also correlated with portal 
inflammation, which–like fibrosis and ballooning–was also 
better described by platelets and age [28], fitting its role 
as a marker of histologically advanced disease, similar to 
fibrosis [9, 29].
As the second key feature in NAFLD assessment apart 
from fibrosis, the NAS score, largely covering features of 
active injury, was best reflected by AST and ALT, unlike 
fibrosis. Among its subcomponents, inflammation was 
found to be associated with fewest biomarkers (only liver 
enzymes), and ballooning with most biomarkers. The 
diversity of results appears plausible since the NAS score 
combines three very diverse features, i.e. inflammation and 
ballooning as indicators of disease activity, and steatosis, 
which is regarded as an early-stage marker of NAFLD but 
is considered a less reliable indicator of disease severity 
[30]. Hepatocellular ballooning resulted most sensitive to 
varied biomarker values and changes in the underlying dis-
ease activity manifesting in ballooning. Our analysis thus 
supports previous investigations that emphasized the value 
of ballooning in assessing NAFLD severity, and expressed 
concern about its lower weight in the NAS score compared 
to steatosis and inflammation [31].
NAFLD is closely tied to metabolic and cardiovascular 
disorders such as diabetes type 2, dyslipidemia, obesity or 
hypertension. For a more detailed discussion of these con-
ditions and the impact of diabetes, body size descriptors, 
cholesterol, α1-antitrypsin and hypertension on histological 
liver scores, as well as contextualization of the results within 
previous literature, the interested reader is referred to the 
Supplementary Material.
Diagnostic noninvasive biomarkers well representing the 
status or grade of NAFLD (e.g. advanced disease) without 
the need for a liver biopsy could enable more frequent and 
firm diagnoses and consequently a better grasp of the gen -
eral NAFLD prevalence, but also refine and improve study 
endpoints and patient selection to better match eligibility 
criteria. While further investigations are necessary before 
single or combinations of noninvasive biomarkers can sat-
isfactorily replace biopsies, the current findings offer useful 
hints on which patients likely display NAFLD and should 
thus undergo biopsy or innovative diagnostic procedures.
Some limitations have to be acknowledged regarding 
the present investigation. First, the analyzed demographic 
and noninvasive biomarkers, albeit abundant, were natu-
rally limited to those available in the NASH-CRN Adult 
NAFLD database. While the large majority represented rou-
tinely measured, readily available, fairly inexpensive and 
clinically relevant variables, innovative biomarkers have 
emerged from newer technologies, e.g. imaging techniques 
like elastography, markers of cellular injury and apoptosis 
(e.g. cytokeratine-18), or fibrogenesis (e.g. hyaluronic acid 
or PRO-C3) [1 , 32, 33]. Although these present interest-
ing avenues for future studies, their scarce availability and 
implementation would still limit their use.
Second, some histological (particularly binary) features 
were imbalanced in the population, with one group domi-
nating. The finding that biomarkers tended to better cover 
higher score values (particularly for the NAS score and its 
components), is partly attributable to their higher preva-
lence (e.g., only 0.7% of the population displayed grade 0 
inflammation). This calls to mind that the results are valid 
for the current study population and data situation–espe-
cially given the few representatives for certain scores (e.g., 
absent inflammation)–and warrants caution against general-
izing or transferring them to other populations. Given the 
importance of identifying patients with advanced disease for 
treatment and clinical studies, the lower coverage of absent 
or mild symptoms seems acceptable. As shown in Fig.  5, 
the lower and upper bounds of the histological scores were 
generally not captured by the investigated noninvasive bio-
markers (unless the majority of the population displayed an 
‘extreme’ grade), which might arise from the distribution 
of score grades, the depiction of the 2.5 th-97.5th percentiles 
of the biomarkers (rather than extreme values), uncertainty 
in the data, or variations in histological staging, even if car-
ried out by experts. The heterogeneous occurrence of scores 
may have affected the ability of noninvasive biomarkers to 
demonstrate their impact at both population extremes of the 
scores. However, the natural history database nevertheless 
represents clinically plausible real-world scenarios.
Next, an analysis of longitudinal disease patterns, i.e. 
changes over time, was not supported due to the nature of 
the available data, which included merely one biopsy for 
82.8% of patients and a maximum of three samples in only 
1.42% of patients. Future emerging NAFLD registries (e.g. 
NASH-CRN Database 2 observational study, European 
NAFLD Registry [34]) might serve to additionally address 
disease progression in the model. These novel databases may 
also be utilized to evaluate or update the current model, e.g. 
with respect to novel biomarkers, refined histological stag-
ing systems (as e.g. discussed for ballooning degeneration), 
or automated machine-learning-based scoring methods [30, 
134 Pharmaceutical Research (2025) 42:123–135
35]. Furthermore, other probabilistic modelling approaches, 
or less complex methods like confirmatory factor analysis 
may be explored for comparison. Last, as the correlations 
between the different disease facets and their associations 
with biomarkers might change for different situations, such 
as drug treatment, multidimensional IRT models may be 
useful for investigating which aspects of the disease are most 
influenced by a certain treatment strategy.
Conclusions
An in silico histological liver score model based on item 
response theory enabled the integrated analysis of the full 
range of 13 diverse histological features (including the 
widely used NAS and fibrosis scores), measuring both 
active injury (e.g. hepatocellular ballooning) and slowly 
progressing lesions (e.g. fibrosis), and their association with 
69 noninvasive biomarkers. Our analysis revealed five dis-
tinct disease facets underlying NAFLD and the measured 
histological scores in patients from the NASH-CRN Adult 
NAFLD database. The ability of multiple clinically relevant 
noninvasive biomarkers to reflect NAFLD activity could be 
quantified across the entire spectrum of all 13 histological 
scores–rather than focusing on one single histological score 
or a specific part of it using traditional statistical tests, pro-
viding limited quantitative information–and was found to 
differ for distinct biopsy features, with ballooning being the 
dominant NAS component. The findings offer insights into 
which patients likely display NAFLD and might thus require 
biopsy; however, further research is warranted before non-
invasive biomarkers can inform study inclusion criteria and 
endpoints. NAFLD-IRT models may lay the basis for future 
investigations on the sensitivity of histological liver scores 
to detect changes of different disease qualities (e.g. inflam-
mation in response to a therapeutic–e.g. anti-inflammatory 
or antifibrotic–intervention), and on the value of noninvasive 
biomarkers for evaluating NAFLD treatment options, ulti -
mately providing a step toward more accessible and informa-
tive measures beyond the NAS.
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplemen-
tary material available at https:// doi. org/ 10. 1007/ s11095- 024- 03791-2.
Acknowledgements The NAFLD Adult study was conducted by the 
NAFLD Adult study Investigators and supported by the National Insti-
tute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK). The 
data from the NAFLD Adult study reported here were supplied by the 
NIDDK Central Repository. This manuscript was not prepared in col-
laboration with Investigators of the NAFLD Adult study and does not 
necessarily reflect the opinions or views of the NAFLD Adult study, 
the NIDDK Central Repository, or the NIDDK.
The authors acknowledge Julia Korell and Chantaratsamon Dansiri-
kul (Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH & Co. KG) for their contributions 
in enabling this project.
The work has previously been partially presented at the ACoP 
(American Conference on Pharmacometrics) 2020 conference in 
the form of a poster, and at the PAGE (Population Approach Group 
Europe) 2021 conference in the form of a talk.
Author Contributions I.K.M.: conceptualization of the analysis, data 
analyses, interpretation of results, drafting of the manuscript; E.L.P.: 
data acquisition, funding acquisition, conceptualization of the analysis, 
project administration, interpretation of results, supervision, critical 
revision of the manuscript; B.W.: funding acquisition, conceptualiza-
tion of the analysis, project administration, interpretation of the results, 
critical revision of the manuscript; S.U.: conceptualization of the analy-
sis, data analyses and interpretation of results, methodology, software, 
supervision, critical revision of the manuscript. All authors approved 
the final version of the manuscript.
Funding Open access funding provided by Uppsala University. This 
research was supported by Boehringer Ingelheim Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
Data Availability The analysed data originated from the Nonalcoholic 
Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) Adult Database (NAFLD Adult). Data 
from the Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) Adult Data-
base [https:// doi. org/ 10. 58020/ 53bk- jk73] reported here are available 
for request at the NIDDK Central Repository (NIDDK-CR) website, 
Resources for Research (R4R), (https:// repos itory. niddk. nih. gov/ studi 
es/ nafld_ adult).
Declarations 
Conflicts of Interest The authors declare that they have no conflicts of 
interest that are relevant to the content of this article.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attri-
bution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long 
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes 
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated 
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a 
copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
 1. Powell EE, Wong VW-S, Rinella M. Non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease. Lancet. 2021;397:2212–24.
 2. Wong VW-S, Chitturi S, Wong GL-H, Yu J, Chan HL-Y, Farrell 
GC. Pathogenesis and novel treatment options for non-alcoholic 
steatohepatitis. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2016;1:56–67.
 3. Rinella ME. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: A systematic review. 
JAMA. 2015;313:2263–73.
 4. Puri P, Sanyal AJ. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: Defini-
tions, risk factors, and workup. Clin Liver Dis (Hoboken). 
2012;1:99–103.
 5. Kleiner DE, Bedossa P. Liver histology and clinical trials for 
nonalcoholic steatohepatitis-perspectives from 2 pathologists. 
Gastroenterology. 2015;149:1305–8.
 6. Kleiner DE, Brunt EM, Van Natta M, Behling C, Contos MJ, 
Cummings OW, et al. Design and validation of a histological 
135Pharmaceutical Research (2025) 42:123–135 
scoring system for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology. 
2005;41:1313–21.
 7. US Food and Drug Administration. Draft Guidance for Industry: 
Noncirrhotic Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis With Liver Fibrosis: 
Developing Drugs for Treatment. 2018. https://  www. fda. gov/ 
media/ 119044/ downl oad. Accessed 23 Apr 2023.
 8. Noureddin M, Yates KP, Vaughn IA, Neuschwander-Tetri BA, 
Sanyal AJ, McCullough A, et al. Clinical and histological deter -
minants of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and advanced fibrosis in 
elderly patients. Hepatology. 2013;58:1644–54.
 9. Brunt EM, Kleiner DE, Wilson LA, Unalp A, Behling CE, Lavine 
JE, et al. Portal chronic inflammation in nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD): a histologic marker of advanced NAFLD-Clin-
icopathologic correlations from the nonalcoholic steatohepatitis 
clinical research network. Hepatology. 2009;49:809–20.
 10. Neuschwander-Tetri BA, Clark JM, Bass NM, Van Natta ML, 
Unalp-Arida A, Tonascia J, et al. Clinical, laboratory and histo -
logical associations in adults with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. 
Hepatology. 2010;52:913–24.
 11. Davison BA, Harrison SA, Cotter G, Alkhouri N, Sanyal A, 
Edwards C, et al. Suboptimal reliability of liver biopsy evalu-
ation has implications for randomized clinical trials. J Hepatol. 
2020;73:1322–32.
 12. Gawrieh S, Wilson LA, Cummings OW, Clark JM, Loomba 
R, Hameed B, et al. Histologic findings of advanced fibrosis 
and cirrhosis in patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
who have normal aminotransferase levels. Am J Gastroenterol. 
2019;114:1626–35.
 13. Loomba R, Abraham M, Unalp A, Wilson L, Lavine J, Doo E, 
et al. Association between diabetes, family history of diabetes, 
and risk of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis and fibrosis. Hepatology. 
2012;56:943–51.
 14. Bauvin P, Delacôte C, Lassailly G, Ntandja Wandji LC, Gnemmi 
V, Dautrecque F, et al. A tool to predict progression of non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease in severely obese patients. Liver Int. 
2021;41:91–100.
 15. Ueckert S. Modeling composite assessment data using item 
response theory. CPT Pharmacometrics Syst Pharmacol. 
2018;7:205–18.
 16. Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) Adult Database 
(NAFLD Adult), NIDDK (National Institute of Diabetes and 
Digestive and Kidney Diseases) Central Repository, v3; 2009. 
https:// repos itory. niddk. nih. gov/ studi es/ nafld_ adult. Accessed 23 
Apr 2023.
 17. Chalmers RP. mirt: A Multidimensional Item Response Theory 
Package for the R Environment. J Stat Softw. 2012;48:1–29.
 18. Yngman G,Bjugård Nyberg H, Nyberg J, Jonsson EN, Karlsson 
MO. An introduction to the full random effects model. CPT Phar-
macometrics Syst Pharmacol. 2022;11:149–60.
 19. Brunt EM, Kleiner DE, Wilson LA, Belt P, Neuschwander-Tetri 
BA, for the NASH Clinical Research Network (CRN). Nonalco-
holic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) activity score and the histo-
pathologic diagnosis in NAFLD: distinct clinicopathologic mean-
ings. Hepatology. 2011;53:810–20.
 20. Bambha K, Belt P, Abraham M, Wilson LA, Pabst M, Ferrell L, 
et al. Ethnicity and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology. 
2012;55:769–80.
 21. McPherson S, Hardy T, Henderson E, Burt AD, Day CP, Anstee 
QM. Evidence of NAFLD progression from steatosis to fibrosing-
steatohepatitis using paired biopsies: Implications for prognosis 
and clinical management. J Hepatol. 2015;62:1148–55.
 22. Han MAT, Saouaf R, Noureddin N, Grotts J, Sundaram V, 
Scott A, et al. Liver enzyme cut offs in patients with Advanced 
Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD): A multi-center study 
[Abstract]. J Hepatol. 2019;70(Suppl):e297.
 23. Verma S, Jensen D, Hart J, Mohanty SR. Predictive value of ALT 
levels for non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and advanced 
fibrosis in non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Liver Int. 
2013;33:1398–405.
 24. Dong MH, Bettencourt R, Barrett-Connor E, Loomba R. Alanine 
aminotransferase decreases with age: the Rancho Bernardo Study. 
PLoS ONE. 2010;5:e14254.
 25. Fracanzani AL, Valenti L, Bugianesi E, Andreoletti M, Colli A, 
Vanni E, et al. Risk of severe liver disease in nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease with normal aminotransferase levels: A role for insu-
lin resistance and diabetes. Hepatology. 2008;48:792–8.
 26. Vilar-Gomez E, Chalasani N. Non-invasive assessment of non-
alcoholic fatty liver disease: Clinical prediction rules and blood-
based biomarkers. J Hepatol. 2018;68:305–15.
 27. Angulo P, Kleiner DE, Dam-Larsen S, Adams LA, Bjornsson 
ES, Charatcharoenwitthaya P, et al. Liver fibrosis, but no other 
histologic features, is associated with long-term outcomes of 
patients with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Gastroenterology. 
2015;149:389-397.e10.
 28. Brunt EM, Kleiner DE, Wilson LA, Sanyal AJ, Neuschwander-
Tetri BA, The NASH CRN. Improvements in histologic features 
and diagnosis associated with improvement in fibrosis in NASH: 
Results from the NASH clinical research network treatment trials. 
Hepatology. 2019;70:522–31.
 29. Mann JP, De Vito R, Mosca A, Alisi A, Armstrong MJ, Raponi 
M, et al. Portal inflammation is independently associated with 
fibrosis and metabolic syndrome in pediatric nonalcoholic fatty 
liver disease. Hepatology. 2016;63:745–53.
 30. Pai RK, Kleiner DE, Hart J, Adeyi OA, Clouston AD, Behling 
CA, et al. Standardising the interpretation of liver biopsies in 
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease clinical trials. Aliment Pharmacol 
Ther. 2019;50:1100–11.
 31. Nascimbeni F, Ballestri S, Machado MV, Mantovani A, Cortez-
Pinto H, Targher G, et al. Clinical relevance of liver histopathol-
ogy and different histological classifications of NASH in adults. 
Expert Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018;12:351-67. 
 32. Feldstein AE, Wieckowska A, Lopez AR, Liu Y-C, Zein NN, 
McCullough AJ. Cytokeratin-18 fragment levels as noninvasive 
biomarkers for nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: A multicenter valida-
tion study. Hepatology. 2009;50:1072–8.
 33. Daniels SJ, Leeming DJ, Eslam M, Hashem AM, Nielsen MJ, 
Krag A, et al. ADAPT: An algorithm incorporating PRO-C3 
accurately identifies patients with NAFLD and advanced fibrosis. 
Hepatology. 2019;69:1075–86.
 34. Hardy T, Wonders K, Younes R, Aithal GP, Aller R, Allison M, 
et al. The European NAFLD Registry: A real-world longitudinal 
cohort study of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Contemp Clin 
Trials. 2020;98:106175.
 35. Forlano R, Mullish BH, Giannakeas N, Maurice JB, Angkathu-
nyakul N, Lloyd J, et al. High-Throughput, Machine Learning-
Based Quantification of Steatosis, Inflammation, Ballooning, and 
Fibrosis in Biopsies From Patients With Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver 
Disease. Clinical Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020;18:2081-2090.e9.
Publisher's Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.