Academic Editors: Chih-Li Lin and
Gang Wang
Received: 2 December 2024
Revised: 19 December 2024
Accepted: 26 December 2024
Published: 28 December 2024
Citation: Kakafoni, G.; Zvintzou, E.;
Kyroglou, S.; Giannatou, K.; Mparnia,
V .; Vareltzis, P .; Kypreos, K.E. Effect of
a Novel Lavender Extract on Plasma
Lipid and Lipoprotein Metabolism,
Glucose Tolerance and Adipose Tissue
Metabolic Activation: A Preclinical
Safety and Efficacy Study. Nutrients
2025, 17, 76. https://doi.org/
10.3390/nu17010076
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
Effect of a Novel Lavender Extract on Plasma Lipid and
Lipoprotein Metabolism, Glucose Tolerance and Adipose
Tissue Metabolic Activation: A Preclinical Safety and
Efficacy Study
Georgia Kakafoni 1,† , Evangelia Zvintzou 1,† , Smaro Kyroglou 2
 , Katerina Giannatou 1, Victoria Mparnia 1,
Patroklos Vareltzis 2
 and Kyriakos E. Kypreos 1,3, *
1 Pharmacology Laboratory, Department of Medicine, University of Patras, 26500 Rio Achaia, Greece;
kakafonigeo@gmail.com (G.K.); liliazv@upatras.gr (E.Z.); katerinagiannatou001@gmail.com (K.G.);
victoriamparnia2@gmail.com (V .M.)
2 Laboratory of Food and Agricultural Industries Technologies, Chemical Engineering Department,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece; kyrosmar@cheng.auth.gr (S.K.);
pkvareltzis@cheng.auth.gr (P .V .)
3 Department of Life Sciences, School of Sciences, European University Cyprus, 2404 Nicosia, Cyprus
* Correspondence: kkypreos@upatras.gr; Tel.: +30-2610969120
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract: Background/Objectives: Lavender has been utilized for its medicinal properties
since ancient times, with numerous health benefits reported. This study aimed to valorize
solid waste from lavender essential oil production by developing a novel lavender extract
from solid lavender residues. The extract’s preclinical safety and efficacy were evaluated
with emphasis on plasma lipid and lipoprotein metabolism, glucose tolerance, and adipose
tissue metabolic activity. Methods: Male C57BL/6 mice were divided into four groups of
five mice each and fed for 30 days with lavender extract encapsulated in 10% maltodextrin,
mixed with a standard chow diet. The first group (Lav 1×) received 21.1 mg/kg/day, the
second group (Lav 10×) received 211 mg/kg/day, and the third group (Lav 100×) received
2110 mg/kg/day. A placebo group consumed the standard diet without lavender extract.
Key outcomes included plasma lipid and lipoprotein profiles, transaminase levels, HDL
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory potential, glucose tolerance, and mitochondrial activity
in white (WAT) and brown (BAT) adipose tissues. Results: The novel lavender extract
induced dose-dependent improvements in lipid and lipoprotein metabolism, glucose
tolerance, and adipose tissue activity. The 2110 mg/kg dose (100×) demonstrated the most
significant beneficial effects, although it was associated with a slight elevation in hepatic
transaminase levels, indicating potential mild hepatic stress. Conclusions: Overall, the
novel lavender extract exhibits promising health benefits with no major safety concerns at
the tested doses, supporting its potential for therapeutic applications.
Keywords: lavender; lavender solid waste; Lavandula stoechas; efficacy; safety; lipoproteins;
glucose homeostasis; white adipose tissue; brown adipose tissue; mitochondrial metabolic
activation; circular economy
1. Introduction
Lavender (Lavandula sp.) belongs to the family Labiatae (Lamiaceae), and the genusLa-
vandula is native to areas bordering the Mediterranean Sea, the Middle East and Southwest
Asia. In general, there are more than 30 species, dozens of subspecies, and hundreds of
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 https://doi.org/10.3390/nu17010076
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 2 of 17
hybrids [1]. The wide distribution of lavender reflects its historical and cultural importance,
as well as its widespread use, either as a medicinal plant or as an aromatic plant, in the
daily life and traditions of many regions.
Lavender has many benefits for human health [2]. Its use for medicinal purposes has
been known since ancient times and has been extensively studied. Some of the most typical
traditional medicinal properties are: antioxidant, antifungal and antibacterial [3–5], cyto-
toxic [6] antiseptic, anti-inflammatory, and analgesic [3], anticonvulsant, anticholinergic,
relaxing [2], and antidepressant [7] properties. In the past, lavender was used therapeuti-
cally for gastric ulcers, asthma, and Parkinson’s disease [2]. It has beneficial effects in the
treatment of headache and symptoms associated with migraine episodes, while also reduc-
ing the spread of pain [8]. It has also been found to have beneficial effects on dementia as an
adjunct therapy [9], improving memory in women with multiple sclerosis [10]. In addition,
lavender essential oil improves the quality of sleep [11], alleviates symptoms of dysmenor-
rhea [12] and menopause [13], and helps enhance wound-healing processes [14]. Moreover,
studies have shown that lavender has beneficial effects in anxiety disorder [15–17].
Lavender has also been proven effective in cardiometabolic diseases. Studies have
shown that inhaling lavender essential oil can lower systolic and diastolic blood pressure
and heart rate [18]. Also, data from rabbit studies suggest that it may reduce aortic choles-
terol content and atherosclerotic plaque accumulation, thus providing a vasoprotective
effect [19,20]. A study of 19 healthy medical personnel examined the effect of inhalation
of lavender essential oil on endothelial function after night shifts. Flow-mediated dila-
tion (FMD) of the brachial artery was reduced after the night shift but was significantly
improved in subjects who had undergone aromatherapy for 30 min with lavender inhala-
tion [21]. In another study, 30 healthy men who inhaled lavender essential oil showed a
marked increase in Coronary Flow Velocity Reserve (CFVR) and decreased serum corti-
sol levels, a change not seen in the control group, demonstrating its potential efficacy in
coronary traffic [20]. Furthermore, in another clinical study, lavender significantly reduced
blood pressure compared to the control group during sleep [22].
Infusion and suspension of Lavandula stoechas L. (L. stoechas), induces hypoglycemia in
normal rats, reaching maximal activity 30 min after administration [23]. Further studies
with L. dentata and L. latifolia have shown that the active hypoglycemic components are
partially water soluble. These extracts were ineffective in rats with alloxan-induced type
I diabetes, indicating that intact pancreatic cells are essential for their pharmacological
activity. The active ingredients have not been chemically identified [24]. In another study,
the essential oil of L. stoechas showed a beneficial effect on glucose levels in rats with
alloxan-induced diabetes. In addition, protective effects on diabetes-related kidney and
liver damage and mitigation of adverse effects on lipid metabolism were observed [ 25].
Clinical data from 37 adult patients with type 2 diabetes showed no significant differences
in fasting glucose after 4 weeks of aromatherapy with Lavandula angustifolia essential oil
inhalation, 5 min before bedtime, compared to the control group [26].
The extraction process of this valuable natural product has been significantly improved
during the last decades. The optimization of lavender oil extraction using both green energy
sources (microwaves, ultrasound, supercritical CO2 or their combination) and alternative
solvents (e.g., ionic liquids) instead of classical hydrodistillation and steam distillation is
of great interest [27–30]. Recently, the complete valorization of aromatic herbs including
hydrolats, leachates, and solid waste has become a major challenge in the pursuit of a
circular economy and environmental impact reduction [31–33]. Vareltzis et al. (2024) [34]
proposed an integrated process consisting of a green extraction method and a consequent
drying process for the valorization of lavender solid waste. Forty-three percent of the total
phenolic content was found in the lavender solid waste, while less than 1% was present in
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 3 of 17
the essential oil fraction. Ultrasound-assisted extraction led to a higher phenolic content and
greater antioxidant properties compared to microwave assisted extraction. Furthermore,
the encapsulation of the extract using maltodextrin improved the drying process yield [34].
Other benefits of encapsulation include stability against oxidation, improved bioavailability,
and masking of the characteristic odor of lavender essential oil.
The beneficial properties of lavender make it a candidate as a functional food ingredi-
ent. As part of our ongoing efforts to valorize aromatic herbs in the pursuit of a sustainable
circular economy and environmental benefits, the aims of the present preclinical study
were to evaluate the efficacy and potential toxicity of a novel maltodextrin encapsulated
lavender extract isolated from the leaves of the plant after essential oil was removed. To
evaluate the potential benefits of this extract as an active food ingredient for metabolic
health, our studies focused on lipid and glucose homeostasis.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Raw Material
The aerial parts of Lavandula stoechas were kindly provided by a local producer in
Rodolivos (Rodolivos IKE, Serres, Greece).
2.2. Production of Dried Extract
Extraction and drying processes have been optimized and described in previous
work [34]. Briefly, lavender leaves were submitted to hydrodistillation and the solid waste
was dried at a temperature of 40 ◦C and ground using a laboratory mill (PX-MFC 90 D,
KINEMATICA, Malters, Switzerland) and a 1 mm sieve. Afterwards, ultrasound-assisted
extraction was conducted using an ultrasonic homogenizer (Sonopuls HD 4100, Bandelin,
Berlin, Germany). One (1) g of dried lavender solid waste was mixed with 18 mL of
ethanol–water solvent (1:1) and the ultrasound amplitude level applied was 40% for10 min.
After extraction, evaporation was performed in a rotary vacuum evaporator (Model R
114, Buchi Laboratoriums-Technik, Flawil, Switzerland) to remove ethanol, and 10%w/v
maltodextrin was added. The solution was spray-dried using an ADL 311S spray-dryer
(Yamato Scientific Co., Tokyo, Japan) with a maximum compressed air pressure of 0.1 MPa,
a feed flow rate of 3.9 mL/min, a drying air flow rate of 0.07 m 3/min, and an inlet air
temperature of 170 ◦C. The resulting outlet temperature was about 57 ± 2 ◦C. The dried
extract was collected and stored in heat-sealed plastic bags in a vacuum (MULTIVAC, C200,
Wolfertschwenden, Germany) at −20 ◦C.
2.3. Characterization of Dried Extract
The moisture, bulk density, hygroscopicity, water activity, total phenolic content and
antioxidant activity of the dried extract were the main properties determined following
the methods described in a previous study [34]. The characteristics of the dried extract are
presented in the Supplementary Materials (Tables S1 and S2).
2.4. Animals
Male C57BL/6 mice, approximately 24 weeks old, were allowed unrestricted access to
water under a 12-h light/dark cycle (7:00 a.m.–6:59 p.m. light). Four groups of five mice
each were formed and special care was taken to include in the same group animals with
similar initial levels of plasma lipids and glucose as well as body weight. No randomization
was needed since all mice had identical genetic backgrounds. Three out of four groups
received the lavender extract encapsulated in 10% maltodextrin mixed homogeneously
with a standard chow diet (#4RF25, Mucedola srI, Milan, Italy) in the following doses:
The first group (Lav 1×) received a daily dose of 21.1 mg/kg, the second group (Lav 10×)
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 4 of 17
received a daily dose of 211 mg/kg, and the third group (Lav 100 ×) received a daily
dose of 2110 mg/kg. The fourth group (placebo) received the equivalent amount of the
same standard chow diet for the duration of the experiment. KEK and EZ were aware of
group allocation during the course of the study. The rest of the investigators performed
experiments and analyzed data in a blinded fashion. All animals were individually caged
during the course of the study. No animal was excluded from the study. Sample size was
determined based on the desired power of statistical analysis, using an online statistical
tool (http://www.stat.ubc.ca/~rollin/stats/ssize/n2.html, accessed on 10 December 2024)
using mu1 = 0.75, mu2 = 1, σ = 0.1, a = 0.05, and desired power of analysis = 0.95. All
animal experiments were conducted according to the EU guidelines of the Protocol for the
Protection and Welfare of Animals. The work was authorized by the Laboratory Animal
Centre committee of the University of Patras Medical School and the Veterinary Authority
of the Prefecture of Western Greece (Authorization numberΠ∆E/∆K/44966/198 approved
on 20 February 2023). The proper implementation of the protocol was monitored by the
facility veterinarian as well as ZV and KEK.
2.5. Calculation of the Appropriate Dosage
The dose was calculated according to the mean human tolerated dose of other lavender
extracts reported in the literature [ 17], which was estimated at 120 mg daily, using the
following equation [35]:
Animaldose = Km(human ) × HED
Km(animal )
where HED stands for Human Estimated Dose expressed in mg/Kg.
Every week during the study, the total amount of the lavender extract used to treat
each mouse in the treated group was adjusted, based on body weight changes.
2.6. Diet Preparation
The standard chow diet for mice was mixed to homogeneity with the appropriate
amount of dried lavender extract, which was produced as described above. The total daily
dose of extract was mixed with the total daily amount of food that the mice were consuming.
Food was given to the mice daily and its complete consumption ensured that animals
received the calculated dose of extract. The placebo group was fed normal chow diet.
2.7. Body Weight Measurement
On day 0 (baseline) and day 30 (end of study), the mice were fasted for 16 h and
weighed on a Mettler® precision balance.
2.8. Intraperitoneal Glucose Tolerance (GTT)
The mice were fasted for 16 h. GTT was performed, and blood glucose was determined
at the indicated timepoints. Biochemical determination of plasma glucose levels was per-
formed spectrophotometrically with a DiaSys Glucose FS kit (cat# 125009910021, Diagnostic
Systems GmbH, Holzheim, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
2.9. Determination of Plasma, Lipoprotein, and Liver Lipid Levels
Biochemical determination of plasma total cholesterol and triglyceride levels was
performed spectrophotometrically with DiaSys Cholesterol FS kit (cat# 113009910021,
Diagnostic Systems GmbH, Holzheim, Germany) and DiaSys Triglycerides FS kit (cat#
157109910021, Diagnostic Systems GmbH, Holzheim, Germany) respectively, according to
the manufacturers’ instructions. For hepatic lipid determination, mice were euthanized
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 5 of 17
at the end of the treatment period and liver samples were collected. Hepatic triglyceride
levels were measured as described previously [36].
2.10. Isolation of Intact Mitochondria
Mitochondria from brown adipose tissue (BAT) and white adipose tissue (WAT) were
isolated, as described previously [ 37]. The protein concentration of each mitochondrial
sample was determined using the DCTM protein assay kit (catalog number 500-0116;
Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA).
2.11. Determination of Liver Enzyme Levels
The determination of liver enzyme levels aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine
aminotransferase (ALT), and gamma-glutamyl transferase ( γ-GT) was performed spec-
trophotometrically using a Siemens Dimension EXL 200 Integrated Chemistry System
(Siemens, Munich, Germany).
2.12. Fractionation and Purification of Plasma Lipoproteins by KBr Density Gradient
Ultracentrifugation
Following 16 h of fasting, plasma samples were isolated from the groups of mice.
Pooled plasma of 0.4 mL from each mouse group was fractionated by KBr density gradient
ultracentrifugation, over a 4 mL KBr (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) gradient, as
described previously [38].
2.13. Western Blot Analysis
For the semiquantitative measurement of murine Apolipoprotein A2 (ApoA2),
Apolipoprotein A1 (ApoA1), Apolipoprotein E (ApoE), Apolipoprotein C1 (ApoC1),
Apolipoprotein C2 (ApoC2), Apolipoprotein C3 (ApoC3), and Apolipoprotein B (ApoB)
in lipoprotein fractions, western blot analysis was performed using the following anti-
bodies: goat anti-ApoA2 (cat# K34001G, Meridian Life Science, Inc., Memphis, Tennessee,
USA), rabbit anti-ApoA1 (cat# ES4169, ELK Biotechnology, Denver, CO, USA), rabbit anti-
ApoE (E7X2A) (cat# 49285, Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA), goat anti-ApoC1 (cat#
K74110G, Meridian Life Science, Inc., Memphis, TN, USA), goat anti-ApoC2 (cat# K59600R,
Meridian Life Science, Inc., Memphis, TN, USA), rabbit anti-ApoC3 (cat# ab55984, Ab-
cam, Cambridge, UK and cat# PAB5869, Abnova, Taipei, Taiwan), as primary and rabbit
anti-goat IgG-HRP (cat# sc-2768, Santa-Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Dallas, TX, USA) and
goat anti-rabbit IgG-HRP (cat#7074, Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA), as secondary.
For the detection of ApoB, a goat anti-ApoB-48/100 HRP (cat# K34005G, Meridian Life
Science, Inc., Memphis, TN, USA) was used. Western blotting for cytochrome C (CytC),
uncoupling protein 1 (Ucp1), and Cytochrome C oxidase subunit 4 (Cox4) was performed
using rabbit anti-mouse antibodies (cat# 4272, Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA; cat#
72298, Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA; and cat# 4844, Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA, USA,
respectively). SDS-PAGE (sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis) of
pure mitochondrial extracts was performed using 6 g protein per sample for BAT and
15 g protein per sample for WAT. Semiquantitative determination of the relative protein
amounts was performed by Image J free software (Fiji, Version 1.52a, Wayne Rasband,
National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD, USA).
2.14. Determination of the Antioxidant Potential of High-Density Lipoprotein (HDL)
For the assessment of the antioxidant capacity of HDL, a modification of the dihy-
drorhodamine 123 method was used, as described previously [39]. The oxidation rate of
dihydrorhodamine in the presence of HDL was assessed. HDL from the placebo group was
used as control. The oxidation rate was calculated for each sample as the mean slope for
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 6 of 17
the linear regression of fluorescence intensity between 10 and 60 min of quadruplicates and
expressed as fluorescence units per minute: the lower the slope, the lower the substrate
oxidation rate.
2.15. Effects of HDL on Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-Induced Inflammation in RAW 264.7 Cells
The effects of the HDL, isolated from the mice, on inflammation were assessed in RAW
264.7 macrophage cell line, as described previously [38].
2.16. Statistical Analysis
All data sets were tested using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov and the Shapiro–Wilk
tests and were treated with parametric ( p > 0.1) or non-parametric tests ( p < 0.1) ac-
cording to their deviation from normality. No outliers were spotted and all datapoints
were included in the analyses. Data were reported as mean ± Standard Error of the
Mean (SEM) and statistically significant p-value is set at <0.05. * = p value < 0.05,
** = p value < 0.005 and *** = p value < 0.0005. All statistical tests were performed using
the GraphPad Prism 8.0.1 software.
3. Results
3.1. Effect of Lavender Extract on Body Weight
To determine the effects of lavender extract treatment on animal body weight, animals
were weighed after 16 h of fasting immediately prior to treatment initiation (Baseline)
and at the end of the study. As shown in Figure 1, no apparent effect on the body weight
of mice was noted following 30 days of treatment with the different doses of our novel
lavender extract.
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 17 
 
 
2.14. Determination of the Antioxidant Potential of High-Density Lipoprotein (HDL) 
For the assessment of the antiox idant capacity of HDL, a modi ﬁcation of the dihy-
drorhodamine 123 method was used, as described previously [39]. The oxidation rate of 
dihydrorhodamine in the presence of HDL was assessed. HDL from the placebo group 
was used as control. The oxidation rate was calculated for each sample as the mean slope 
for the linear regression of ﬂuorescence intensity between 10 and 60 min of quadruplicates 
and expressed as ﬂuorescence units per minute: the lower the slope, the lower the sub-
strate oxidation rate. 
2.15. Eﬀects of HDL on Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-Induced Inﬂammation in RAW 264.7 Cells 
The eﬀects of the HDL, isolated from the mice, on in ﬂammation were assessed in 
RAW 264.7 macrophage cell line, as described previously [38]. 
2.16. Statistical Analysis 
All data sets were tested using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov and the Shapiro–Wilk tests 
and were treated with parametric ( p > 0.1) or non-parametric tests ( p < 0.1) according to 
their deviation from normality. No outliers were spotted and all datapoints were included 
in the analyses. Data were reported as mean ± Standard Error of the Mean (SEM) and 
statistically signiﬁcant p-value is set at <0.05. * = p value < 0.05, ** = p value < 0.005 and *** 
= p value < 0.0005. All statistical tests were performed using the GraphPad Prism 8.0.1 
software. 
3. Results 
3.1. Eﬀect of Lavender Extract on Body Weight 
To determine the e ﬀects of lavender extract treatment on animal body weight, ani-
mals were weighed after 16 h of fasting immediately prior to treatment initiation (Base-
line) and at the end of the study. As shown in Figure 1, no apparent e ﬀect on the body 
weight of mice was noted following 30 days of treatment with the di ﬀerent doses of our 
novel lavender extract. 
 
Figure 1. Body weight levels of mice at the beginning and end of the study. Data were analyzed 
using two-way ANOVA and are pres ented as Mean ± SEM. Baseline refers to all animals at the 
beginning of the study (ns, non-signiﬁcant). 
3.2. Eﬀect of Lavender Extract on Liver Cholesterol and Triglyceride Levels and Plasma Liver 
Enzyme Levels 
In order to evaluate the safety of lavender extract administration, we tested liver tox-
icity in the treated mice by measuring hepati c lipid content and the levels of three main 
liver enzymes, namely alanine aminotransferase—ALT (SGPT), aspartate 
Figure 1. Body weight levels of mice at the beginning and end of the study. Data were analyzed using
two-way ANOVA and are presented as Mean± SEM. Baseline refers to all animals at the beginning
of the study (ns, non-significant).
3.2. Effect of Lavender Extract on Liver Cholesterol and Triglyceride Levels and Plasma Liver
Enzyme Levels
In order to evaluate the safety of lavender extract administration, we tested liver
toxicity in the treated mice by measuring hepatic lipid content and the levels of
three main liver enzymes, namely alanine aminotransferase—ALT (SGPT), aspartate
aminotransferase—AST (SGOT), and gamma-glutamyl transferase (γ-GT), in the plasma
of the experimental animals.
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 7 of 17
The 1× dose triggered only a mild increase in AST and γ-GT liver enzymes while it
lowered ALT, even though it increased hepatic triglyceride content compared to the placebo
group (Figure 2A,B, and Table 1). Similarly, hepatic lipid content determination showed
that a 10× administration of lavender extract resulted in significantly elevated cholesterol
and triglyceride levels (Figure 2A,B) compared to the other groups, but did not negatively
impact the levels of the liver enzymes (Table 1). Finally, the 100× dose did not alter either
cholesterol or triglyceride levels in the liver, but resulted in a moderate elevation in liver
enzymes (Figure 2A,B and Table 1).
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 17 
 
 
aminotransferase—AST (SGOT), and gamma-glutamyl transferase ( γ-GT), in the plasma 
of the experimental animals. 
The 1x dose triggered only a mild increase in AST and γ-GT liver enzymes while it 
lowered ALT, even though it increased hepatic triglyceride content compared to the pla-
cebo group (Figure 2A,B, and Table 1). Similarly, hepatic lipid content determination 
showed that a 10x administration of lavender extract resulted in signi ﬁcantly elevated 
cholesterol and triglyceride levels (Figure 2A,B) compared to the other groups, but did 
not negatively impact the levels of the liver enzymes (Table 1). Finally, the 100x dose did 
not alter either cholesterol or triglyceride levels in the liver, but resulted in a moderate 
elevation in liver enzymes (Figure 2A,B and Table 1). 
 
Figure 2. Determination of hepatic lipid levels. Panel ( A) indicates the hepatic cholesterol content 
and panel ( B) the hepatic triglyceride content per gram of  liver tissue isolated from all groups of 
mice. Data were analyzed using one-way ANOVA and are presented as Mean ± SEM. * = p value < 
0.05, ** = p value < 0.005 and *** = p value < 0.0005. 
Table 1. Plasma liver enzyme levels. 
Liver Enzyme (IU/L) Plac ebo Lav 1x Lav 10x Lav 100x 
Alanine Aminotransferase—ALT (SGPT 1) 60.5 40.0 41.0 118.0 
Aspartate Aminotransferase—AST (SGOT 2) 178.0 230.0 226.0 345.0 
Gamma-Glutamyl Transferase— γ-GT 3.5 4.0 2.0 4.0 
1 SGPT, Serum Glutamic Pyruvic Transaminase; 2 SGOT, Serum Glutamic Oxaloacetic Transami-
nase. 
3.3. Eﬀect of Lavender Extract on Plasma and Lipoprotein Lipid Levels 
Plasma lipid levels were determined at the beginning (Baseline) and at the end of the 
study after 16 h of fasting. Lipoprotein lipid levels were determined only at the end of the 
study after the mice were sacriﬁced. 
Our data indicate that the administration of doses 1x and 10x resulted in a signiﬁcant 
increase of plasma cholesterol. Additionally, the 10x dose led to a signi ﬁcant increase in 
triglyceride levels, while the 100x dose did not aﬀect plasma triglycerides, while it signif-
icantly decreased plasma cholesterol as comp ared to the placebo group (Figure 3A,D). 
Further analysis of lipoprotein lipid levels showed that the cholesterol increase observed 
with 1x and 10x doses was mainly due to HDL cholesterol levels, while the 100x dose did 
not increase HDL-C levels compared to the pl acebo (Figure 3B,C). The 1x dose led to a 
signiﬁcant increase in LDL and HDL triglyceride content, while the 10x dose a ﬀected 
VLDL and HDL triglyceride levels (Figure 3E,F). 
✱✱✱
✱✱✱✱✱
✱
✱✱✱
✱✱✱
✱✱
✱✱✱
AB
Figure 2. Determination of hepatic lipid levels. Panel (A) indicates the hepatic cholesterol content
and panel (B) the hepatic triglyceride content per gram of liver tissue isolated from all groups of mice.
Data were analyzed using one-way ANOVA and are presented as Mean± SEM. * = p value < 0.05,
** = p value < 0.005 and *** = p value < 0.0005.
Table 1. Plasma liver enzyme levels.
Liver Enzyme (IU/L) Placebo Lav 1 × Lav 10× Lav 100×
Alanine Aminotransferase—ALT (SGPT 1) 60.5 40.0 41.0 118.0
Aspartate Aminotransferase—AST (SGOT 2) 178.0 230.0 226.0 345.0
Gamma-Glutamyl Transferase—γ-GT 3.5 4.0 2.0 4.0
1 SGPT, Serum Glutamic Pyruvic Transaminase;2 SGOT, Serum Glutamic Oxaloacetic Transaminase.
3.3. Effect of Lavender Extract on Plasma and Lipoprotein Lipid Levels
Plasma lipid levels were determined at the beginning (Baseline) and at the end of the
study after 16 h of fasting. Lipoprotein lipid levels were determined only at the end of the
study after the mice were sacrificed.
Our data indicate that the administration of doses 1× and 10× resulted in a significant
increase of plasma cholesterol. Additionally, the 10 × dose led to a significant increase
in triglyceride levels, while the 100 × dose did not affect plasma triglycerides, while it
significantly decreased plasma cholesterol as compared to the placebo group (Figure 3A,D).
Further analysis of lipoprotein lipid levels showed that the cholesterol increase observed
with 1× and 10× doses was mainly due to HDL cholesterol levels, while the 100× dose
did not increase HDL-C levels compared to the placebo (Figure 3B,C). The 1× dose led to
a significant increase in LDL and HDL triglyceride content, while the 10× dose affected
VLDL and HDL triglyceride levels (Figure 3E,F).
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 8 of 17
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 17 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Plasma total cholesterol (A) and triglyceride (D) levels, lipoprotein cholesterol (B,C) and 
triglyceride (E,F). Data were analyzed using one-way ANOVA ( A,D) and two-way ANOVA ( C,F) 
and are presented as Mean ± SEM. VLDL, very low density lipoprotein; IDL, intermediate density 
lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein ; HDL, high density lipoprotein. * = p value < 0.05, ** = p 
value < 0.005 and *** = p value < 0.0005.  
3.4. Eﬀect of Lavender Extract on the Apolipoprotein Content of Plasma Lipoproteins 
Analysis of the apolipoprotein content of plas ma lipoproteins showed that in the placebo 
group signiﬁcant amounts of ApoA1, ApoA2, ApoC1, and ApoE were primarily present in the HDL 
fractions, as expected (Figure 4). ApoΕ in particular was present in the VLDL/IDL/LDL fractions. In 
the 1x and 10x dose groups, treatment with the lavender extract decreased the levels of apolipopro-
tein A2 while it increased the levels of apolipoproteins E, B and C1 compared to the placebo group 
(Figure 4). In addition, administration of the 1x dose led to an increase in the levels of apolipoprotein 
C2, while it did not a ﬀect the levels of apolipoprotein A1 compared to the placebo. In contrast, 
treatment with the 10x dose did not a ﬀect the levels of apolipoprotein C2, while it appeared to in-
crease the levels of apolipoproteins A1 and E relati ve to the placebo. Finally, administration of the 
100x dose led to a notable redistribution of apolipoprotein A2, which now also appears in small LDL 
fractions as well as VLDL (Figure 4). This dose also resulted in the disappearance of apolipoprotein 
B from the HDL fractions and its redistribution in considerably lower amounts in the LDL, com-
pared to the 1x and 10x treated groups. In addition , the 100x dose led to a reduction in all other 
apolipoproteins relative to both the placebo and the other two doses. 
 
AD
B E
✱✱
✱✱✱
✱✱
✱
✱✱✱
✱
✱✱✱
✱✱✱
✱
✱✱✱
✱✱✱
✱✱✱
1         2         3         4          5         6         7         8          9        10
VLDL/ 
IDL LDL HDL
Lipid
free  
1         2         3         4          5         6         7         8          9        10
VLDL/ 
IDL LDL HDL
Lipid
free  
C F
✱✱
✱
✱✱
✱
✱✱
✱✱✱ ✱
✱✱
✱✱✱✱✱✱
✱
✱
Lipoprotein FractionsLipoprotein Fractions
Figure 3. Plasma total cholesterol ( A) and triglyceride ( D) levels, lipoprotein cholesterol ( B,C)
and triglyceride (E,F). Data were analyzed using one-way ANOVA ( A,D) and two-way ANOVA
(C,F) and are presented as Mean ± SEM. VLDL, very low density lipoprotein; IDL, intermediate
density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; HDL, high density lipoprotein. * = p value < 0.05,
** = p value < 0.005 and *** = p value < 0.0005.
3.4. Effect of Lavender Extract on the Apolipoprotein Content of Plasma Lipoproteins
Analysis of the apolipoprotein content of plasma lipoproteins showed that in the
placebo group significant amounts of ApoA1, ApoA2, ApoC1, and ApoE were primarily
present in the HDL fractions, as expected (Figure 4). ApoE in particular was present in the
VLDL/IDL/LDL fractions. In the 1× and 10× dose groups, treatment with the lavender
extract decreased the levels of apolipoprotein A2 while it increased the levels of apolipopro-
teins E, B and C1 compared to the placebo group (Figure 4). In addition, administration of
the 1× dose led to an increase in the levels of apolipoprotein C2, while it did not affect the
levels of apolipoprotein A1 compared to the placebo. In contrast, treatment with the 10×
dose did not affect the levels of apolipoprotein C2, while it appeared to increase the levels
of apolipoproteins A1 and E relative to the placebo. Finally, administration of the 100 ×
dose led to a notable redistribution of apolipoprotein A2, which now also appears in small
LDL fractions as well as VLDL (Figure 4). This dose also resulted in the disappearance
of apolipoprotein B from the HDL fractions and its redistribution in considerably lower
amounts in the LDL, compared to the 1× and 10× treated groups. In addition, the 100×
dose led to a reduction in all other apolipoproteins relative to both the placebo and the
other two doses.
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 9 of 17
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 17 
 
 
 
 Figure 4. Representative Western blot analysis of apolipoprotein content of plasma lipoproteins 
fractions isolated by UCF. ApoA2, Apolipoprotein A2; ApoA1, Apolipoprotein A1; ApoE, Apolipo-
protein E; ApoC1, Apolipoprotein C1; ApoC2, Apolipoprotein C2; ApoC3, Apolipoprotein C3; 
ApoB-48, Apolipoprotein B-48; CM, Chylomicron; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein; IDL, inter-
mediate density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lip oprotein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; UCF, 
ultracentrifugation. 
 
3.5. Eﬀect of Lavender Extract on the Anti-Inﬂammatory and Antioxidant Capacity of HDL 
Based on our previous observations [40] that the apolipoprotein and lipid content of 
HDL particles modulated their functionality, next we proceeded to determine the anti-
inﬂammatory and antioxidant capacity of th e plasma HDL isolated from experimental 
animals. Our results show that the HDL, isolated from mice treated with the 100x dose of 
the lavender extract, possessed the best anti-inﬂammatory capacity compared to the other 
groups and the placebo group, leading to signiﬁcantly reduced TNFα secretion, following 
LPS challenge, in cultured RAW 264.7 macrophages (Figure 5A). 
When we tested HDL from the di ﬀerent mouse groups for its antioxidant capacity, 
we observed a signiﬁcant reduction of DHR oxidation following the addition of HDL iso-
lated from both 10x and 100x groups. Speci ﬁcally, the administration of 10x and 100x 
doses of lavender extract led to the pr oduction of HDL particles with signi ﬁcantly in-
creased antioxidant capacity, with the 10x dose showing the highest capacity compared 
to all other doses and the placebo (Figure 5B). 
 
Figure 5. Anti−inﬂammatory (A) and antioxidant (B) capacity of HDL isolated from the plasma of 
all groups of mice. Panel (A) indicates the eﬀects of HDL on LPS (100 ng/mL)−induced TNFα release 
from cultured RAW 264.7 macrophages. Panel ( B) indicates DHR oxidation rate after the addition 
of 5 µg HDL −cholesterol over the course of 60 mi n. Data were analyzed using two −way ANOVA 
(A) and one−way ANOVA (B) and are presented as Mean ± SEM. * = p value < 0.05, ** = p value < 
0.005 and *** = p value < 0.0005.  
✱✱✱
✱✱
A
+      +      +      +           +      +      +      +       :LPS (100 ng/ml)
---- 50      50      50      50   :HDL (μg/ml)
B
FU/min
✱
Figure 4. Representative Western blot analysis of apolipoprotein content of plasma lipopro-
teins fractions isolated by UCF. ApoA2, Apolipoprotein A2; ApoA1, Apolipoprotein A1; ApoE,
Apolipoprotein E; ApoC1, Apolipoprotein C1; ApoC2, Apolipoprotein C2; ApoC3, Apolipoprotein
C3; ApoB-48, Apolipoprotein B-48; CM, Chylomicron; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein; IDL,
intermediate density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein;
UCF, ultracentrifugation.
3.5. Effect of Lavender Extract on the Anti-Inflammatory and Antioxidant Capacity of HDL
Based on our previous observations [ 40] that the apolipoprotein and lipid content
of HDL particles modulated their functionality, next we proceeded to determine the anti-
inflammatory and antioxidant capacity of the plasma HDL isolated from experimental
animals. Our results show that the HDL, isolated from mice treated with the 100× dose of
the lavender extract, possessed the best anti-inflammatory capacity compared to the other
groups and the placebo group, leading to significantly reduced TNFα secretion, following
LPS challenge, in cultured RAW 264.7 macrophages (Figure 5A).
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 17 
 
 
 
 Figure 4. Representative Western blot analysis of apolipoprotein content of plasma lipoproteins 
fractions isolated by UCF. ApoA2, Apolipoprotein A2; ApoA1, Apolipoprotein A1; ApoE, Apolipo-
protein E; ApoC1, Apolipoprotein C1; ApoC2, Apolipoprotein C2; ApoC3, Apolipoprotein C3; 
ApoB-48, Apolipoprotein B-48; CM, Chylomicron; VLDL, very low-density lipoprotein; IDL, inter-
mediate density lipoprotein; LDL, low-density lip oprotein; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; UCF, 
ultracentrifugation. 
 
3.5. Eﬀect of Lavender Extract on the Anti-Inﬂammatory and Antioxidant Capacity of HDL 
Based on our previous observations [40] that the apolipoprotein and lipid content of 
HDL particles modulated their functionality, next we proceeded to determine the anti-
inﬂammatory and antioxidant capacity of th e plasma HDL isolated from experimental 
animals. Our results show that the HDL, isolated from mice treated with the 100x dose of 
the lavender extract, possessed the best anti-inﬂammatory capacity compared to the other 
groups and the placebo group, leading to signiﬁcantly reduced TNFα secretion, following 
LPS challenge, in cultured RAW 264.7 macrophages (Figure 5A). 
When we tested HDL from the di ﬀerent mouse groups for its antioxidant capacity, 
we observed a signiﬁcant reduction of DHR oxidation following the addition of HDL iso-
lated from both 10x and 100x groups. Speci ﬁcally, the administration of 10x and 100x 
doses of lavender extract led to the pr oduction of HDL particles with signi ﬁcantly in-
creased antioxidant capacity, with the 10x dose showing the highest capacity compared 
to all other doses and the placebo (Figure 5B). 
 
Figure 5. Anti−inﬂammatory (A) and antioxidant (B) capacity of HDL isolated from the plasma of 
all groups of mice. Panel (A) indicates the eﬀects of HDL on LPS (100 ng/mL)−induced TNFα release 
from cultured RAW 264.7 macrophages. Panel ( B) indicates DHR oxidation rate after the addition 
of 5 µg HDL −cholesterol over the course of 60 mi n. Data were analyzed using two −way ANOVA 
(A) and one−way ANOVA (B) and are presented as Mean ± SEM. * = p value < 0.05, ** = p value < 
0.005 and *** = p value < 0.0005.  
✱✱✱
✱✱
A
+      +      +      +           +      +      +      +       :LPS (100 ng/ml)
---- 50      50      50      50   :HDL (μg/ml)
B
FU/min
✱
Figure 5. Anti−inflammatory (A) and antioxidant (B) capacity of HDL isolated from the plasma of all
groups of mice. Panel (A) indicates the effects of HDL on LPS (100 ng/mL)−induced TNFα release
from cultured RAW 264.7 macrophages. Panel (B) indicates DHR oxidation rate after the addition of
5 µg HDL−cholesterol over the course of 60 min. Data were analyzed using two−way ANOVA (A)
and one−way ANOVA (B) and are presented as Mean ± SEM. * = p value < 0.05, ** = p value < 0.005
and *** = p value < 0.0005.
When we tested HDL from the different mouse groups for its antioxidant capacity, we
observed a significant reduction of DHR oxidation following the addition of HDL isolated
from both 10× and 100× groups. Specifically, the administration of 10× and 100× doses
of lavender extract led to the production of HDL particles with significantly increased
antioxidant capacity, with the 10× dose showing the highest capacity compared to all other
doses and the placebo (Figure 5B).
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 10 of 17
3.6. Effect of Lavender Extract on Fasting Glucose Levels and Glucose Tolerance
To evaluate the effects of lavender extract on the glycemic profile of the experimental
animals, we performed a classical glucose tolerance test (GTT) along with a measurement
of fasting plasma glucose levels.
From the glucose tolerance test, performed at the beginning (Baseline) and at the end
of the study, we noted a significant decrease in glucose tolerance with the administration of
1× and 10× doses of lavender extract. Nevertheless, the administration of the 100× dose
had no apparent effect on glucose tolerance, compared to the placebo (Figure 6A,B). Fasting
plasma glucose levels also indicated that the administration of a 100 × dose of lavender
extract led to reduced glucose levels, compared to all other groups (Figure 6C).
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 17 
 
 
 
3.6. Eﬀect of Lavender Extract on Fasting Glucose Levels and Glucose Tolerance 
To evaluate the eﬀects of lavender extract on the glycemic proﬁle of the experimental 
animals, we performed a classical glucose tolerance test (GTT) along with a measurement 
of fasting plasma glucose levels. 
From the glucose tolerance test, performed at the beginning (Baseline) and at the end 
of the study, we noted a signiﬁcant decrease in glucose tolerance with the administration 
of 1x and 10x doses of lavender extract. Nevertheless, the administration of the 100x dose 
had no apparent eﬀect on glucose tolerance, compared to the placebo (Figure 6A,B). Fast-
ing plasma glucose levels also indicated that the administration of a 100x dose of lavender 
extract led to reduced glucose levels, compared to all other groups (Figure 6C). 
                             
 
Figure 6. Eﬀect of lavender extract on the glycemic proﬁle of the experimental animals. (A) Glucose 
tolerance test (GTT) at the beginning (Baseline) and at the end of the study. (B) Mean area under the 
curve (AUC) for each group at the beginning (Base line) and at the end of the study calculated for 
GTT curves. Panel (C) indicates the fasting plasma glucose levels at the beginning (Baseline) and at 
the end of the study. Data were analyzed using one-way ANOVA (A,C) and are presented as Mean 
± SEM. ** = p value < 0.005 and *** = p value < 0.0005.  
 
3.7. Eﬀect of Lavender Extract on Mitochondrial Metabolic Activation of Brown and White Adi-
pose Tissue 
Next, we proceeded to the evaluation of adipose tissue mitochondrial metabolic ac-
tivation. For this purpose, intact mitochondria were isolated from brown (BAT) and white 
(WAT) adipose tissue harvested from the experimental animals. Mitochondrial fractions 
were then analyzed by Western blot for their uncoupling protein 1 (Ucp1), cytochrome C 
(CytC), and cytochrome C oxidase subunit 4 (Cox4) levels. 
Analysis of isolated BAT mitochondria from mice treated with 1x and 10x doses sug-
gested decreased metabolic activation compared to the placebo and the 100x dose groups, 
mainly due to decreased non-shivering thermogenesis, as indicated by Ucp1 levels (Fig-
u r e  7 A , C ) .  I n  c o n t r a s t ,  a d m i n i s t r a t i o n  o f  t h e  1 0 0 x  d o s e  r e s u l t e d  i n  i n c r e a s e d  B A T  
GTT AUC
✱✱✱
✱✱✱
✱✱✱
✱✱✱
✱✱✱✱✱✱
0
50
100
150
Baseline
Lav 1x
Lav 10x
Placebo
Lav 100x
✱✱✱
✱✱
✱✱✱
✱✱
A
B C
Glucose (mg/dl)
Figure 6. Effect of lavender extract on the glycemic profile of the experimental animals. (A) Glucose
tolerance test (GTT) at the beginning (Baseline) and at the end of the study. ( B) Mean area under
the curve (AUC) for each group at the beginning (Baseline) and at the end of the study calculated
for GTT curves. Panel ( C) indicates the fasting plasma glucose levels at the beginning (Baseline)
and at the end of the study. Data were analyzed using one-way ANOVA (A,C) and are presented as
Mean ± SEM. ** = p value < 0.005 and *** = p value < 0.0005.
3.7. Effect of Lavender Extract on Mitochondrial Metabolic Activation of Brown and White
Adipose Tissue
Next, we proceeded to the evaluation of adipose tissue mitochondrial metabolic
activation. For this purpose, intact mitochondria were isolated from brown (BAT) and white
(WAT) adipose tissue harvested from the experimental animals. Mitochondrial fractions
were then analyzed by Western blot for their uncoupling protein 1 (Ucp1), cytochrome C
(CytC), and cytochrome C oxidase subunit 4 (Cox4) levels.
Analysis of isolated BAT mitochondria from mice treated with 1 × and 10× doses
suggested decreased metabolic activation compared to the placebo and the 100 × dose
groups, mainly due to decreased non-shivering thermogenesis, as indicated by Ucp1 levels
(Figure 7A,C). In contrast, administration of the 100 × dose resulted in increased BAT
mitochondria oxidative phosphorylation and non-shivering thermogenesis, as indicated by
the elevated Ucp1 and CytC in relation to Cox4 levels (Figure 7A,C, E).
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 11 of 17
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 17 
 
 
mitochondria oxidative phosphorylation and non-shivering thermogenesis, as indicated 
by the elevated Ucp1 and CytC in relation to Cox4 levels (Figure 7A,C, E). 
 
Figure 7. Representative Western blotting analysis and semiquantitative determination of Ucp1 and 
CytC relative to Cox4 in mitochondrial extracts (Panels A and B). Panels C and D indicate mitochon-
drial Ucp1 and CytC levels corrected for Cox4 le vels, in BAT and WAT respectively. Panel E indi-
cates the relative Ucp1/CytC ratio in BAT and WA T respectively. Data were produced from the 
same blots probed with the indicated antibodies . Statistical analysis was performed using a two-
way ANOVA and are presented as mean ± SEM. Se miquantitative determination of the relative 
protein amounts was performed by ImageJ free so ftware (Fiji, Version 1.52a, Wayne Rasband). 
WAT, white adipose tissue; BAT, brown adipose tissue; Ucp1, uncoupling protein 1; CytC, cyto-
chrome C; Cox4, cytochrome C oxidase subunit 4. * = p value < 0.05, ** = p value < 0.005 and *** = p 
value < 0.0005.  
A similar analysis of WAT mitochondrial fractions showed that all three doses (1x, 
10x and 100x) of lavender extract signi ﬁcantly decrease WAT mitochondrial metabolic 
activation, compared to the placebo, as indicated by the decreased levels of both Ucp1 and 
CytC levels. Nevertheless, the 100x dose administration of the lavender extract led to sig-
niﬁcantly increased levels of both Ucp1 and CytC, compared to the other two doses, indi-
cating enhanced WAT mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and non-shivering ther-
mogenesis, compared to the two groups treated with 1x and 10x doses (Figure 7B,D, E). 
4. Discussion 
The beneﬁts of lavender for human health as we ll as its use for medicinal purposes 
have been known for centuries [2]. In addition  to its antifungal, antibacterial [3–5], anti-
cholinergic, relaxing [2] and antidepressant [7] properties, which have been extensively 
studied, lavender has an important eﬀect on both the cardiovascular system and the man-
agement of blood glucose levels. Preclinical and clinical studies indicated that the use of 
lavender essential oil can lower blood pressure [10,14] and improve coronary circulation 
by reducing aortic cholesterol content and atherosclerotic plaque formation, thus provid-
ing an antiatherogenic eﬀect [11,12] Furthermore, the well-known antioxidant properties 
of lavender oil and solid waste were conﬁrmed by the high phenolic content and antioxi-
dant capacity of the extract and dried extract determined in this research work. 
As part of our ongoing e ﬀorts to valorize aromatic herbs in the pursuit of circular 
economy and environmental bene ﬁts, in the present study we tested the e ﬃcacy and 
Figure 7. Representative Western blotting analysis and semiquantitative determination of Ucp1 and
CytC relative to Cox4 in mitochondrial extracts (Panels (A,B)). Panels (C,D) indicate mitochondrial
Ucp1 and CytC levels corrected for Cox4 levels, in BAT and WAT respectively. Panel E indicates
the relative Ucp1/CytC ratio in BAT and WAT respectively. Data were produced from the same
blots probed with the indicated antibodies. Statistical analysis was performed using a two-way
ANOVA and are presented as mean± SEM. Semiquantitative determination of the relative protein
amounts was performed by ImageJ free software (Fiji, Version 1.52a, Wayne Rasband). WAT, white
adipose tissue; BAT, brown adipose tissue; Ucp1, uncoupling protein 1; CytC, cytochrome C; Cox4,
cytochrome C oxidase subunit 4. * = p value < 0.05, ** = p value < 0.005 and *** = p value < 0.0005.
A similar analysis of WAT mitochondrial fractions showed that all three doses (1×,
10× and 100×) of lavender extract significantly decrease WAT mitochondrial metabolic
activation, compared to the placebo, as indicated by the decreased levels of both Ucp1
and CytC levels. Nevertheless, the 100× dose administration of the lavender extract led
to significantly increased levels of both Ucp1 and CytC, compared to the other two doses,
indicating enhanced WAT mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and non-shivering
thermogenesis, compared to the two groups treated with 1× and 10× doses (Figure 7B,D,E).
4. Discussion
The benefits of lavender for human health as well as its use for medicinal purposes
have been known for centuries [2]. In addition to its antifungal, antibacterial [ 3–5], anti-
cholinergic, relaxing [2] and antidepressant [7] properties, which have been extensively
studied, lavender has an important effect on both the cardiovascular system and the man-
agement of blood glucose levels. Preclinical and clinical studies indicated that the use of
lavender essential oil can lower blood pressure [10,14] and improve coronary circulation
by reducing aortic cholesterol content and atherosclerotic plaque formation, thus providing
an antiatherogenic effect [11,12] Furthermore, the well-known antioxidant properties of
lavender oil and solid waste were confirmed by the high phenolic content and antioxidant
capacity of the extract and dried extract determined in this research work.
As part of our ongoing efforts to valorize aromatic herbs in the pursuit of circular
economy and environmental benefits, in the present study we tested the efficacy and
potential toxicity of a maltodextrin encapsulated lavender extract isolated from the leaves
of the plant after essential oil was removed. Among other benefits, encapsulation was
essential to minimize lavender odor.
Our results summarized in Table 2 show that none of the doses of lavender extract
used affect the body weight of the experimental animals. From the measurement of blood
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 12 of 17
lipids, it appears that the 1× and 10× doses trigger a mild increase in plasma cholesterol.
This increase does not appear to result in adverse effects for health and rather it may be
beneficial since fractionation of plasma lipoproteins and measurement of their lipid content
showed that this increase in plasma cholesterol was mainly due to the increase in HDL
cholesterol. In contrast, the 100× dose appears to reduce plasma cholesterol levels due to a
reduction in the cholesterol content of all lipoprotein fractions. When plasma triglyceride
levels were measured, it was found that the 1× and 10× doses increase triglyceride levels
with the most significant increase in VLDL fraction at the 10× dose and LDL fraction at the
1× dose. Furthermore, it appears that the 100× dose does not affect plasma triglyceride
levels but causes a redistribution of triglycerides with a decrease in VLDL triglycerides and
an increase in HDL triglycerides.
Table 2. Comparison of parameters tested between groups, in relation to the placebo.
Study Groups/Parameters 1 × 10× 100×
Body Weight = = =
Plasma cholesterol + +++ -
Plasma triglycerides = ++ =
Cholesterol in VLDL = = =
Cholesterol in LDL = = =
Cholesterol in HDL + +++ =
Triglycerides in VLDL = ++ =
Triglycerides in LDL +++ = =
Triglycerides in HDL + ++ =
Anti-inflammatory effect of HDL = = +++
Antioxidant activity of HDL = +++ +++
Liver cholesterol = +++ =
Hepatic triglycerides +++ +++ =
Transaminase ALT (SGPT) - - +
Transaminase AST (SGOT) + + +
γ-Glutamyltransferase (γ-GT) = - =
Basal state fasting plasma glucose = = - -
Glucose tolerance - - - - - - =
Ucp1 (BAT) - - - - +
Mitochondrial Cytc (BAT) = = =
Ucp1/Cytc (BAT) + = - -
Ucp1 (WAT) - - - - - - - -
Mitochondrial Cytc (WAT) - - - - - - =
Ucp1/Cytc (WAT) +++ + =
ApoA2 -- -- = #
ApoA1 = + -
ApoE = = -
ApoC1 + + -
ApoC2 + = -
ApoC3 = = =
ApoB48 ++ ++ +
=: no significant change, -: significant decrease corresponding to p value < 0.05, - -: significant decrease corre-
sponding to p value < 0.005, - - -: significant decrease corresponding to p value < 0.0005, +: significant increase
corresponding to p value < 0.05, ++: significant increase corresponding to p value < 0.005, +++: significant increase
corresponding to p value < 0.0005, #: signifies redistribution in the case of lipoproteins.
Apolipoprotein analysis of plasma lipoproteins showed that administration of laven-
der extract at any of the three doses increased apolipoprotein B levels. This increase was
much more pronounced at the 1 × and 10× doses where APOB was also present in the
HDL fractions, while at the 100× dose it was much milder and APOB was only present
in LDL. Recent studies have shown that apolipoprotein B levels follow a direct and linear
correlation with increased cardiovascular risk [25]. At the 1× and 10× doses the increase
in APOB levels is consistent with the corresponding increase in serum triglycerides, sug-
gesting a possible significant increase in residual cardiovascular risk at these doses due to
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 13 of 17
increased number of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. Moreover, at these two doses, APOB
appears in density fractions where HDL particles are expected, suggesting the possible
presence of very small-dense LDL particles, which are particularly atherogenic.
However, the 10× dose appears to increase levels of the atheroprotective apolipopro-
tein A1, an effect that mitigates the increased residual risk associated with increased
presence of APOB-containing triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. ApoA1 promotes the de novo
biogenesis of HDL and this may explain the increased HDL-C levels obtained in the 1×
and 10× groups. On the other hand, the 10× dose slightly increases the levels of ApoC1,
an apolipoprotein that is associated with an adverse effect on lipoprotein profiles including
inhibition of lipoprotein lipase (LpL) and lecithin–cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) activi-
ties, with respective negative effects on lipid profiles [26]. Contrasting these findings with
the two lower doses, the 100× dose triggers only a mild increase in plasma APOB levels
exclusively in the LDL fractions and is not accompanied by any increase in cholesterol or
triglyceride levels of these fractions, indicating the lack of a possible proatherogenic effect
of the 100× dose.
The significant change in lipid and apolipoprotein content observed in HDL lipopro-
tein fractions combined with evidence in the literature for potential antioxidant and anti-
inflammatory [3–5] properties of lavender led us to measure the anti-inflammatory and an-
tioxidant activity of isolated HDL from the plasma from experimental animals treated with
the various doses of our lavender extract. Measurement of HDL anti-inflammatory activity
showed that the 100× dose of lavender extract led to improved HDL anti-inflammatory
activity compared to the placebo treated group, as indicated by the significant reduction in
the release of the proinflammatory cytokine TNFα. Furthermore, following measurement
of HDL antioxidant activity, it appears that the 10× and 100× doses of our lavender extract
led to better antioxidant capacity. Overall, administration of our lavender extract in our
mouse model is associated with notably improved HDL functionality.
The positive effects of lavender extract treatment on HDL functionality led us to
hypothesize that our extract may have a significant benefit on plasma glucose homeosta-
sis [41]. Data in the literature on the effect of lavender essential oil on glucose homeostasis
are conflicting, with some studies supporting beneficial effects in rodents [15,17] and others
showing no effect on the glycemic profile of humans [18]. Our own analysis showed that
the administration of our lavender extract at the doses of 1 × and 10× does not lead to
a change in fasting glucose levels, but rather is associated with reduced post-prandial
plasma glucose clearance consistent with reduced glucose tolerance. However, in agree-
ment with the notable increase in HDL antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activity at the
100× dose, treatment with this dose lowers fasting glucose levels and maintains normal
blood glucose tolerance.
Since glucose tolerance is often associated with obesity, and obesity at the molecular
level is linked to reduced levels of mitochondrial metabolic activity, in the next set of
experiments we performed a biochemical characterization of mitochondrial metabolic
activation of purified mitochondria from WAT and BAT of the mice treated with the three
different doses of our lavender extract. This analysis showed that the administration of
the lavender extract in the 1× and 10× groups resulted in a significant decrease in non-
shivering thermogenesis in BAT. However, treatment with the 100× dose led to a significant
increase in thermogenesis in this tissue, as shown by the levels of Ucp1 compared to the
placebo group, while not affecting ATP production through oxidative phosphorylation
in this tissue. In contrast, administration of all three doses of lavender extract led to a
significant reduction in WAT mitochondrial non-shivering thermogenesis as evidenced by
the reduction in mitochondrial Ucp1 levels, with the greatest reduction observed at the 1×
and 10× doses. On the other hand, ATP production via oxidative phosphorylation was
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 14 of 17
reduced only at 1× and 10× doses compared to the placebo. Overall, it appears that out of
the three doses tested, administration of 100× lavender extract appears to have superior
effects compared to the other two, as it promotes thermogenesis at the expense of ATP
production in both BAT and WAT.
To determine any potential adverse effects of our extract on liver function, we mea-
sured hepatic cholesterol and triglyceride content, as well as ALT, AST, andγ-GT levels
in the plasma of experimental animals. γ-GT is a molecular marker of hepatic oxidative
stress which is a crucial process for the development of NASH. Any value ≤4 is considered
physiological. On the other hand, ALT and AST are more sensitive markers of acute liver
toxicity. Treatment with the 10 × dose increased both liver cholesterol and triglyceride
levels, while the 1 × dose increased only liver triglyceride levels. However, ALT and γ-
GT levels at these doses remained normal, while only AST showed a moderate increase.
In contrast, at the 100 × dose, although no significant change was identified in hepatic
cholesterol and triglyceride levels, a doubling of ALT (SGPT) and AST (SGOT) levels and a
very slight increase in γ-GT were observed compared to the placebo group. Nevertheless,
this increase in hepatic enzyme levels is considered mild for the safety of extract even at
the 100× dose. Based on the very long experience we have with statins, which can also
raise hepatic enzymes, changes up to three-fold are considered acceptable and do not pose
a threat for health or a reason for statin discontinuation. However, with respect to our
extract, longer treatment periods may be needed to clarify this point and show whether
this increase is transient, as it often happens with popular medications like statins [42].
5. Study Limitations
A limitation of our study is that all animals tested were males and approximately
24 weeks old. We have no data on female mice or mice of different ages to evaluate the
impact of sex or age on the outcomes of our study. Another limitation is that we did not
investigate the effects of the extract under different diets (for example high-fat diet) since
in the present study our goal was to investigate the effects of our lavender extract in a
normolipidemic condition and under a standard diet representing a person with normal
dietary habits. Finally, additional toxicity tests, including organ toxicity, are needed for a
complete characterization of the safety profile of the extract.
6. Conclusions
In conclusion, administration of our Levander stoechas extract results in pleiotropic
beneficial effects on lipid and lipoprotein profiles, as well as glucose and adipose tissue
metabolism, with these effects appearing to be dose-dependent. Based on our results,
the 100× dose, which, in mice corresponds to 2110 mg per kg body weight, has the most
beneficial effects (Table 2). Furthermore, no serious safety concerns are raised for this dose
aside from a modest increase in liver enzyme levels detected in the blood.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https:
//www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/nu17010076/s1, Table S1: Physicochemical properties of dried
extract; Table S2: Antioxidant properties of extract and dried extract.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, K.E.K. and P .V .; methodology and investigation, G.K.,
E.Z., S.K., K.G., V .M., P .V ., K.E.K.; G.K., E.Z., S.K., K.G., V .M., P .V . and K.E.K.; resources, K.E.K. and
P .V .; data curation, P .V . and K.E.K.; writing—original draft preparation, G.K., E.Z., S.K., K.G., V .M, P .V .
and K.E.K.; writing—review and editing, G.K., E.Z., S.K., K.G., V .M., P .V . and K.E.K.; visualization,
G.K., E.Z., K.E.K. and P .V .; supervision, K.E.K.; project administration, K.E.K.; funding acquisition,
K.E.K. and P .V . All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 15 of 17
Funding: This research was funded by the Ministry of Agriculture, Program for Agricultural Devel-
opment, ESPA 2014-2020, Submeasure 16.1 and 16.2, grant number M16ΣΥN-00110.
Institutional Review Board Statement: All animal experiments were conducted according to the EU
guidelines of the Protocol for the Protection and Welfare of Animals. The work was authorized by the
Laboratory Animal Centre committee of the University of Patras Medical School and the Veterinary
Authority of the Prefecture of Western Greece (Authorization numberΠ∆E/∆K/44966/198 approved
on 20 February 2023).
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable
Data Availability Statement: The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article were submitted to
the Journal during the review process. Further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest
References
1. Koulivand, P .H.; Khaleghi Ghadiri, M.; Gorji, A. Lavender and the Nervous System.Evid.-Based Complement. Altern. Med. 2013,
2013, 681304. [CrossRef]
2. Batiha, G.E.S.; Teibo, J.O.; Wasef, L.; Shaheen, H.M.; Akomolafe, A.P .; Teibo, T.K.A.; Al-kuraishy, H.M.; Al-Garbeeb, A.I.; Alexiou,
A.; Papadakis, M. A Review of the Bioactive Components and Pharmacological Properties of Lavandula Species. Naunyn
Schmiedebergs Arch. Pharmacol. 2023, 396, 877–900. [CrossRef]
3. Chrysargyris, A.; Panayiotou, C.; Tzortzakis, N. Nitrogen and Phosphorus Levels Affected Plant Growth, Essential Oil Composi-
tion and Antioxidant Status of Lavender Plant (Lavandula angustifolia Mill.). Ind. Crops Prod. 2016, 83, 577–586. [CrossRef]
4. Thaker, V .; Lodhia, M.; Bhatt, K. Antibacterial Activity of Essential Oils from Palmarosa, Evening Primrose, Lavender and
Tuberose. Indian. J. Pharm. Sci. 2009, 71, 134. [CrossRef]
5. Altaei, D.T. Topical Lavender Oil for the Treatment of Recurrent Aphthous Ulceration. Am. J. Dent. 2012, 25, 39–43. [PubMed]
6. Nikoli´ c, M.; Jovanovi´ c, K.K.; Markovi´ c, T.; Markovi´ c, D.; Gligorijevi´ c, N.; Radulovi´ c, S.; Sokovi´ c, M. Chemical Composition,
Antimicrobial, and Cytotoxic Properties of Five Lamiaceae Essential Oils. Ind. Crops Prod. 2014, 61, 225–232. [CrossRef]
7. Ravindran, A.V .; Balneaves, L.G.; Faulkner, G.; Ortiz, A.; McIntosh, D.; Morehouse, R.L.; Ravindran, L.; Yatham, L.N.; Kennedy,
S.H.; Lam, R.W.; et al. Canadian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments (CANMAT) 2016 Clinical Guidelines for the
Management of Adults with Major Depressive Disorder. Can. J. Psychiatry 2016, 61, 576–587. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Sasannejad, P .; Saeedi, M.; Shoeibi, A.; Gorji, A.; Abbasi, M.; Foroughipour, M. Lavender Essential Oil in the Treatment of
Migraine Headache: A Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial. Eur. Neurol. 2012, 67, 288–291. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Lin, P .W.; Chan, W.; Ng, B.F.; Lam, L.C. Efficacy of Aromatherapy ( Lavandula angustifolia) as an Intervention for Agitated
Behaviours in Chinese Older Persons with Dementia: A Cross-over Randomized Trial. Int. J. Geriatr. Psychiatry 2007, 22, 405–410.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Mohammad Rezaie, S.; Shahabinejad, M.; Loripoor, M.; Reza Sayadi, A. The Effect of Aromatherapy with Lavender Essential Oil
on the Working Memory of Women with Multiple Sclerosis.J. Med. Life 2021, 14, 776–781. [CrossRef]
11. Cheong, M.J.; Kim, S.; Kim, J.S.; Lee, H.; Lyu, Y.-S.; Lee, Y.R.; Jeon, B.; Kang, H.W. A Systematic Literature Review and
Meta-Analysis of the Clinical Effects of Aroma Inhalation Therapy on Sleep Problems. Medicine 2021, 100, e24652. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
12. Raisi Dehkordi, Z.; Hosseini Baharanchi, F.S.; Bekhradi, R. Effect of Lavender Inhalation on the Symptoms of Primary Dysmenor-
rhea and the Amount of Menstrual Bleeding: A Randomized Clinical Trial. Complement. Ther. Med. 2014, 22, 212–219. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
13. Kazemzadeh, R.; Nikjou, R.; Rostamnegad, M.; Norouzi, H. Effect of Lavender Aromatherapy on Menopause Hot Flushing: A
Crossover Randomized Clinical Trial. J. Chin. Med. Assoc. 2016, 79, 489–492. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Sheikhan, F.; Jahdi, F.; Khoei, E.M.; Shamsalizadeh, N.; Sheikhan, M.; Haghani, H. Episiotomy Pain Relief: Use of Lavender Oil
Essence in Primiparous Iranian Women. Complement. Ther. Clin. Pr. 2012, 18, 66–70. [CrossRef]
15. Woelk, H.; Schläfke, S. A Multi-Center, Double-Blind, Randomised Study of the Lavender Oil Preparation Silexan in Comparison
to Lorazepam for Generalized Anxiety Disorder. Phytomedicine 2010, 17, 94–99. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Kasper, S.; Gastpar, M.; Müller, W.E.; Volz, H.-P .; Möller, H.-J.; Schläfke, S.; Dienel, A. Lavender Oil Preparation Silexan Is
Effective in Generalized Anxiety Disorder—A Randomized, Double-Blind Comparison to Placebo and Paroxetine. Int. J.
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014, 17, 859–869. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Kasper, S.; Möller, H.J.; Volz, H.P .; Schläfke, S.; Dienel, A. Silexan in Generalized Anxiety Disorder: Investigation of the Therapeutic
Dosage Range in a Pooled Data Set. Int. Clin. Psychopharmacol. 2017, 32. [CrossRef]
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 16 of 17
18. Romine, I.J.; Bush, A.M.; Geist, C.R. Lavender Aromatherapy in Recovery from Exercise. Percept. Mot. Ski. 1999, 88, 756–758.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Nikolaevski˘ı, V .V .; Kononova, N.S.; Pertsovski˘ı, A.I.; Shinkarchuk, I.F. Effect of Essential Oils on the Course of Experimental
Atherosclerosis. Patol. Fiziol. Eksp. Ter. 1990, 52–53.
20. Shiina, Y.; Funabashi, N.; Lee, K.; Toyoda, T.; Sekine, T.; Honjo, S.; Hasegawa, R.; Kawata, T.; Wakatsuki, Y.; Hayashi, S.;
et al. Relaxation Effects of Lavender Aromatherapy Improve Coronary Flow Velocity Reserve in Healthy Men Evaluated by
Transthoracic Doppler Echocardiography.Int. J. Cardiol. 2008, 129, 193–197. [CrossRef]
21. Shimada, K.; Fukuda, S.; Maeda, K.; Kawasaki, T.; Kono, Y.; Jissho, S.; Taguchi, H.; Yoshiyama, M.; Yoshikawa, J. Aromatherapy
Alleviates Endothelial Dysfunction of Medical Staff after Night-Shift Work: Preliminary Observations. Hypertens. Res. 2011,
34, 264–267. [CrossRef]
22. Lytle, J.; Mwatha, C.; Davis, K.K. Effect of Lavender Aromatherapy on Vital Signs and Perceived Quality of Sleep in the
Intermediate Care Unit: A Pilot Study. Am. J. Crit. Care 2014, 23, 24–29. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Gamez, M.J.; Jimenez, J.; Risco, S.; Zarzuelo, A. Hypoglycemic Activity in Various Species of the Genus Lavandula. Part 1:
Lavandula stoechas L. and Lavandula multifida L. Pharmazie 1987, 42, 706–707.
24. Gamez, M.J.; Zarzuelo, A.; Risco, S.; Utrilla, P .; Jimenez, J. Hypoglycemic Activity in Various Species of the GenusLavandula. Part
2: Lavandula dentata and Lavandula latifolia. Pharmazie 1988, 43, 441–442.
25. Sebai, H.; Selmi, S.; Rtibi, K.; Souli, A.; Gharbi, N.; Sakly, M. Lavender ( Lavandula stoaechas L.) Essential Oils Attenuate
Hyperglycemia and Protect against Oxidative Stress in Alloxan-Induced Diabetic Rats. Lipids Health Dis. 2013, 12, 189. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
26. Nasiri Lari, Z.; Hajimonfarednejad, M.; Riasatian, M.; Abolhassanzadeh, Z.; Iraji, A.; Vojoud, M.; Heydari, M.; Shams, M. Efficacy
of Inhaled Lavandula Angustifolia Mill. Essential Oil on Sleep Quality, Quality of Life and Metabolic Control in Patients with
Diabetes Mellitus Type II and Insomnia. J. Ethnopharmacol. 2020, 251, 112560. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. González-Rivera, J.; Duce, C.; Falconieri, D.; Ferrari, C.; Ghezzi, L.; Piras, A.; Tine, M.R. Coaxial Microwave Assisted Hy-
drodistillation of Essential Oils from Five Different Herbs (Lavender, Rosemary, Sage, Fennel Seeds and Clove Buds): Chemical
Composition and Thermal Analysis. Innov. Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 2016, 33, 308–318. [CrossRef]
28. Gouda, M.; El-Din Bekhit, A.; Tang, Y.; Huang, Y.; Huang, L.; He, Y.; Li, X. Recent Innovations of Ultrasound Green Technology in
Herbal Phytochemistry: A Review. Ultrason. Sonochem 2021, 73, 105538. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Yousefi, M.; Rahimi-Nasrabadi, M.; Pourmortazavi, S.M.; Wysokowski, M.; Jesionowski, T.; Ehrlich, H.; Mirsadeghi, S. Supercriti-
cal Fluid Extraction of Essential Oils. TrAC Trends Anal. Chem. 2019, 118, 182–193. [CrossRef]
30. Ullah, H.; Wilfred, C.D.; Shaharun, M.S. Ionic Liquid-Based Extraction and Separation Trends of Bioactive Compounds from
Plant Biomass. Sep. Sci. Technol. 2019, 54, 559–579. [CrossRef]
31. Gonzalez-Rivera, J.; Campanella, B.; Pulidori, E.; Bramanti, E.; Tiné, M.R.; Bernazzani, L.; Onor, M.; Bàrberi, P .; Duce, C.; Ferrari,
C. From Volatiles to Solid Wastes: Towards the Full Valorization of Lavender and Rosemary by Simultaneous in Situ Microwaves
and Ultrasounds Irradiation Extraction. Ind. Crops Prod. 2023, 194, 116362. [CrossRef]
32. Gonzalez-Rivera, J.; Duce, C.; Campanella, B.; Bernazzani, L.; Ferrari, C.; Tanzini, E.; Onor, M.; Longo, I.; Ruiz, J.C.; Tinè, M.R.;
et al. In Situ Microwave Assisted Extraction of Clove Buds to Isolate Essential Oil, Polyphenols, and Lignocellulosic Compounds.
Ind. Crops Prod. 2021, 161, 113203. [CrossRef]
33. Turrini, F.; Beruto, M.; Mela, L.; Curir, P .; Triglia, G.; Boggia, R.; Zunin, P .; Monroy, F. Ultrasound-Assisted Extraction of Lavender
(Lavandula angustifolia Miller, Cultivar Rosa) Solid by-Products Remaining after the Distillation of the Essential Oil. Appl. Sci.
2021, 11, 5495. [CrossRef]
34. Vareltzis, P .; Fotiou, D.; Papatheologou, V .; Kyroglou, S.; Tsachouridou, E.; Goula, A.M. Optimized Solid–Liquid Separation of
Phenolics from Lavender Waste and Properties of the Dried Extracts. Separations 2024, 11, 67. [CrossRef]
35. Nair, A.; Jacob, S. A Simple Practice Guide for Dose Conversion between Animals and Human. J. Basic. Clin. Pharm. 2016,
7, 27–31. [CrossRef]
36. Karavia, E.A.; Papachristou, D.J.; Kotsikogianni, I.; Giopanou, I.; Kypreos, K.E. Deficiency in Apolipoprotein E Has a Protective
Effect on Diet-induced Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease in Mice. FEBS J. 2011, 278, 3119–3129. [CrossRef]
37. Constantinou, C.; Mpatsoulis, D.; Natsos, A.; Petropoulou, P .-I.; Zvintzou, E.; Traish, A.M.; Voshol, P .J.; Karagiannides, I.; Kypreos,
K.E. The Low Density Lipoprotein Receptor Modulates the Effects of Hypogonadism on Diet-Induced Obesity and Related
Metabolic Perturbations. J. Lipid Res. 2014, 55, 1434–1447. [CrossRef]
38. Zvintzou, E.; Xepapadaki, E.; Kalogeropoulou, C.; Filou, S.; Kypreos, K.E. Pleiotropic Effects of Apolipoprotein A-II on High-
Density Lipoprotein Functionality, Adipose Tissue Metabolic Activity and Plasma Glucose Homeostasis. J. Biomed. Res. 2020,
34, 14. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Zvintzou, E.; Skroubis, G.; Chroni, A.; Petropoulou, P .-I.; Gkolfinopoulou, C.; Sakellaropoulos, G.; Gantz, D.; Mihou, I.;
Kalfarentzos, F.; Kypreos, K.E. Effects of Bariatric Surgery on HDL Structure and Functionality: Results from a Prospective Trial.
J. Clin. Lipidol. 2014, 8, 408–417. [CrossRef]
Nutrients 2025, 17, 76 17 of 17
40. Zvintzou, E.; Karampela, D.S.; Vakka, A.; Xepapadaki, E.; Karavia, E.A.; Hatziri, A.; Giannopoulou, P .C.; Kypreos, K.E. High
Density Lipoprotein in Atherosclerosis and Coronary Heart Disease: Where Do We Stand Today? Vasc. Pharmacol. 2021,
141, 106928. [CrossRef]
41. Xepapadaki, E.; Nikdima, I.; Sagiadinou, E.C.; Zvintzou, E.; Kypreos, K.E. HDL and Type 2 Diabetes: The Chicken or the Egg?
Diabetologia 2021, 64, 1917–1926. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Karahalil, B.; Hare, E.; Koç, G.; Uslu, ˙I.; ¸ Sentürk, K.; Özkan, Y. Hepatotoxicity Associated with Statins.Arch. Ind. Hyg. Toxicol.
2017, 68, 254–260. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.