Academic Editor: Luís Silva
Received: 24 November 2024
Revised: 2 January 2025
Accepted: 9 January 2025
Published: 14 January 2025
Citation: Elgharib, I.M.; Abdelhamid,
F.M.; Elshopakey, G.E.; Sembawa, H.;
Albukhari, T.A.; Filimban, W.A.;
Bagadood, R.M.; El-Boshy, M.E.; Risha,
E.F. Therapeutic Potential of Clove Oil
in Mitigating Cadmium-Induced
Hepatorenal Toxicity Through
Antioxidant, Anti-Inflammatory, and
Antiapoptotic Mechanisms.
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94. https://
doi.org/10.3390/ph18010094
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
Therapeutic Potential of Clove Oil in Mitigating
Cadmium-Induced Hepatorenal Toxicity Through Antioxidant,
Anti-Inflammatory, and Antiapoptotic Mechanisms
Inas M. Elgharib 1, Fatma M. Abdelhamid 1
 , Gehad E. Elshopakey 1,2
 , Hatem Sembawa 3
 , Talat A. Albukhari 4,
Waheed A. Filimban 5, Rehab M. Bagadood 6
 , Mohamed E. El-Boshy 1 and Engy F. Risha 1, *
1 Department of Clinical Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Mansoura University,
Mansoura 35516, Egypt; menhm2010@gmail.com (I.M.E.); may_mokh@mans.edu.eg (F.M.A.);
gehadelshopakey@mans.edu.eg (G.E.E.); elboshi@mans.edu.eg (M.E.E.-B.)
2 Department of Veterinary Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Delta University for Science and
Technology, Gamasa 35712, Egypt
3 Department of Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Umm Alqura University, Makkah P .O. Box 7607, Saudi Arabia;
hasembawa@uqu.edu.sa
4 Department of Hematology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Umm Alqura University,
Makkah P .O. Box 7607, Saudi Arabia; tabukhari@uqu.edu.sa
5 Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah P .O. Box 7607, Saudi Arabia;
wahfilim@gmail.com
6 Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Applied Medical Sciences, Umm Al-Qura University,
Makkah P .O. Box 7607, Saudi Arabia; rmbagadood@uqu.edu.sa
* Correspondence: engyrisha@mans.edu.eg; Tel.: +20-120-534-8354; Fax: +20-50-2200-696
Abstract: Hazardous heavy metals, particularly cadmium (Cd), are widely distributed in
the environment and cause oxidative stress in various animal and human organs. Clove oil
(CLO), a common aromatic spice, has been used as a traditional medication as it has potent
anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and hepatoprotective properties. Background/Objectives:
This study aimed to investigate the antioxidant, antiapoptotic, and anti-inflammatory
effects of clove oil (CLO) against hepatorenal toxicity induced by cadmium (Cd). Methods:
Twenty rats were equally divided into four groups: a control group, a Cd group treated
with 15 mg/kg b.wt CdCl 2, a CLO group administered 200 mg/kg b.wt CLO, and a
Cd+CLO group. All groups were orally treated for 4 weeks. Results: Cadmium (Cd)
exposure caused anemia and hepatorenal damage, as evidenced by increased serum levels
of urea, creatinine, uric acid, total bilirubin (including its direct and indirect fractions),
and elevated activities of liver enzymes such as alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate
transaminase (AST), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP). However, total protein and albumin
levels decreased. Furthermore, there was a decrease in the levels of glutathione, glutathione
transferase, and catalase in the liver antioxidant profiles. Meanwhile, malondialdehyde
levels increased. Cadmium toxicity caused elevated expression of liver apoptosis markers,
such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF- α) and caspase-3, and inflammation. CLO
ameliorated the oxidative effects of Cd through decreasing urea (27.4%), creatinine (41.6%),
liver enzymes, and hepatic apoptotic markers while increasing levels of total protein,
albumin, and hepatic values of SOD (60.37%), CAT (64.49%), GSH (50.41%), and GST
(9.16%). Conclusions: Hematological and biochemical parameters, as well as the antioxidant
system, improved following clove oil treatment, leading to a reduction in hepatorenal
damage. Therefore, it is possible to conclude that CLO protects rats from inflammation,
apoptosis, and hepatorenal oxidative damage caused by Cd poisoning. Comprehensive
translational research is required to validate CLO’s efficacy and safety of use in humans.
Future studies should focus on elucidating the precise molecular mechanisms, optimal
dosing strategies, and potential synergistic effects of CLO with other therapeutic agents.
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 https://doi.org/10.3390/ph18010094
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 2 of 20
Keywords: clove oil; cadmium chloride; hepatorenal toxicity; oxidant/antioxidant status;
apoptotic markers
1. Introduction
Cadmium (Cd) is a common heavy metal present in the environment that can be
dangerous to humans and animals. It is involved in both natural and man-made processes,
including geological weathering, the manufacture of batteries, pigments, and electroplating,
the petrochemical, plastic, and refinery industries, and cigarette smoke. Cd mainly accu-
mulates in the liver and kidney but also affects other organs [1]. It was classified in 1993 by
the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) as a Class I carcinogen [2]. The
mechanism of Cd toxicity involves competition between Cd and essential metals, which
modifies cellular processes, such as energy, metabolism, and metal membrane transport [3],
or binding to thiol groups in the mitochondria, causing mitochondrial malfunction and
damage [4]. After exposure, whether via ingestion or inhalation, Cd binds to blood cells,
harming the hematological system and causing anemia [5]. The liver is the main organ for
xenobiotic metabolism and detoxification. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) and the inhibition
of hepatic antioxidant enzyme activity are produced when Cd is bound to hepatic cell
membranes. This results in an increase in total bilirubin and liver functional enzymes
(ALT, AST, and ALP) and a decrease in total protein levels and lipid and lipoprotein
production in the liver, causing endoplasmic reticulum stress and increasing cell death
by raising the levels of reactive oxygen radicals. Cd exposure promotes tissue damage
caused by lipid peroxidation [6], and according to Andjelkovic et al. [7], Cd weakens the
antioxidant enzyme system, causing oxidative stress due to altered gene expression. Cd is
also an immunotoxin inhibitor that damages the immune system and causes apoptosis by
directly interacting with immune cells, changing their status and function, and increasing
within them [ 8]. Studies suggest that Cd may also harm the liver by elevating TNF- α
production [9]. According to Abdelrazek et al. [10], as an essential component of apoptosis,
caspase-3 is upregulated under hazardous conditions, such as Cd toxicity, and is the last
step in many apoptotic pathways. However, the molecular mechanisms behind the toxic
effects of cadmium in the liver and kidney are still not fully understood.
For millennia, people have utilized CLO, a common aromatic spice, as a traditional
medication to treat fever, anemia, diarrhea, coughing, and dental discomfort [ 11] and
as a food preservative. CLO possesses antioxidant properties, depending on the source.
Additionally, it is among the greatest sources of phenolic chemicals, including gallic acid,
eugenol acetate, and eugenol [12]. CLO is also a potent free radical scavenger that donates
hydrogen atoms via its -OH groups [13]. Phytochemical investigations into CLO confirm
its notable concentration of phenolic and flavonoid components and the positive relation-
ship between its antioxidant capacity and phenolic and flavonoid levels. According to
Soliman et al. [14], the amounts of these compounds vary depending on the type of plant
material and the chemical composition of the compounds that can be extracted [15]. The
extracts’ overall lowering power and capacity to scavenge DPPH, which are influenced by
the extraction solvent, were employed to assess their level of antioxidant activity [16]. In the
current investigation, the main components of CLO were recovered using GC-MC, which
is considered the best analytical method for volatile oil [ 17]. We obtained 76% eugenol,
17.4% caryophyllene, 2.12% alpha humulene, and 1.2% eugenol acetate. However, accord-
ing to another study by Bakour et al. [18], the main ingredients are eugenol and eugenol
acetate. This variation could be attributed to a variety of factors, including meteorological
conditions, soil composition, genetic characteristics, age, maturity stage, plant section type,
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 3 of 20
and distillation techniques [ 19]. The amount of volatile metabolites in the oil can vary
depending on the conditions of distillation and storage. The extraction technique utilized
to produce the oil can also have an impact on its chemical makeup [20]. Nevertheless, CLO
possesses potent anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and hepatoprotective properties. Two im-
portant aspects of its anti-inflammatory action are the inhibition of TNF-α and the reduced
production of nitric oxide (NO) radicals. [21]. Furthermore, its effectiveness against cancer
has recently been confirmed [22]. The safe use of clove oil has also been confirmed by the
American Food and Drug Administration (FDA), with 2.5 mg/kg body weight being the
recommended daily consumption according to the World Health Organization (WHO) [23].
Ugenol is the primary phytochemical recovered from CLO with a potent antioxidant effect,
with a total level of nearly 80%, depending on the extraction method. Its constituents are
alpha-humulene, eugenol acetate, and beta-caryophyllene [24].
Our study is groundbreaking in its attempt to bridge a critical knowledge gap. Unlike
previous research, which predominantly focused on the general antioxidant properties of
clove oil, as well as its molecular modulation of cadmium-induced pathophysiology, this
study lays the foundation for its potential therapeutic application against cadmium toxicity
by elucidating how CLO interacts with key oxidative, apoptotic, and inflammatory path-
ways. Furthermore, CLO, as a natural, readily available, and cost-effective remedy, offers
a promising alternative that warrants thorough investigation; thus, this study represents
a critical step toward the development of novel interventions for combating cadmium-
induced hepatorenal damage.
2. Results
2.1. Phytochemical Analysis and Antioxidant Activity of Clove Oil
The total phenolic content of clove oil was 172.38 mg gallic acid equivalent/100 g,
as shown in Table 1. The standard flavonoid content for CLO was 54.358 mg catechin
per 100 g. As presented in Table 2, the antioxidant capacity of CLO was calculated as the
percentage of residual 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (DPPH), which ranged from 49.72
to 85.23, and the lowest percentage of remaining DPPH (49.72) was associated with the
highest concentration of CLO (0.168 mg/mL).
Table 1. Phytochemical analysis of the clove oil sample.
Oil sample
Phytochemical Analysis
Phenolic Contents
“mg gallic acid equivalent/g. oil” Flavonoid Contents “mg catechin equivalent/g. oil”
172.38 54.358
Table 2. Antioxidant activity of the clove oil sample as determined via the DPPH experiment using
standard ascorbic acid.
Sample Conc. (mg/mL) % Remaining DPPH IC50 (mg/mL)
Oil sample
0.168 49.72
0.15720.084 59.94
0.042 75.71
0.021 85.23
Ascorbic acid
0.062 15.267
0.02220.031 39.084
0.016 61.069
0.008 74.809
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 4 of 20
2.2. CLO Analysis Using Gas Chromatography–Mass Spectroscopy (GC–MS)
Table 3 shows that 23 known elements of CLO were examined. There were four
main substances, with eugenol having the highest concentration at 16 min retention time
(RT) and beta-caryophyllene having the lowest concentration at 18 min RT. Alpha humu-
lene presented a 2.1% concentration at 19 min RT, and eugenol acetate presented 1.2% at
21 min RT.
Table 3. GC–MS analysis of CLO.
Compound Name Compound Class Structure Effects Retention Time Focus
Eugenol Phenylpropanoid C 10H12O2
Anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, and
antimicrobial properties 16 min 76.8%
Beta-caryophyllene Sesquiterpene
(Terpenes) C15H24
Anti-inflammatory, analgesic,
antioxidant, neuroprotective, anticancer,
and antimicrobial properties
18 min 17.4%
Alpha-caryophyllene Sesquiterpene
(Terpenes) C15H24
Anti-inflammatory, analgesic, and
anticancer properties 19 min 2.1%
Eugenol acetate Phenylpropanoid C 10H12O2
Anti-inflammatory, antioxidant,
analgesic, and antimicrobial properties 21 min 1.2%
2.3. Hematological Result
When the Cd-intoxicated group was compared to the control group, the hematological
results showed a significant decrease in packed cell volume (PCV%), hemoglobin (Hb
g/dL), and red blood cell count (RBCs × 106), while total leukocyte count was increased in
the Cd group relative to the NC group. Simultaneously, the group treatment with Cd+CLO
showed a marked improvement in its hematological profile compared to the Cd group
(Table 4). Differences in the blood indices MCV , MCH, and MCHC were insignificant across
all study groups (Table 4).
Table 4. Hematological results at the fourth week after clove oil treatment in rats intoxicated with
cadmium (mean ± SE).
Group RBCs
(×106/µL)
Hb
(g/dL)
PCV
(%)
MCV
(fl)
MCH
(pg)
MCHC
(%)
WBCs
(×103/µL)
Control 6.74 ± 0.25 a 14.76 ± 0.23 a 40.60 ± 0.65 a 59.46 ± 2.29 a 21.96 ± 0.71 a 36.97 ± 0.35 a 17.33 ± 0.30 c
Cd 5.42 ± 0.07 c 13.02 ± 0.21 c 34.86 ± 0.41 c 59.60 ± 1.00 b 22.26 ± 0.54 b 37.34 ± 0.36 c 20.29 ± 0.08 a
CLO 6.86 ± 0.24 a 14.57 ± 0.14 a 40.92 ± 0.76 a 59.26 ± 2.00 a 20.56 ± 0.64 a 34.74 ± 0.74 a 17.15 ± 0.34 c
Cd+CLO 6.08 ± 0.06 b 13.59 ± 0.16 b 39.37 ± 1.08 b 60.56 ± 1.11 b 21.83 ± 0.33 b 36.06 ± 0.47 b 19.57 ± 0.04 b
Cd (cadmium), CLO (clove oil). Values with different superscript letters indicate significance at p < 0.05.
2.4. Liver and Kidney Function Biomarkers
The serum blood levels of ALT, AST, and ALP together with total (TB), direct, and indi-
rect bilirubin with globulin were significantly higher, while the serum total protein and al-
bumin were distinctly reduced in the Cd group compared to the NC group (Figures 1 and 2,
p < 0.05 for all). Both Cd+CLO treatment groups presented substantial reductions in the
blood enzyme activities of ALT, AST, and ALP with total and direct bilirubin, simultane-
ously with increased blood total protein and albumin levels, compared to the Cd group
(p < 0.05 for all markers). Furthermore, all tested liver function markers were equal be-
tween the CLO and control groups (Figures 1 and 2). As shown in Table 5, rat kidneys were
negatively impacted by cadmium toxicity, as shown by the markedly higher serum levels
of urea, uric acid, and creatinine in Cd-intoxicated rats compared to the control group.
However, treatment with CLO significantly reduced the renal damage caused by Cd and
decreased urea, uric acid, and creatinine levels, although they did not return to normal.
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 5 of 20
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 21 
 
 
in the blood enzyme activities of ALT, AST, and ALP with total and direct bilirubin, sim-
ultaneously with increased blood total protein and albumin levels, compared to the Cd 
group (p < 0.05 for all markers). Furthermore, all tested liver function markers were equal 
between the CLO and control groups (Figures 1 and 2). As shown in Table 5, rat kidneys 
were negatively impacted by cadmium toxicity, as shown by the markedly higher serum 
levels of urea, uric acid, and creatinine in Cd-intoxicated rats compared to the control 
group. However, treatment with CLO signiﬁcantly reduced the renal damage caused by 
Cd and decreased urea, uric acid, and creatinine levels, although they did not return to 
normal. 
 
Figure 1. Liver function tests at fourth week after clove oil treatment in rats intoxicated with cad-
mium (mean ± SE). Signiﬁcant values are deﬁned as those with distinct superscript letters (p < 0.05). 
The enzymes that convert amino acids to bilirubin are (A) alanine aminotransferase, (B) aspartate 
aminotransferase, (C) alkaline phosphatase, (D) total bilirubin, (E) direct bilirubin, and (F) indirect 
bilirubin. 
 
Figure 2. Proteinogram of rats intoxicated with cadmium at the end of the fourth week after receiv-
ing clove oil treatment (mean ± SE). Signiﬁcant values are deﬁned as those with distinct superscript 
letters (p < 0.05). (A) Globulin, (B) albumin, (C) total protein, and (D) A/G ratio. 
Figure 1. Liver function tests at fourth week after clove oil treatment in rats intoxicated with
cadmium (mean ± SE). Significant values are defined as those with distinct superscript letters
(p < 0.05). The enzymes that convert amino acids to bilirubin are ( A) alanine aminotransferase,
(B) aspartate aminotransferase, (C) alkaline phosphatase, (D) total bilirubin, (E) direct bilirubin, and
(F) indirect bilirubin.
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 21 
 
 
in the blood enzyme activities of ALT, AST, and ALP with total and direct bilirubin, sim-
ultaneously with increased blood total protein and albumin levels, compared to the Cd 
group (p < 0.05 for all markers). Furthermore, all tested liver function markers were equal 
between the CLO and control groups (Figures 1 and 2). As shown in Table 5, rat kidneys 
were negatively impacted by cadmium toxicity, as shown by the markedly higher serum 
levels of urea, uric acid, and creatinine in Cd-intoxicated rats compared to the control 
group. However, treatment with CLO signiﬁcantly reduced the renal damage caused by 
Cd and decreased urea, uric acid, and creatinine levels, although they did not return to 
normal. 
 
Figure 1. Liver function tests at fourth week after clove oil treatment in rats intoxicated with cad-
mium (mean ± SE). Signiﬁcant values are deﬁned as those with distinct superscript letters (p < 0.05). 
The enzymes that convert amino acids to bilirubin are (A) alanine aminotransferase, (B) aspartate 
aminotransferase, (C) alkaline phosphatase, (D) total bilirubin, (E) direct bilirubin, and (F) indirect 
bilirubin. 
 
Figure 2. Proteinogram of rats intoxicated with cadmium at the end of the fourth week after receiv-
ing clove oil treatment (mean ± SE). Signiﬁcant values are deﬁned as those with distinct superscript 
letters (p < 0.05). (A) Globulin, (B) albumin, (C) total protein, and (D) A/G ratio. 
Figure 2. Proteinogram of rats intoxicated with cadmium at the end of the fourth week after receiving
clove oil treatment (mean ± SE). Significant values are defined as those with distinct superscript
letters (p < 0.05). (A) Globulin, (B) albumin, (C) total protein, and (D) A/G ratio.
Table 5. Renal function outcomes in rats intoxicated with cadmium at the end of the fourth week
following clove oil treatment (mean ± SE).
Group Urea
(mg/dL)
Uric Acid
(mg/dL)
Creatinine
(mg/dL)
Control 40.27 ± 0.64 c 0.80 ± 0.02 c 0.44 ± 0.006 c
Cd 62.17 ± 0.61 a 1.18 ± 0.04 a 0.84 ± 0.011 a
CLO 40.22 ± 0.64 c 0.81 ± 0.015 c 0.43 ± 0.0.007 c
Cd+CLO 45.17 ± 0.30 b 0.92 ± 0.011 b 0.49 ± 0.014 b
Cd (cadmium), CLO (clove oil). Values with different superscript letters indicate significance at p < 0.05.
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 6 of 20
2.5. Hepatic Antioxidant and Oxidative Markers
In contrast to the control group, Cd toxicity caused hepatic oxidative stress, as shown
by a significant increase in hepatic MDA and a significant decrease in SOD, CAT, GSH, and
GST antioxidant molecules (p < 0.05 for all) (Table 6). Compared to Cd+CLO intoxicated
rats, the Cd group displayed a significant reduction in hepatic MDA with increased hepatic
concentrations of SOD, CAT, GSH, and GST. In all tests, the antioxidant and oxidative
markers were equal between the CLO and NC groups, except for GST activity, which was
significantly higher in the CLO group (Table 6).
Table 6. The hepatic homogenate of experimental rats treated with clove oil at the end of the fourth
week showed indicators of oxidative stress and antioxidant biomarkers in rats intoxicated with
cadmium (mean ± SE).
Group MDA
(nmol/g.Tissue)
SOD
(U/g.Tissue)
CAT
(U/g.Tissue)
GSH
(mg/g.Tissue)
GST
(U/g.Tissue)
Control 24.54 ± 2.87 c 611.60 ± 0.92 a 19.3 ± 0.07 a 19.54 ± 1.42 a 24.49 ± 0.59 b
Cd 72.93 ± 6.19 a 320.24 ± 44.09 c 10.7 ± 0.16 c 9.68 ± 0.55 c 18.67 ± 0.56 d
CLO 17.97 ± 2.92 c 607.60 ± 2.24 a 19.7 ± 0.007 a 19.02 ± 1.56 a 26.24 ± 0.54 a
Cd+CLO 37.62 ± 3.62 b 513.60 ± 12.34 b 17.6 ± 0.03 b 14.56 ± 0.68 b 20.38 ± 0.26 c
Cd (cadmium chloride), CLO (clove oil). Values with different superscript letters indicate significance at p < 0.05.
MDA (malondialdehyde), SOD (superoxide dismutase), CAT (catalase), GSH (reduced glutathione), and GST
(glutathione-S-transferase).
2.6. Cadmium Residues in Experimental Rat Liver
Table 7 provides a summary of the findings regarding Cd residues in the liver. Rats
exposed to Cd had higher levels of Cd residues than control rats; however, when CLO was
also administered, the concentration of Cd was significantly lower than that in the Cd-only
group. There was no discernible difference in the levels of Cd residues in the liver between
the rats treated with CLO and control rats.
Table 7. Rats that were intoxicated with Cd and treated with CLO for four weeks showed changes in
their liver’s Cd levels (mean ± SE).
Group Cadmium Residues in Liver
(mg/kg Liver)
Control 0.00013 ± 0.000042 c
Cd 0.024496 ± 0.0036 a
CLO 0.000346 ± 0.0001 c
Cd+CLO 0.0333 ± 0.0051 b
Cd (cadmium chloride), CLO (clove oil). Values with different superscript letters indicate significance at p < 0.05.
2.7. Histopathological Investigation
2.7.1. Liver
As shown in Figure 3, normal hepatic parenchyma was observed in the control group
(Figure 3A,B) and CLO group (Figure 3C,D). Several normal hepatic lobules split by
very thin layers of connective tissue septa were also observed. Normal hepatic cords
protruded from the thin-walled core veins of each normal hepatic lobule. A typical portal
region, which includes the bile ducts, hepatic artery, and portal vein, was also present.
The hepatic sections of the Cd group (Figure 3E,F) showed intense portal inflammation,
hydropic hepatocyte degeneration, isolated areas of coagulative necrosis with leukocytic
cells, obstructed sinusoids, and central veins with leukocytic cells. These alterations
decreased in the Cd+CLO group (Figure 3G,H). The hepatocyte patterns were normal; there
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 7 of 20
was less inflammation in the portal region and few leukocytic cells surrounding the CV in
the hepatic sections (Figure 3).
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 21 
 
 
2.7. Histopathological Investigation 
2.7.1. Liver 
As shown in Figure 3, normal hepatic parenchyma was observed in the control group 
(Figure 3A,B) and CLO group (Figure 3C,D). Several normal hepatic lobules split by very 
thin layers of connective tissue septa were also observed. Normal hepatic cords protruded 
from the thin-walled core veins of each normal hepatic lobule. A typical portal region, 
which includes the bile ducts, hepatic artery, and portal vein, was also present. The he-
patic sections of the Cd group (Figure 3E,F) showed intense portal inﬂammation, hydropic 
hepatocyte degeneration, isolated areas of coagulative necrosis with leukocytic cells, ob-
structed sinusoids, and central veins with leukocytic cells. These alterations decreased in 
the Cd+CLO group (Figure 3G,H). The hepatocyte patterns were normal; there was less 
inﬂammation in the portal region and few leukocytic cells surrounding the CV in the he-
patic sections (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Microscopic images of H&E-stained hepatic sections from the control group (A,B) and 
CLO group (C,D) demonstrating typical radially oriented hepatic cords around the central veins 
(CV) with normal portal regions and sinusoids (s). H&E-stained hepatic sections from the Cd group 
(E,F) demonstrating focal areas of coagulative necrosis (black arrowheads), vascular dilation (red 
arrow), marked inﬂammation (black arrows) in the portal areas, and hydropic degeneration in 
hepatocytes (dashed black arrows). H&E-stained hepatic sections from the Cd+CLO group (G,H) 
demonstrating hydropic degeneration in hepatocytes (dashed black arrows) (100 bar 100 is the low 
magniﬁcation, and 400 bar 50 is the high magniﬁcation). 
2.7.2. Kidney 
As demonstrated in Figure 4 renal cortical slices from the control group (Figure 4A,B) 
and CLO group (Figure 4C,D) showed typical tubules and glomeruli with little interstitial 
tissue. The renal cortical sections of the Cd group (Figure 4E,F) exhibited signiﬁcant hy-
dropic degeneration of the tubular epithelium, necrosis, congestion, perivascular edema, 
bleeding, and the inﬁltration of mononuclear cells in the interstitial tissue. The histological 
appearance of the renal cortical sections in the Cd+ CLO group (Figure 4G,H) showed 
some improvement, with decreased tubular epithelial hydropic degeneration. Mild peri-
vascular edema and a few interstitial lymphocytic cell inﬁltrations were observed in a few 
sections. 
Figure 3. Microscopic images of H&E-stained hepatic sections from the control group ( A,B) and
CLO group (C,D) demonstrating typical radially oriented hepatic cords around the central veins
(CV) with normal portal regions and sinusoids (s). H&E-stained hepatic sections from the Cd
group (E,F) demonstrating focal areas of coagulative necrosis (black arrowheads), vascular dilation
(red arrow), marked inflammation (black arrows) in the portal areas, and hydropic degeneration
in hepatocytes (dashed black arrows). H&E-stained hepatic sections from the Cd+CLO group
(G,H) demonstrating hydropic degeneration in hepatocytes (dashed black arrows) (100 bar 100 is the
low magnification, and 400 bar 50 is the high magnification).
2.7.2. Kidney
As demonstrated in Figure 4 renal cortical slices from the control group (Figure 4A,B)
and CLO group (Figure 4C,D) showed typical tubules and glomeruli with little interstitial
tissue. The renal cortical sections of the Cd group (Figure 4E,F) exhibited significant
hydropic degeneration of the tubular epithelium, necrosis, congestion, perivascular edema,
bleeding, and the infiltration of mononuclear cells in the interstitial tissue. The histological
appearance of the renal cortical sections in the Cd+CLO group (Figure 4G,H) showed some
improvement, with decreased tubular epithelial hydropic degeneration. Mild perivascular
edema and a few interstitial lymphocytic cell infiltrations were observed in a few sections.
2.8. Immunohistochemical Expression of Caspase-3 and TNF-α
Liver tissue sections from all the rat groups were immunostained with caspase-3
and TNF-α using immunohistochemical labeling. The control and CLO groups exhibited
negative immunostaining for both caspase-3 and TNF-α markers. When rats were exposed
to Cd toxicity, the levels of caspase-3 displayed strong positive brown immunostaining
against caspase-3 in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes. Liver tissue from the Cd+CLO group
displayed a marked decrease in positive brown immunostaining against caspase-3 in the
cytoplasm of hepatocytes. The statistical analysis showed a significant increase in caspase-3
in the Cd group compared to the control and CLO groups. A significant decrease was
apparent in the Cd+CLO group compared to the others (Figure 5).
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 8 of 20
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 21 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Microscopic images of H&E-stained renal cortical sections revealing normal tubules (T) 
and glomeruli (G) with minimal interstitial tissue in the control group (A,B) and CLO group (C,D). 
H&E-stained renal cortical sections from the Cd group (E,F) revealing severe hydropic degeneration 
of the tubular epithelium (dashed black arrows), necrosis (black arrowheads), congestion (red ar-
rows), and marked perivascular edema (*) with many mononuclear cells inﬁltrating the interstitial 
tissue (thin black arrows). H&E-stained renal cortical sections from the Cd+CLO group (G,H) show-
ing minor perivascular edema (*) and milder hydropic degeneration in a few tubules (dashed black 
arrows) and some mononuclear cells inﬁltrating the interstitial tissue (thin black arrows) (100 bar 
100 is the low magniﬁcation, and 400 bar 50 is the high magniﬁcation). 
2.8. Immunohistochemical Expression of Caspase-3 and TNF-α 
Liver tissue sections from all the rat groups were immunostained with caspase-3 and 
TNF-α using immunohistochemical labeling. The control and CLO groups exhibited neg-
ative immunostaining for both caspase-3 and TNF-α markers. When rats were exposed to 
Cd toxicity, the levels of caspase-3 displayed strong positive brown immunostaining 
against caspase-3 in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes. Liver tissue from the Cd+CLO group 
displayed a marked decrease in positive brown immunostaining against caspase-3 in the 
cytoplasm of hepatocytes. The statistical analysis showed a signiﬁcant increase in caspase-
3 in the Cd group compared to the control and CLO groups. A signiﬁcant decrease was 
apparent in the Cd+CLO group compared to the others (Figure 5). 
When rats were exposed to Cd toxicity, the levels of TNF-α displayed a strong posi-
tive brown immunostaining against TNF-α in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes. Liver tissue 
from the Cd+CLO group displayed a marked decrease in positive brown immunostaining 
against TNF-α in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes. The statistical analysis showed a signiﬁ-
cant increase in TNF-α in the Cd group compared to the control and CLO groups. A sig-
niﬁcant decrease was apparent in the Cd+CLO group compared to the others (Figure 6). 
Figure 4. Microscopic images of H&E-stained renal cortical sections revealing normal tubules (T)
and glomeruli (G) with minimal interstitial tissue in the control group (A,B) and CLO group (C,D).
H&E-stained renal cortical sections from the Cd group (E,F) revealing severe hydropic degeneration
of the tubular epithelium (dashed black arrows), necrosis (black arrowheads), congestion (red arrows),
and marked perivascular edema (*) with many mononuclear cells infiltrating the interstitial tissue
(thin black arrows). H&E-stained renal cortical sections from the Cd+CLO group ( G,H) showing
minor perivascular edema (*) and milder hydropic degeneration in a few tubules (dashed black
arrows) and some mononuclear cells infiltrating the interstitial tissue (thin black arrows) (100 bar 100
is the low magnification, and 400 bar 50 is the high magnification).
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 21 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Immunostained liver section displaying negative immunostaining against caspase-3 in the 
control group (A) and CLO group (B). Liver displayed strong immunostaining against caspase-3 in 
the Cd group (C). Liver sections displayed a marked decrease in immunostaining against caspase-
3 in the Cd+CLO group (D). (IHC, DAB immunostaining, hematoxylin as a counterstain, 100×). Bars 
(E) represent the scores of caspase-3 expressions (mean ± SE). Values with diﬀerent superscript let-
ters are considered signiﬁcant at p < 0.05. 
 
Figure 6. Immunostained liver section displaying negative immunostaining against TNF-α in the 
control group (A) and CLO group (B). Liver displayed strong immunostaining against TNF-α in the 
Cd group (C). Liver sections displayed a marked decrease in immunostaining against TNF-α in the 
Cd+CLO group (D) (IHC, DAB immunostaining, hematoxylin as a counterstain, 100×). Bars (E) rep-
resent the scores of TNF-α expression (mean ± SE). Values with diﬀerent superscript letters are con-
sidered signiﬁcant at p < 0.05. 
3. Discussion 
Cd is a heavy metal that aﬀects the endoplasmic reticulum, cell membrane, mito-
chondria, lysosomes, and a number of enzymes involved in metabolism, detoxiﬁcation, 
and damage repair. Cd-induced hepatotoxicity is a well-known reason for liver damage 
in both humans and animals, according to Rana et al. [25]. CLO (Syzygium aromaticum) is 
one of the most well-known essential oils to have antioxidant properties, depending on 
its source. Additionally, it is also among the greatest sources of phenolic compounds, in-
cluding gallic acid, eugenol acetate, and eugenol [12]. It is a potent free-radical scavenger 
that donates a hydrogen atom via its -OH groups. The eﬀects of Cd administration in the 
Figure 5. Immunostained liver section displaying negative immunostaining against caspase-3 in the
control group (A) and CLO group (B). Liver displayed strong immunostaining against caspase-3 in
the Cd group (C). Liver sections displayed a marked decrease in immunostaining against caspase-3
in the Cd+CLO group (D). (IHC, DAB immunostaining, hematoxylin as a counterstain, 100×). Bars
(E) represent the scores of caspase-3 expressions (mean± SE). Values with different superscript letters
are considered significant at p < 0.05.
When rats were exposed to Cd toxicity, the levels of TNF-α displayed a strong positive
brown immunostaining against TNF- α in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes. Liver tissue
from the Cd+CLO group displayed a marked decrease in positive brown immunostaining
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 9 of 20
against TNF-α in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes. The statistical analysis showed a significant
increase in TNF-α in the Cd group compared to the control and CLO groups. A significant
decrease was apparent in the Cd+CLO group compared to the others (Figure 6).
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 21 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Immunostained liver section displaying negative immunostaining against caspase-3 in the 
control group (A) and CLO group (B). Liver displayed strong immunostaining against caspase-3 in 
the Cd group (C). Liver sections displayed a marked decrease in immunostaining against caspase-
3 in the Cd+CLO group (D). (IHC, DAB immunostaining, hematoxylin as a counterstain, 100×). Bars 
(E) represent the scores of caspase-3 expressions (mean ± SE). Values with diﬀerent superscript let-
ters are considered signiﬁcant at p < 0.05. 
 
Figure 6. Immunostained liver section displaying negative immunostaining against TNF-α in the 
control group (A) and CLO group (B). Liver displayed strong immunostaining against TNF-α in the 
Cd group (C). Liver sections displayed a marked decrease in immunostaining against TNF-α in the 
Cd+CLO group (D) (IHC, DAB immunostaining, hematoxylin as a counterstain, 100×). Bars (E) rep-
resent the scores of TNF-α expression (mean ± SE). Values with diﬀerent superscript letters are con-
sidered signiﬁcant at p < 0.05. 
3. Discussion 
Cd is a heavy metal that aﬀects the endoplasmic reticulum, cell membrane, mito-
chondria, lysosomes, and a number of enzymes involved in metabolism, detoxiﬁcation, 
and damage repair. Cd-induced hepatotoxicity is a well-known reason for liver damage 
in both humans and animals, according to Rana et al. [25]. CLO (Syzygium aromaticum) is 
one of the most well-known essential oils to have antioxidant properties, depending on 
its source. Additionally, it is also among the greatest sources of phenolic compounds, in-
cluding gallic acid, eugenol acetate, and eugenol [12]. It is a potent free-radical scavenger 
that donates a hydrogen atom via its -OH groups. The eﬀects of Cd administration in the 
Figure 6. Immunostained liver section displaying negative immunostaining against TNF-α in the
control group (A) and CLO group ( B). Liver displayed strong immunostaining against TNF- α in
the Cd group (C). Liver sections displayed a marked decrease in immunostaining against TNF- α
in the Cd+CLO group (D) (IHC, DAB immunostaining, hematoxylin as a counterstain, 100×). Bars
(E) represent the scores of TNF-α expression (mean ± SE). Values with different superscript letters
are considered significant at p < 0.05.
3. Discussion
Cd is a heavy metal that affects the endoplasmic reticulum, cell membrane, mito-
chondria, lysosomes, and a number of enzymes involved in metabolism, detoxification,
and damage repair. Cd-induced hepatotoxicity is a well-known reason for liver damage
in both humans and animals, according to Rana et al. [ 25]. CLO ( Syzygium aromaticum)
is one of the most well-known essential oils to have antioxidant properties, depending
on its source. Additionally, it is also among the greatest sources of phenolic compounds,
including gallic acid, eugenol acetate, and eugenol [12]. It is a potent free-radical scavenger
that donates a hydrogen atom via its -OH groups. The effects of Cd administration in
the biological system depend on the route of exposure, the dose administered, and the
duration of exposure. The maximum rate of Cd accumulation was found to be up to 70%,
recorded in the cytoplasm, followed by 15% in the nucleus, with relatively low quantities
recorded in the endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria [ 26]. According to Soliman,
Ibrahim, and El Baz [ 14], Cd is an accumulative toxin in various organs, especially in
the liver of rats, as was found in our research, due to the presence of high concentra-
tions of MT (metallothionine)—a finding in agreement with Nordberg and Nordberg [ 27].
MT in the liver possesses a high affinity for Cd ions [ 28]. A deficiency in MT results in
hepatic injury and accumulation. Moreover, the amount of Cd that accumulates in the
body varies on the exposure’s route, dose, and duration [ 29]. Cd treatment with CLO
reduced the Cd accumulation in hepatic cells because they contain hydroxyl (-OH) and
carbonyl (C=O) functional groups that compete with Cd for sulfhydryl-binding sites on
metallothionine [30]. The considerable decline observed in this study could point to the
detrimental effects of Cd on RBC count, Hb concentration, and PCV%. In addition, we
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 10 of 20
found no significant changes in MCV , MCHC, and MCH, indicating that Cd may cause
normocytic normochromic anemia even after acute exposure, thought to be caused by a
defect in the synthesis of erythropoietin, as Cd directly causes bone marrow mesenchymal
stem cell (BMSC) apoptosis [ 31]. Additionally, our results showed that Cd toxicity caused
a significant increase in WBC count compared to modulators; this result in the control
group, which may be indicative of early induction of inflammatory responses to external
immunity, is consistent with the results of [32]. On the other hand, Cd toxicity induced a
significant decrease in WBC count. The CLO co-treatment improved RBC count, Hb conc,
and PCV%, along with a significant decline in WBC count, compared to the Cd-intoxicated
group due to its anti-inflammatory effects in the lymphoid systems and kidney; this,
in turn, enhanced the reproduction of the erythropoietin hormone, which controls the
generation of red blood cells and their maturation in bone marrow [33].
Cd is a potent hepatotoxic agent [ 34]. In the current investigation, the changes in
total protein and albumin contents in Cd-exposed rat livers showed a loss of the liver’s
protein synthesis capabilities due to mitochondrial and cytosolic dysfunctions [ 35]. In
contrast, serum globulin levels increased somewhat more than in the control group due
to its oxidative action, which stimulated the immune system to produce more globulin
as a defense mechanism [ 36]. The A/G ratio in Cd-intoxicated rats was much lower
than that in the control groups, owing to globulin exceeding that of albumin, with
the CLO treatment regenerating damaged cells in the liver [ 37]. The most recent data
demonstrate a sharp rise in serum liver enzymes and ALP after the fourth week of
Cd poisoning, indicating liver damage and the loss of the integrity of the functioning
membrane, as well as hepatic enzyme leakage into the blood [ 38]. These variations
in hepatic function are supported by histological changes in rat liver cells after Cd
intoxication, including the loss of hepatic architecture and modifications to the lipid
structures of liver tissue. Cell membrane rupture, cytoplasmic vacuolization, and nuclear
pyknosis may be caused by the production of highly reactive radicals and subsequent
lipid peroxidation. In the current study, co-treatment with CLO stabilized the cell
membrane, which resulted in a significant drop in serum ALT, AST, and ALP levels [ 39].
Elevated serum bilirubin levels are a clear marker of liver damage [ 40]. Furthermore, our
study revealed that increased serum total and direct bilirubin, which is a specific sign of
liver damage, may be due to increased hepatocyte damage, inflammatory cell infiltration,
and biliary tract dysfunction, which inhibit hepatocytes from absorbing bilirubin and
the accumulation of fat droplets in Cd-treated rats [ 41]. The co-treatment of CLO with
Cd in the present investigation decreased bilirubin levels by ameliorating the synthetic
function and hepatic excretory mechanism. Cd is a classic nephrotoxin [ 42]. According
to our study, a significant elevation in urea, creatinine, and uric acid was observed in the
Cd-intoxicated group compared to the control group, which was confirmed by the severe
histopathological changes in renal tissue, consistent with the findings of Gabr et al. [ 43]
and Yang and Shu [ 44]. Proximal tubule cell interactions with low-molecular-weight
thiols (cysteine and glutathione) may be the pathophysiology of the harmful effects
on the kidney [ 45]. Moreover, altered DNA methylation patterns, the suppression of
DNA repair processes, and disruption of Na +-K+-ATPase have all been implicated in
Cd-induced nephrotoxicity [ 46]. Co-treatment with CLO led to decreased values in the
kidney function tests compared to the Cd-treated group, which is in agreement with
the results of Hussein et al. [ 47]. Flavonoids act as diuretics, increasing the glomerular
filtration rate [48].
In the present study, exposure to Cd in the Cd-intoxicated group showed a signifi-
cant decrease in the GSH level and CAT, SOD, and GST activity in hepatic homogenates
compared to the control group, indicating the presence of oxidative stress, as clarified
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 11 of 20
in a study by Wang et al. [ 49]. In addition, there was a significant elevation in hepatic
MDA in rats compared to the control group, in agreement with Aja et al. [ 50]. The ox-
idative effect of Cd may be due to the removal of cations from the active sites of several
antioxidant enzymes, such as SOD, CAT, and GPx [ 51], which compete with metals in
these antioxidant enzymes. For example, when Cd replaces selenium in GPx or zinc
in SOD, the antioxidant activity of these enzymes is reduced or lost [ 52]. Co-treatment
with CLO caused a significant elevation of CAT, SOD, GST, and GSH, accompanied by
a decline in MDA, compared to the Cd-intoxicated group, via the hydroxyl groups in
the eugenol transfer electrons or hydrogen atoms to neutralize free radicals, blocking
the oxidative process. In addition, Cd inhibits iron-mediated lipid peroxidation and
the auto-oxidation of Fe 2+ ions [53]. Rats treated with CLO alone showed a consider-
ably higher GST activity than rats in the control group, indicating an improvement in
the antioxidant defense system. It is well established that Cd induction can produce
histopathological alterations and changes in lipid composition, causing macrophages to
release TNF- α (a cytokine that promotes inflammation produced by Kupffer cells) as a
defensive mechanism. However, when cells are subjected to severe infection or toxicity,
NO is produced in high quantities and can cause a pathological state via NO-induced
oxidative stress [ 54]. In the current study, the Cd-treated group showed a significant in-
crease in TNF- α expression compared to the control group when immune histochemical
techniques were applied in [ 55]. Enhanced oxidative stress can disrupt the mitochondrial
membrane’s permeability, releasing cytochrome C into the cytoplasm, where it attaches
to Apaf-1 (apoptotic protease activating factor 1) and initiates the cascade that ends
in cell death [ 56]. In the present study, the treatment with CLO caused a significant
reduction in TNF- α expression to near the control level due to the anti-inflammatory
properties of CLO via the inhibition of the NF-kB factor (nuclear factor kappa light chain
enhancer of activated B cells), a family of highly conserved transcription factors that
modulate inflammatory responses, cellular proliferation, and death by activating TNF- α
and decreasing the production of cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 in macrophage-stimulated
lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
Apoptosis, or programmed cell death, is essential for multicellular organism survival
because it eliminates damaged or infected cells, which may interfere with normal func-
tion [57]. It can be regulated by many modulators and proteins (caspases) [ 58] stimulated
by Cd. Caspase-3 is a crucial molecule for regulating both mitochondrial and death recep-
tor apoptotic pathways [ 59] and is more specific in the detection of apoptotic cells [ 60].
According to our study, caspase-3 activity was significantly enhanced in the liver of the
Cd-intoxicated group compared to the control. This may be because Cd can increase
intracellular ROS, resulting in cellular oxidative stress, and activate the mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK)-family-associated proteins (which control how cells react to a
variety of stimuli, such as proinflammatory cytokines, mitogens, osmotic stress, and
heat shock). They regulate a variety of cellular processes, including apoptosis, mitosis,
differentiation, gene expression, and proliferation [ 61]. This is mediated by abnormal
mitochondrial membrane potential and the expression of apoptosis-related proteins such
as Bax, Bcl-2, and cleaved caspase-3. Along with the co-treatment with CLO causing a
significant decline in caspase-3 compared to the group intoxicated with Cd, our result
agreed with Abadi et al. [ 62]. This may be due to the scavenging of the generated ROS,
with the potent antioxidant effect preventing the release of Ca +2 from the endoplasmic
reticulum into the cytosol, as well as the release of cytochrome C, which ultimately
prompts the activation of cell death. CLO also regulates the apoptotic and anti-apoptotic
protein ratio (Bax/Bcl2 ratio), which causes a decrease in cleaved caspase-3 expression.
Recent research has clarified the important role of clove oil in decreasing the danger-
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 12 of 20
ous effects of COVID-19, such as pneumonia and lung thrombosis, via the inhibition of
thrombin-induced platelet aggregation and improving the blood supply of both the brain
and heart [ 63]. Other research has proven that clove oil has cytotoxic activity against
oral, prostate, lung, brain, and breast cancer due to anti-proliferative capabilities [ 64].
The most relevant contribution of our study is understanding the therapeutic potential
of clove oil (CLO) in mitigating cadmium toxicity, addressing a critical knowledge gap
in the current research. While previous studies have primarily focused on the general
antioxidant properties of CLO and its molecular modulation of cadmium-induced patho-
physiology, this research takes a more comprehensive approach. By investigating how
CLO interacts with key biological pathways, including oxidative stress, apoptosis, and
inflammation, we provide new insights into its potential to counteract the toxic effects of
cadmium exposure. Unlike conventional treatments, CLO is a natural, readily available,
and cost-effective remedy, making it a highly promising alternative for therapeutic use.
Our findings lay the foundation for the further exploration of CLO as a novel intervention
to combat cadmium-induced hepatorenal damage. This study represents a critical first
step toward developing more accessible and effective strategies to prevent and treat cad-
mium toxicity, offering hope for a safer, sustainable approach to managing environmental
toxin exposure.
Building upon the findings of this study, there are several critical areas for future
investigation to further understand and harness the potential of CLO in mitigating cad-
mium toxicity via the study of the precise molecular mechanisms through which clove
oil modulates oxidative stress and inflammation caused by cadmium exposure. In ad-
dition, exploring the role of CLO in chelation and excretion pathways to determine its
efficacy in reducing cadmium accumulation in tissues is of importance. Moreover, con-
ducting dose–response studies to identify the most effective and safest concentrations of
clove oil for mitigating cadmium-induced toxicity across different biological systems is
desirable. Also, further study on the evaluation of the long-term effects of clove oil on
chronic cadmium exposure, especially in populations at risk of prolonged environmental
or occupational exposure, is required, as is a comparative study on the efficacy of clove
oil with other known natural antioxidants or pharmacological interventions in mitigating
cadmium toxicity. Our study’s use of CLO as crude oil presents a limitation, and more
research should be conducted using this oil’s active components. Another restriction is
using a single dose of CLO, where multiple doses should be administered. Future studies
should be applied to demonstrate that CLO has an effective hepatorenal protective effect by
using purified active components and varied dosages of this oil. Furthermore, subsequent
work is necessary to strengthen the understanding of the underlying mechanisms of how
these protective effects occur. Nevertheless, further investigations are required to assess
and compare the efficacy and safety of CLO in both prophylactic and therapeutic uses for
hepatorenal damage related to chronic heavy metal toxicity.
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Chemicals
Dimethyl sulfoxide, CLO, and cadmium chloride (Cdcl2) were acquired from Sigma
Business, Egypt. The kits for SOD, MDA, GSH, catalase, and GST reagents were purchased
from the Biodiagnostic Company, Egypt. The kits for determining total protein, AST, ALT,
and ALP levels for each group of individuals were acquired from Diamond Company, Scy
Tek Laboratories, and Diagnostic Biosystems for caspase-3 and TNF-α, respectively.
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 13 of 20
4.2. Phytochemical Composition of Clove Oil
4.2.1. Total Amount of Phenolics
Gallic acid was used as a standard in the application of the Folin–Ciocalteu technique,
which measures the total phenolic content. The total phenolic content of the oil sample was
determined and reported as milligrams of gallic acid equivalent per gram of oil sample
weight based on the standard curve (y = 0.0062x, r2 = 0.987) [65].
4.2.2. Total Amount of Flavonoids
Using aluminum chloride as a reference standard for catechin, a colorimetric examina-
tion was performed to determine the total flavonoid content. The weight of the oil sample
and standard curve (y = 0.0028x, r2 = 0.988) were used to calculate the amount [66].
4.2.3. Assay for Antioxidant Activity 2,2-Diphenyl-1-Picrylhydrazyl (DPPH)
Ascorbic acid was used as a reference because we examined the antioxidant capacity
of the oil sample using the DPPH• colorimetric method by way of the assay reported by
Kitts et al. [67]. Briefly, an equivalent amount of each sample was combined with methanol
to prepare a serial dilution. A DPPH solution (0.135 mM concentration) was prepared, and
1 mL was added to each sample prior to serial dilution. The mixture was left in the dark at
room temperature for 30 min after the addition of the DPPH solution. Next, the absorbance
of each sample was measured at a wavelength of 517 nm. The % of DPPH• remaining was
calculated using the following equation: [DPPH•] [T/DPPH•]T = 0 × 100. The values were
then plotted aversely to the milligrams of oil sample/mL using an exponential curve to
identify the effective concentration (IC50). IC50 indicates the level of antioxidants needed to
decrease the initial concentration of the DPPH• solution by 50%. The IC50 values indicated
an inverse relationship with the antioxidant capacity of the tested samples.
4.2.4. Gas Chromatography–Mass Spectroscopy (GC–MS) of Clove Oil Samples
We utilized an Agilent 5975C and QP2010-GC–MS with an autosampler equipped
with a capillary column (automatic injector high-purity helium as the carrier gas; injector
temperature maintained at 280 ◦C, split mode (1:10)), followed by an initial temperature
of 40 ◦C and a final temperature of 300 ◦C and an initial time of 5 min and a final time of
7.5 min at 8/min [68].
4.3. Animals and Experimental Protocol
Twenty-six-week-old male albino rats, weighing between 150 and 180 g, were acquired
from Tanta Experimental Animal House and housed in 50 × 30 × 25 cm plastic boxes
with mesh wire covers for a period of 15 days to allow for adjustment. The recorded room
temperature was 25 ± 2 ◦C, with a 12 h light/dark cycle and 60–70% humidity. Rats were
provided with a pellet diet and hydrated with fresh water. The Animal Research Ethical
Committee of the Mansoura Faculty of Veterinary Medicine was involved in this study.
Following a two-week acclimatization period, twenty rats were divided into four equal
groups of five rats each, as depicted in Figure 1. Control group rats were administered
normal saline by oral gavage. Cd group rats were administered an oral gavage dose of
15 mg/kg of Cdcl2 [69]. CLO group rats were given clove oil (CLO) dissolved in DEMSO
at a dose of 200 mg/kg b.wt orally via gavage, as per [70]. The Cd+CLO group was given
identical dosages of Cdcl2 and clove oil every day. All treatments were continued for four
weeks (Figure 7).
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 14 of 20
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14 of 21 
 
 
equal groups of ﬁve rats each, as depicted in Figure 1. Control group rats were adminis-
tered normal saline by oral gavage. Cd group rats were administered an oral gavage dose 
of 15 mg/kg of Cdcl2 [69]. CLO group rats were given clove oil (CLO) dissolved in DEMSO 
at a dose of 200 mg/kg b.wt orally via gavage, as per [70]. The Cd+CLO group was given 
identical dosages of Cdcl2 and clove oil every day. All treatments were continued for four 
weeks( Figure 7). 
 
Figure 7. Experiment design. 
4.4. Sampling 
At the end of the treatments, a suﬃcient amount of blood was drawn while the ani-
mal was sedated (i.p. injection of xylazine, 8–12 mg/kg). The median canthus of each ani-
mal was punctured at a 45° angle using a capillary tube, and the blood samples were sep-
arated into two portions. One portion was collected in tubes containing 0.5 mg/mL EDTA 
dipotassium salt as an anticoagulant, which was carefully mixed to prevent RBC hemoly-
sis for the assessment of hematological parameters. The other portion was left to coagulate 
at room temperature and refrigerated to remove clots. The clear serum was separated and 
centrifuged for 10 min at 3000 rpm and then transferred to an Eppendorf tube and kept at 
−20 °C until biochemical testing started. The ethics committee at Mansoura University rec-
ommended that rats should be euthanized by means of cervical dislocation. The kidney 
and liver were excised and washed, and two portions were collected as follows: liver tis-
sue (0.5 g) was extracted, ground, and homogenized. Frozen 4.5 mL PBS (phosphate buﬀer 
saline (PBS; PH 7.5 ) was added, mixed well, and placed in Falcon tubes before being cen-
trifuged at 825× g for 15 min at 4 °C. After careful separation and maintenance at −20° C, 
the supernatant was used to determine the oxidative and hepatic antioxidant indicators 
[71]. As soon as was feasible, another liver tissue sample was ﬁxed in 10% formalin for 
histological and immunohistochemical analysis. 
  
Figure 7. Experiment design.
4.4. Sampling
At the end of the treatments, a sufficient amount of blood was drawn while the
animal was sedated (i.p. injection of xylazine, 8–12 mg/kg). The median canthus of each
animal was punctured at a 45◦ angle using a capillary tube, and the blood samples were
separated into two portions. One portion was collected in tubes containing 0.5 mg/mL
EDTA dipotassium salt as an anticoagulant, which was carefully mixed to prevent RBC
hemolysis for the assessment of hematological parameters. The other portion was left
to coagulate at room temperature and refrigerated to remove clots. The clear serum was
separated and centrifuged for 10 min at 3000 rpm and then transferred to an Eppendorf tube
and kept at −20 ◦C until biochemical testing started. The ethics committee at Mansoura
University recommended that rats should be euthanized by means of cervical dislocation.
The kidney and liver were excised and washed, and two portions were collected as follows:
liver tissue (0.5 g) was extracted, ground, and homogenized. Frozen 4.5 mL PBS (phosphate
buffer saline (PBS; PH 7.5) was added, mixed well, and placed in Falcon tubes before
being centrifuged at 825× g for 15 min at 4 ◦C. After careful separation and maintenance
at −20 ◦C, the supernatant was used to determine the oxidative and hepatic antioxidant
indicators [71]. As soon as was feasible, another liver tissue sample was fixed in 10%
formalin for histological and immunohistochemical analysis.
4.5. Evaluation of Hematological Parameters
Whole blood samples were used to measure the number of leukocytes (TLCs) and
erythrocytes (RBCs) and estimate the packed cell volume (PCV) and hemoglobin (Hb)
content. The mean corpuscular volume (MCV), mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), and
mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) were calculated in accordance with
Feldman [72].
4.6. Evaluation of Serum Biochemical Parameters
The serum activities of alanine aminotransferase (ALT, catalog No.; AL 1031), aspartate
aminotransferase (AST, catalog No.; AS 1061) (Biodiagnostics Company, Cairo, Egypt), and
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 15 of 20
alkaline phosphatase (ALP , Ref: MD41233) (Spinreact Co., Santa Coloma, Spain), as well as
levels of total, direct, and indirect bilirubin (Diamond, Cairo, Egypt) were evaluated. Total
protein (catalog No.; SB-0250-500) and albumin (catalog No.; SB-028-500) were assessed
using assay kits provided by the Stanbio Labs Company (TX, USA). To calculate A/G,
albumin was divided by the concentration of globulin, which was obtained by subtracting
albumin from total protein [ 73]. Serum creatinine (catalog No.; CR 1251) and serum
urea (catalog No.; UR 2110) were estimated using kits supplied by the Biodiagnostics
Company (Cairo, Egypt), while uric acid (catalog No.; MD41001) was measured following
the protocol of the Spinreact Co. (Santa Coloma, Spain). All these tests were assayed
spectrophotometrically (spectrophotometer, BM, Germany, 5010).
4.7. Assessment of Hepatic Lipid Peroxidation Indicators and Antioxidants in
Hepatic Homogenates
Hepatic malondialdehyde (MDA, catalog No.; MD 25 29) [ 74] and antioxidant pa-
rameters superoxide dismutase (SOD, catalog No.; SD 25 21) [75], catalase (CAT, catalog
No.; CA 25 17) [ 76], and glutathione-S- transferase (GST) [ 77], as well as reduced glu-
tathione (GSH) [78], were assayed spectrophotometrically using commercially available
Bio-Diagnostic ready-made kits (Cairo, Egypt) following the manufacturer’s protocols.
4.8. Cadmium Accumulation in Liver
Atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Perkin-Elmer A.A. Model 800) was used to
assess the amount of Cd in the liver while accounting for background effects. For homoge-
nization, digestion, and thorough drying, each sample (0.5 g) was treated with a 6:1 ratio
of ultrapure concentrated nitric acid/perchloric acid on a hotplate. Before analysis and
quantification using atomic absorption spectrophotometry, the samples were diluted with
deionized water [79].
4.9. Evaluation of Liver Histopathology
To assess liver and kidney damage, histology tests were performed. Hepatic and
renal tissues were preserved in 10% formaldehyde and then implanted in paraffin. The
embedded tissue samples were sectioned (5 µm) and stained with hematoxylin and eosin
in order to evaluate the general histological features. The tissue sections were viewed
under a light microscope (Eclipse E200-LED; Nikon, Kawasaki, Japan) at a magnification of
×400 [80].
4.10. Expression of TNF-α and Caspase-3 via Immunohistochemistry
The sections were rehydrated in two containers and 100% ethanol for ten minutes each
after the paraffin wax was submerged in three containers of fresh xylene for five minutes
each. Subsequently, the sections were washed twice with distilled water. The process of
creating crosslinks via formalin fixation involved soaking slides in sodium citrate buffer
(PH 6.0), heating them to boiling point in a microwave, and then allowing them to cool
on a bench for half an hour before staining with antibodies. Sections should be immersed
in 3% H2O2 to reduce endogamous peroxidase activity, which could otherwise result in
strong background staining, incorporating monoclonal rabbit anti-mouse primary antibody
(dilution 1 in 100) and recombinant human TNF-α (ready to use), matching to their primary
antibodies, incubated overnight at 4◦C in a humidified chamber, and then washed with Tris-
buffered saline (TBS) for TNF-α and caspase-3, respectively. The process of “visualizing”
the marking involved allowing the slides to sit at room temperature for five minutes while
using 3,3′-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB) from Dako, Glostrup, Denmark,
as the chromogen. The slides were incubated with peroxidase-conjugated secondary
anti-rabbit antibodies for half an hour at room temperature. Hematoxylin was used as a
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 16 of 20
counterstain for the semi-quantitative analysis of the immunopositive response distribution
pattern of the hepatic lobule using light microscopy (Olympus CX31, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo,
Japan). They were enumerated, and ImageJ analysis software (NIH, 1.46a, Bethesda, MD,
USA) was used to assess their frequency per 1000 cells [81].
4.11. Statistical Analysis
The statistical analysis in this study was designed to ensure the validity, reliability,
and interpretability of the results. The data were analyzed and presented as the means
with standard errors (using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS, version 17).
All data were tested for normality via Levene’s test. The histogram figures were created
using Excel (Microsoft Office 365, version 2020). A one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
was used to evaluate the variance across groups. A p-value of less than 0.05 was regarded
to indicate an acceptable level of significance.
5. Conclusions
The current study indicated that oxidative stress and apoptotic response play an
essential role in the regulation of Cd-induced hepatic and renal injury. CLO co-treatment
with Cd relatively mitigates the hepatic and renal toxicity of Cd, as proved by improvements
in hematological and biochemical parameters and the attenuation of hepatic oxidative
damage, inflammatory response, and hepatic apoptosis. The protective effect of CLO is
mediated through its antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and antiapoptotic activities. Further
studies are needed to clarify the potent effect of clove oil against coronaviruses and cancer.
Author Contributions: I.M.E.: methodology, formal analysis, data curation, writing—original draft,
review, and editing. H.S., T.A.A., W.A.F. and R.M.B.: conceptualization, validation, visualization, data
curation, and analysis. M.E.E.-B. and G.E.E.: data analysis and reviewing and revising the completed
manuscript. F.M.A. and E.F.R.; conceptualization, validation, visualization, and supervision. E.F.R.:
preparation of the manuscript for publication. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: All experimental procedures were performed in accordance
with the relevant guidelines and regulations of the animal welfare committee at Mansoura Univer-
sity’s Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and were approved with the number MU-ACUC, Ph. D/46.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: All data are contained within the article.
Acknowledgments: The authors express their sincere thanks to Walaa Awadin, Pathology, Fac-
ulty of Veterinary Medicine, Mansoura University, Egypt, for her faithful help in completing the
histopathological findings in this study.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Abbreviations
CLO, clove oil; Cd, cadmium; ALT, alanine transaminase; AST, aspartate transaminase; ALP ,
alkaline phosphatase; SOD, superoxide dismutase; CAT, catalase; GSH, reduced glutathione; GST,
glutathione-S- transferase; MDA, malondialdehyde; ROS, reactive oxygen species; TNF- α, tumor
necrosis factor-alpha.
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 17 of 20
References
1. Ögütçü, G.; Kocamaz, G.; Edebal, O.; Pamuk, S.; Kükner, A. The Effect of L-Carnitine on Cadmium Toxicity in Liver and Kidney
Tissue in Prepubertal Female Rats. Int. J. Morphol. 2024, 42, 819–825. [CrossRef]
2. Wang, Z.; Sun, Y.; Yao, W.; Ba, Q.; Wang, H. Effects of Cadmium Exposure on the Immune System and Immunoregulation.Front.
Immunol. 2021, 12, 695484. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Atere, T.G.; Akinloye, O.A. High dose of standardised extract of Costus afer leaves potentiates cadmium reproductive toxicity in
Wistar rats. Andrologia 2019, 51, e13360. [CrossRef]
4. Okutu Jackson, B.; Enebrayi, O.N. Ameliorative effect of allium sativum and justicia carnea extracts co-administration on acute
cadmium chloride-induced changes on liver function parameters of albino rats. World J. Pharm. Life Sci. 2022, 4, 11–24.
5. Hossein-Khannazer, N.; Azizi, G.; Eslami, S.; Alhassan Mohammed, H.; Fayyaz, F.; Hosseinzadeh, R.; Usman, A.B.; Kamali, A.N.;
Mohammadi, H.; Jadidi-Niaragh, F.; et al. The effects of cadmium exposure in the induction of inflammation. Immunopharmacol.
Immunotoxicol. 2019, 42, 1–8. [CrossRef]
6. Branca, J.J.V .; Pacini, A.; Gulisano, M.; Taddei, N.; Fiorillo, C.; Becatti, M. Cadmium-Induced Cytotoxicity: Effects on Mitochondrial
Electron Transport Chain. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 2020, 8, 604377. [CrossRef]
7. Andjelkovic, M.; Buha Djordjevic, A.; Antonijevic, E.; Antonijevic, B.; Stanic, M.; Kotur-Stevuljevic, J.; Spasojevic-Kalimanovska,
V .; Jovanovic, M.; Boricic, N.; Wallace, D.; et al. Toxic Effect of Acute Cadmium and Lead Exposure in Rat Blood, Liver, and
Kidney. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 274. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Mirkov, I.; Popov Aleksandrov, A.; Ninkov, M.; Tucovic, D.; Kulas, J.; Zeljkovic, M.; Popovic, D.; Kataranovski, M. Immunotoxicol-
ogy of cadmium: Cells of the immune system as targets and effectors of cadmium toxicity. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2021, 149, 112026.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Chen, X.; Bi, M.; Yang, J.; Cai, J.; Zhang, H.; Zhu, Y.; Zheng, Y.; Liu, Q.; Shi, G.; Zhang, Z. Cadmium exposure triggers oxidative
stress, necroptosis, Th1/Th2 imbalance and promotes inflammation through the TNF-α/NF-κB pathway in swine small intestine.
J. Hazard. Mater. 2022, 421, 126704. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Abdelrazek, H.M.A.; Helmy, S.A.; Elsayed, D.H.; Ebaid, H.M.; Mohamed, R.M. Ameliorating effects of green tea extract on
cadmium induced reproductive injury in male Wistar rats with respect to androgen receptors and caspase-3. Reprod. Biol. 2016,
16, 300–308. [CrossRef]
11. Saeed, M.; Khan, M.S.; Alagawany, M.; Farag, M.R.; Alqaisi, O.; Aqib, A.I.; Qumar, M.; Siddique, F.; Ramadan, M.F. Clove
(Syzygium aromaticum) and its phytochemicals in ruminant feed: An updated review. Rend. Lincei Sci. Fis. Nat. 2021, 32, 273–285.
[CrossRef]
12. Fiqardina, A.; Yusrini Djabir, Y.; Santoso, A.; Nurul Salsabil, S.; Ismail, I. The Nephroprotective Effect of Clove Oil (Oleum
Caryophylli) Against Levofloxacin Toxicity in Rats. Iran. J. Toxicol. 2022, 16, 27–34. [CrossRef]
13. Saricaoglu, F.T.; Turhan, S. Performance of mechanically deboned chicken meat protein coatings containing thyme or clove
essential oil for storage quality improvement of beef sucuks. Meat Sci. 2019, 158, 107912. [CrossRef]
14. Soliman, W.; Ibrahim, M.; El Baz, H. In Vitro evaluation ofSyzygium aromaticum L. ethanol extract as biocontrol agent against
postharvest tomato and potato diseases. Egypt. J. Bot. 2019, 59, 81–94.
15. Hemalatha, R.; Nivetha, P .; Mohanapriya, C.; Sharmila, G.; Muthukumaran, C.; Gopinath, M. Phytochemical composition, GC-MS
analysis, in vitro antioxidant and antibacterial potential of clove flower bud (Eugenia caryophyllus) methanolic extract. J. Food Sci.
Technol. 2016, 53, 1189–1198. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Gong, Y.; Liu, X.; He, W.-H.; Xu, H.-G.; Yuan, F.; Gao, Y.-X. Investigation into the antioxidant activity and chemical composition of
alcoholic extracts from defatted marigold (Tagetes erectaL.) residue. Fitoterapia 2012, 83, 481–489. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Zhang, J.; Cao, G.; Xia, Y.; Wen, C.; Fan, Y. Fast analysis of principal volatile compounds in crude and processed Atractylodes
macrocephala by an automated static headspace gas chromatography-mass spectrometry.Pharmacogn. Mag. 2014, 10, 249–253.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Bakour, M.; Soulo, N.; Hammas, N.; Fatemi, H.E.; Aboulghazi, A.; Taroq, A.; Abdellaoui, A.; Al-Waili, N.; Lyoussi, B. The
Antioxidant Content and Protective Effect of Argan Oil and Syzygium aromaticum Essential Oil in Hydrogen Peroxide-Induced
Biochemical and Histological Changes. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2018, 19, 610. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Teles, A.M.; Silva-Silva, J.V .; Fernandes, J.M.P .; Abreu-Silva, A.L.; Calabrese, K.d.S.; Mendes Filho, N.E.; Mouchrek, A.N.;
Almeida-Souza, F. GC-MS Characterization of Antibacterial, Antioxidant, and Antitrypanosomal Activity of Syzygium aromaticum
Essential Oil and Eugenol. Evid. Based Complement. Altern. Med. 2021, 2021, 6663255. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. El Ghallab, Y.; Al Jahid, A.; Jamal Eddine, J.; Ait Haj Said, A.; Zarayby, L.; Derfoufi, S.Syzygium aromaticum L.: Phytochemical
investigation and comparison of the scavenging activity of essential oil, extracts and eugenol. Adv. Tradit. Med. 2019, 20, 153–158.
[CrossRef]
21. Nirmala, M.J.; Durai, L.; Gopakumar, V .; Nagarajan, R. Anticancer and antibacterial effects of a clove bud essential oil-based
nanoscale emulsion system. Int. J. Nanomed. 2019, 14, 6439–6450. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 18 of 20
22. Shehabeldine, A.M.; Doghish, A.S.; El-Dakroury, W.A.; Hassanin, M.M.H.; Al-Askar, A.A.; AbdElgawad, H.; Hashem, A.H.
Antimicrobial, Antibiofilm, and Anticancer Activities of Syzygium aromaticum Essential Oil Nanoemulsion. Molecules 2023,
28, 5812. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Yilmaz-Oral, D.; Onder, A.; Gur, S.; Carbonell-Barrachina, Á.A.; Kaya-Sezginer, E.; Oztekin, C.V .; Zor, M. The beneficial effect of
clove essential oil and its major component, eugenol, on erectile function in diabetic rats. Andrologia 2020, 52, e13606. [CrossRef]
24. Gülçin, ˙I.; Elmasta¸ s, M.; Aboul-Enein, H.Y. Antioxidant activity of clove oil—A powerful antioxidant source.Arab. J. Chem. 2012,
5, 489–499. [CrossRef]
25. Rana, K.; Verma, Y.; Rana, S.V .S. Possible Mechanisms of Liver Injury Induced by Cadmium Sulfide Nanoparticles in Rat.Biol.
Trace Elem. Res. 2020, 199, 216–226. [CrossRef]
26. Cao, X.; Fu, M.; Bi, R.; Zheng, X.; Fu, B.; Tian, S.; Liu, C.; Li, Q.; Liu, J. Cadmium induced BEAS-2B cells apoptosis and
mitochondria damage via MAPK signaling pathway. Chemosphere 2021, 263, 128346. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Nordberg, M.; Nordberg, G.F. Metallothionein and Cadmium Toxicology-Historical Review and Commentary.Biomolecules 2022,
12, 360. [CrossRef]
28. Hong, D.; Min, J.-Y.; Min, K.-B. Association Between Cadmium Exposure and Liver Function in Adults in the United States: A
Cross-sectional Study. J. Prev. Med. Public Health 2021, 54, 471–480. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Djokic, J.; Ninkov, M.; Mirkov, I.; Popov Aleksandrov, A.; Zolotarevski, L.; Kataranovski, D.; Kataranovski, M. Differential effects
of cadmium administration on peripheral blood granulocytes in rats. Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2014, 37, 210–219. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
30. Rafati Rahimzadeh, M.; Rafati Rahimzadeh, M.; Kazemi, S.; Moghadamnia, A.R.; Ghaemi Amiri, M.; Moghadamnia, A.A.
Iron; Benefits or threatens (with emphasis on mechanism and treatment of its poisoning). Hum. Exp. Toxicol. 2023,
42, 09603271231192361. [CrossRef]
31. Ma, Y.; Ran, D.; Shi, X.; Zhao, H.; Liu, Z. Cadmium toxicity: A role in bone cell function and teeth development. Sci. Total Environ.
2021, 769, 144646. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Katsaros, M.; Paschos, P .; Giouleme, O. Red cell distribution width as a marker of activity in inflammatory bowel disease: A
narrative review. Ann. Gastroenterol. 2020, 33, 348–354. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Suresh, S.; Rajvanshi, P .K.; Noguchi, C.T. The Many Facets of Erythropoietin Physiologic and Metabolic Response.Front. Physiol.
2020, 10, 1534. [CrossRef]
34. Al-Baqami, N.; Hamza, R. Protective Effect of Resveratrol against Hepatotoxicity of Cadmium in Male Rats: Antioxidant and
Histopathological Approaches. Coatings 2021, 11, 594. [CrossRef]
35. Hamza, R.Z.; El-Megharbel, S.M.; Altalhi, T.; Gobouri, A.A.; Alrogi, A.A. Hypolipidemic and hepatoprotective synergistic effects
of selenium nanoparticles and vitamin. E against acrylamide-Induced hepatic alterations in male albino mice. Appl. Organomet.
Chem. 2020, 34, e5458. [CrossRef]
36. Koriem, K.M.M.; Fathi, G.E.; Salem, H.A.; Akram, N.H.; Gamil, S.A. Protective role of pectin against cadmium-induced testicular
toxicity and oxidative stress in rats. Toxicol. Mech. Methods 2013, 23, 263–272. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Nayila, I. Effect of Ascorbic Acid Supplementation on Liver Function Tests in Hepatitis C Patients. Open J. Intern. Med. 2020, 10,
263–279. [CrossRef]
38. Hamza, R.Z.; Al-Malki, N.A.; Alharthi, S.; Alharthy, S.A.; Albogami, B.; El-Megharbel, S.M. Chemical Characterization of Taif
Rose (Rosa damascena) Methanolic Extract and Its Physiological Effect on Liver Functions, Blood Indices, Antioxidant Capacity,
and Heart Vitality against Cadmium Chloride Toxicity.Antioxidants 2022, 11, 1229. [CrossRef]
39. Mladenovi´ c, J.; Ognjanovi´ c, B.; Ðor¯devi´ c, N.; Mati´ c, M.; Kneževi´ c, V .; Štajn, A.; Saiˇ ci´ c, Z. Protective effects of oestradiol against
cadmium-induced changes in blood parameters and oxidative damage in rats. Arch. Ind. Hyg. Toxicol. 2014, 65, 37–46. [CrossRef]
40. Ude, C.; Achikanu, C.; Nwobodo, F. Effects of cadmium ion on the structure and function of rat hepatocyte. Sci. Afr. 2014, 13,
349–357.
41. Alshehri, A.S.; El-kott, A.F.; El-Gerbed, M.S.A.; El-Kenawy, A.E.; Albadrani, G.M.; Khalifa, H.S. Kaempferol prevents cadmium
chloride-induced liver damage by upregulating Nrf2 and suppressing NF- κB and keap1. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2021, 29,
13917–13929. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Rana, M.N.; Tangpong, J.; Rahman, M.M. Toxicodynamics of Lead, Cadmium, Mercury and Arsenic-induced kidney toxicity and
treatment strategy: A mini review. Toxicol. Rep. 2018, 5, 704–713. [CrossRef]
43. Gabr, S.A.; Alghadir, A.H.; Ghoniem, G.A. Biological activities of ginger against cadmium-induced renal toxicity.Saudi J. Biol. Sci.
2019, 26, 382–389. [CrossRef]
44. Yang, H.; Shu, Y. Cadmium transporters in the kidney and cadmium-induced nephrotoxicity.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2015, 16, 1484–1494.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. He, L.; Wang, B.; Hay, E.B.; Nebert, D.W. Discovery of ZIP transporters that participate in cadmium damage to testis and kidney.
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2009, 238, 250–257. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 19 of 20
46. Kitamura, M.; Hiramatsu, N. The oxidative stress: Endoplasmic reticulum stress axis in cadmium toxicity. BioMetals 2010, 23,
941–950. [CrossRef]
47. Hussein, R.; Khalaf, M.; Mohamed, W. Hesperidin and eugenol attenuate cadmium-induced nephrotoxicity via regulation of
oxidative stress, Bax/Bcl2 and cleaved caspase 3 expression. Turk. J. Biochem. 2020, 45, 767–775. [CrossRef]
48. Sembiring, F.; Unitly, A.J.A.; Eddy, L. Effects of clove syrup therapy on creatinine, urea, and kidney histology of diabetes mellitus
rat. J. Biotechnol. Conserv. Wallacea 2021, 1, 31–41.
49. Wang, J.; Wang, K.; Ding, L.; Zhao, P .; Zhang, C.; Wang, H.; Yang, Z.; Liu, Z. Alleviating effect of quercetin on cadmium-induced
oxidative damage and apoptosis by activating the Nrf2-keap1 pathway in BRL-3A cells. Front. Pharmacol. 2022, 13, 969892.
[CrossRef]
50. Aja, P .M.; Ekpono, E.U.; Awoke, J.N.; Famurewa, A.C.; Izekwe, F.I.; Okoro, E.J.; Okorie, C.F.; Orji, C.L.; Nwite, F.; Ale, B.A.; et al.
Hesperidin ameliorates hepatic dysfunction and dyslipidemia in male Wistar rats exposed to cadmium chloride. Toxicol. Rep.
2020, 7, 1331–1338. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51. Kandemir, F.M.; Caglayan, C.; Darendelio˘ glu, E.; Küçükler, S.;˙Izol, E.; Kandemir, Ö. Modulatory effects of carvacrol against
cadmium-induced hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity by molecular targeting regulation. Life Sci. 2021, 277, 119610. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
52. Abdeen, A.; Abdelkader, A.; Elgazzar, D.; Aboubakr, M.; Abdulah, O.A.; Shoghy, K.; Abdel-Daim, M.; El-Serehy, H.A.; Najda,
A.; El-Mleeh, A. Coenzyme Q10 supplementation mitigates piroxicam-induced oxidative injury and apoptotic pathways in the
stomach, liver, and kidney.Biomed. Pharmacother. 2020, 130, 110627. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Askari, E.; Fallah, A.A.; Habibian Dehkordi, S.; Bahadoran, S.; Mohebbi, A.; Mohamadi, S. Effect of Dietary Clove (Syzygium
Aromaticum) Essential Oil on Growth Performance, Oxidative Indices, Lipid Profile, and Cadmium Accumulation in Cd-exposed
Quails. J. Environ. Health Sustain. Dev. 2022, 7. [CrossRef]
54. Rumahlatu, D. Effect of cadmium on the concentration and expression of TNF-α protein in sea urchin Diadema setosum (Leske,
1778). Hidrobiológica 2019, 29, 181–188. [CrossRef]
55. Antar, S.A.; El-Gammal, M.A.; Hazem, R.M.; Moustafa, Y.M. Etanercept Mitigates Cadmium Chloride-induced Testicular Damage
in Rats “An Insight into Autophagy, Apoptosis, Oxidative Stress and Inflammation”. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2022, 29,
28194–28207. [CrossRef]
56. Haro-González, J.N.; Castillo-Herrera, G.A.; Martínez-Velázquez, M.; Espinosa-Andrews, H. Clove Essential Oil ( Syzygium
aromaticum L. Myrtaceae): Extraction, Chemical Composition, Food Applications, and Essential Bioactivity for Human Health.
Molecules 2021, 26, 6387. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57. Portt, L.; Norman, G.; Clapp, C.; Greenwood, M.; Greenwood, M.T. Anti-apoptosis and cell survival: A review. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta (BBA) Mol. Cell Res. 2011, 1813, 238–259. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Ulukaya, E.; Acilan, C.; Yilmaz, Y. Apoptosis: Why and how does it occur in biology? Cell Biochem. Funct. 2011, 29, 468–480.
[CrossRef]
59. Lavrik, I.N. Systems biology of apoptosis signaling networks. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2010, 21, 551–555. [CrossRef]
60. Pathak, N.; Mitra, S.; Khandelwal, S. Cadmium Induces Thymocyte Apoptosis via Caspase—Dependent and
Caspase—Independent Pathways. J. Biochem. Mol. Toxicol. 2013, 27, 193–203. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61. Liu, X.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, Y.I.; Yan, Y.; Wang, J.; Gu, J.; Chun, B.; Liu, Z. Investigation of cadmium-induced apoptosis and the
protective effect of N-acetylcysteine in BRL 3A cells. Mol. Med. Rep. 2016, 14, 373–379. [CrossRef]
62. Abadi, A.V .M.; Karimi, E.; Oskoueian, E.; Mohammad, G.R.K.S.; Shafaei, N. Chemical investigation and screening of anti-cancer
potential of Syzygium aromaticum L. bud (clove) essential oil nanoemulsion. 3 Biotech 2022, 12, 49. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Kona, P .; Ajay, B.C.; Gangadhara, K.; Kumar, N.; Choudhary, R.R.; Mahatma, M.K.; Singh, S.; Reddy, K.K.; Bera, S.K.; Sangh,
C.; et al. AMMI and GGE biplot analysis of genotype by environment interaction for yield and yield contributing traits in
confectionery groundnut. Sci. Rep. 2024, 14, 2943. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Mekky, A.E.; Emam, A.E.; Selim, M.N.; Abdelmouty, E.S.; Khedr, M. Antibacterial and antineoplastic MCF-7 and HePG-2
characteristics of the methanolic (80%) clove (Syzygium aromaticum L.) extract. Biomass Convers. Biorefinery 2023, 14, 16787–16798.
[CrossRef]
65. Wolfe, K.; Wu, X.; Liu, R.H. Antioxidant Activity of Apple Peels. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2003, 51, 609–614. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Zhishen, J.; Mengcheng, T.; Jianming, W. The determination of flavonoid contents in mulberry and their scavenging effects on
superoxide radicals. Food Chem. 1999, 64, 555–559. [CrossRef]
67. Kitts, D.D.; Wijewickreme, A.N.; Hu, C. Antioxidant properties of a North American ginseng extract. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 2000,
203, 1–10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. Amelia, B.; Saepudin, E.; Cahyana, A.H.; Rahayu, D.U.; Sulistyoningrum, A.S.; Haib, J. GC-MS analysis of clove ( Syzygium
aromaticum) bud essential oil from Java and Manado. AIP Conf. Proc. 2017, 1862, 030082.
Pharmaceuticals 2025, 18, 94 20 of 20
69. Ognjanovi´ c, B.I.; Markovi´ c, S.D.; Pavlovi´ c, S.Z.; Žiki´ c, R.V .; Štajn, A.; Saiˇ ci´ c, Z.S. Effect of chronic cadmium exposure on
antioxidant defense system in some tissues of rats: Protective effect of selenium. Physiol. Res. 2008, 57, 403–411. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
70. Aboubakr, M. Neuroprotective Effects of Clove Oil in Acrylamide Induced Neurotoxicity in Rats. Pak. Vet. J. 2019, 39, 111–115.
[CrossRef]
71. Fernandez-Botran, R.; Gorantla, V .; Sun, X.; Ren, X.; Perez-Abadia, G.; Crespo, F.A.; Oliver, R.; Orhun, H.I.; Quan, E.E.;
Maldonado, C.; et al. Targeting of glycosaminoglycan-cytokine interactions as a novel therapeutic approach in allotransplantation1.
Transplantation 2002, 74, 623–629. [CrossRef]
72. Feldman, B. Practical Transfusion Medicine for the Small Animal Practitioner; Teton NewMedia: Jackson, WY, USA, 2004. [CrossRef]
73. Kaneko, J. Clinical Biochemistry of Domestic Animals; Academic Press: New York, NY, USA, 2008; Volume 273.
74. Kei, S. Serum lipid peroxide in cerebrovascular disorders determined by a new colorimetric method. Clin. Chim. Acta 1978, 90,
37–43. [CrossRef]
75. Marklund, S.; Marklund, G. Involvement of the Superoxide Anion Radical in the Autoxidation of Pyrogallol and a Convenient
Assay for Superoxide Dismutase. Eur. J. Biochem. 1974, 47, 469–474. [CrossRef]
76. Fossati, P .; Prencipe, L.; Berti, G. Use of 3,5-dichloro-2-hydroxybenzenesulfonic acid/4-aminophenazone chromogenic system in
direct enzymic assay of uric acid in serum and urine. Clin. Chem. 1980, 26, 227–231. [CrossRef]
77. Habig, W.H.; Pabst, M.J.; Jakoby, W.B. Glutathione S-Transferases. J. Biol. Chem. 1974, 249, 7130–7139. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
78. Goldbeg, D.M.; Spooner, R.J. Assay of Glutathione reductase. Methods Enzym. Anal. 1983, 3, 258–265.
79. Thiex, N.; Novotny, L.; Crawford, A. Determination of Ash in Animal Feed: AOAC Official Method 942.05 Revisited. J. AOAC Int.
2012, 95, 1392–1397. [CrossRef]
80. Bancroft, J.D.; Gamble, M. Theory and Practice of Histological Techniques; Elsevier Health Sciences: Philadelphia, PA, USA, 2008.
81. Elshopakey, G.E.; Elazab, S.T. Cinnamon Aqueous Extract Attenuates Diclofenac Sodium and Oxytetracycline Mediated Hepato-
Renal Toxicity and Modulates Oxidative Stress, Cell Apoptosis, and Inflammation in Male Albino Rats. Vet. Sci. 2021, 8, 9.
[CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.