Therapeutic anti-inflammatory 
immune potentials of some 
seaweeds extracts on chemically 
induced liver injury in mice
Eman Bases1, Mostafa M. El-Sheekh1, Shimaa M. El Shafay1, Rania El-shenody1 & 
Mohamed Nassef2
Carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) is a well-known hepatotoxin. This work aimed to assess the therapeutic 
anti-inflammatory immune potentials of the seaweeds Padina pavonia and Jania rubens extracts on 
carbon tetrachloride (CCL4)-caused liver damage in mice. Our experimentation included two testing 
regimens: pre-treatment and post-treatment of P. pavonia and J. rubens extracts in CCL4/mice. Pre-
treatment and post-treatment of P. pavonia and J. rubens extracts in CCL4/mice increased WBCs count 
and lymphocytes relative numbers and reduced the neutrophils and monocytes relative numbers. 
Pre-treatment and post-treatment of CCL4/mice with P. pavonia and J. rubens extracts significantly 
reduced the release amounts of pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-6 and significantly inhibited 
the increased CRP level. Furthermore, pre-treatment and post-treatment of CCL4/mice with P.  
pavonia and J. rubens extracts recovered the activities of GSH, and significantly decreased MDA level. 
CCL4/mice pre-treated and post-treated with P. pavonia and J. rubens extracts decreased alanine 
aminotransferase (AL T) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) levels. Pre- and post-treatment of CCL4/
mice with the P. pavonia and J. rubens extracts ameliorated the liver damages caused by CCl4 and 
significantly inhibited the necrotic area, indicating hepatic cell death and decreased periportal hepatic 
degeneration, fibrosis, and inflammation.
Keywords Seaweeds, Immunomodulatory, Anti-inflammatory, Antioxidants, Hepatoprotective
Abbreviations
CCL4  Carbon tetrachloride
WBCs  White blood cells
CRP  C-reactive protein
MDA  Malondialdehyde
AST  Aspartate aminotransferase
ALT  Alanine aminotransferase
NK  Natural killer
TNF-α  Tumor necrosis factor-alpha
IL-6  Interleukin 6
GSH  Antioxidant enzymes glutathione
Hepatocellular impairment and inflammatory cell infiltration result in cirrhosis and fibrosis 1. One of the 
inflammatory mediators is the tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α), interleukin 6 (IL-6), and C-reactive 
protein (CRP) that are secreted primarily by activated natural killer (NK) and T cells and liver, respectively. Pro-
inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines are recognized for their immunomodulatory, anti-inflammatory, 
and antiviral properties2. TNF-α and IL-6 contribute to systemic inflammation that enhances the immune acute 
stage reaction3, is associated with chronic inflammation, and enhances tumor formation, growth, and metastasis4. 
IFN-γ-activated macrophages secret plenty of cytokine TNF-α, which is a pleiotropic cytokine secreted when 
antigen activation that plays crucial roles in the immune response and may also modulate hepatocyte function2. 
Tripathi et al. 5. reported that TNF aggravates oxidative stress and inflammatory responses- and IL-6 in the 
1Botany Department, Faculty of Science, Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt. 2Zoology Department, Faculty of Science, 
Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt. email: mostafaelsheikh@science.tanta.edu.eg
OPEN
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 1| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports

hepatocytes. CRP is one of the proteins the liver produces that go up in response to inflammation. Its level 
increases in response to specific inflammatory cytokines formed by leucocytes during inflammation.
Inflammation is a natural defense mechanism against infection that occurs in reaction to various events, 
including tissue damage6,7. The pathophysiology of many illnesses is caused by immune system malfunction8,9. 
Because of their capacity to recognize, engulf, and eliminate numerous pathogens, phagocytes like macrophages 
and neutrophils play a critical role in innate immunity10. Inflammatory mediators, including TNF-α, IL-6, and 
CRP , are produced by macrophages and other immune components during the inflammatory response 11,12. 
Modulating immune cell-mediated inflammatory responses is critical for developing a novel anti-inflammatory 
treatment strategy, and immune system modulation is becoming a significant topic in pharmacology13. In hepatic 
inflammation, the damaged hepatocytes and infiltrating inflammatory cells support Kupffer cells, liberating 
cytokines such as TNF-α, IL-6, and CRP 14. The Immunomodulation approach in the inflammatory process is 
related to the nonspecific stimulation of macrophages, monocytes, neutrophils, natural killer (NK) cells, and 
lymphocytes’ activity and effectiveness, as well as the synthesis of numerous effector immune mediators by 
activated cells15.
The main potentials of carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) are liver injury initiation by elevating lipid peroxidation; 
reduction of antioxidants, such as nonenzymatic reduced glutathione (GSH) and Malondialdehyde (MDA), 
activities, production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and increasing of hepatic enzymes aspartate 
aminotransferase (AST) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 16–18. AST and ALT are sensitive biomarkers in 
hepatic damage diagnosis. MDA is a lipid peroxidation end product and a marker of reactive oxygen species 
(ROS). Increased liver inflammation encourages the development of lipid peroxidation products, including 
MDA19,20.
The main effects of brown seaweeds or their compounds are the potential suppression of ROS-initiated 
inflammatory signaling pathways enhanced by chemokines, toll-like receptors, and nuclear factor kappa-light-
chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-κB) signaling molecules and immune regulation of innate and adaptive 
immune responses, particularly by interfering with macrophage and lymphocyte immunity21. Consumption of 
brown seaweed, extracts, or specific chemicals modulates various components of the inflammatory immune 
response, including steady-state immunological parameters, innate and adaptive immune responses, and 
inflammation21.
The underlying mechanisms of the anti-inflammatory impacts of brown seaweed extracts are linked to 
different stages of the inflammatory response. Disruption of the steady state of the body tissue results in the 
immune cells responding to damage or irritation via an innate cascade driving inflammation. Pre-treating 
macrophages and lymphocytes with the seaweed component fucoidan was reported to suppress the pro-
inflammatory reaction or promote anti-inflammatory potentials, leading to NF-kB translocation inhibition and 
reduced levels of pro-inflammatory mediator synthesis22,23.
One of the oxidative stress markers, reactive oxygen species (ROS), is a critical component of the inflammatory 
response, serving a variety of functions after tissue damage, including acute inflammation initiating, clarifying 
infection and necrotic tissue, and mediating various intracellular transduction pathways. Seaweed extracts appear 
to suppress the progression of inflammation, particularly the production of ROS. One of the treatments for 
inflammation is to reduce the formation of ROS, which gives an interesting aspect for studying the inflammatory 
immune response of brown seaweed constituents21.
Liver illnesses have become one of the most frequent and dangerous diseases worldwide due to changes 
in human lifestyle. Furthermore, many approaches have investigated new herbal and marine seaweed-
derived medications to decrease drug-induced liver damage 24. As a result of their rich sources of structurally 
miscellaneous bioactive compounds with immune stimulation, antitumoral, antivirus, immunomodulatory, 
anti-inflammatory properties, and hepatoprotective properties, marine seaweeds have attracted the attention of 
pharmaceutical and medical industries25–30. Seaweed such as P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts reduced oval cell 
proliferation and improved liver architecture, indicating hepatoprotective potentials against chemical-induced 
liver damage. Previously, researchers have demonstrated that seaweed extracts can reduce vascular inflammation 
caused by immune cell adhesion31,32. The marine algae bioactive gradients may impact the immunological and 
inflammatory systems, affecting disease development33,34. Brown seaweed extracts exhibit relatively high levels 
of chlorophyll, carotenoids, fucoxanthin polyphenol phlorotannins that have been shown to possess a range 
of bioactive properties, including anti-oxidant, anti-inflammatory, anti-allergic, anti-cancer, anti-obesity, and 
neuroprotective activities35.
Given these considerations, this paper aimed to investigate the brown and red seaweeds P . pavonica and J. 
rubens extracts efficacy on the immune compartments that potentiate consequent responses to inflammatory 
implications in the carbon tetrachloride (CCl 4)-induced hepatotoxicity animal models of inflammation 
by revealing the protective effects of P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts against chronic hepatic inflammation 
and possible pathways for its immune stimulation, immunomodulatory, anti-inflammatory, antioxidant and 
hepatoprotective potentials.
Materials and methods
Sample collection
P . pavonica and J. rubens (Plate 1) were gathered from Abu Qir Bay, Alexandria, Egypt. Seaweed samples were 
transported in chilled circumstances to the Faculty of Science, Tanta University, Egypt. After that, collected 
macroalgae were washed with tap water and then air-dried in the shade at room temperature before being 
dried at 38 °C in the oven. The dried materials were ground and kept for more studies. The collected seaweeds 
were identified according to morphological criteria as size, shape, and color in conjunction with reference to 
marine benthic seaweed literature. The seaweeds were recognized using the Algae Base website to confirm their 
identification, according to Guiry and Guiry36.
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 2| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Preparation of crude extracts
Padina pavonica and Jania rubens extraction process was conducted following El-Sheekh et al. 37. Briefly, 1 g of 
seaweed powder was soaked in methanol (1:30 w/v) on a rotary shaker at 120 rpm at room temperature for two 
days. The supernatant was heated in the oven at 45 °C to eliminate the extra solvent. The crude extracts were 
dissolved in methanol to a final concentration of 5 mg/mL and kept at −20 °C for future investigations.
Mice
Seventy female 8-week-old albino mice (25 ± 2 g) were supplied by Theodor Bilharz Research Institute (TBRI), 
Cairo, Egypt. Animals were distributed into seven groups, ten mice each, and supplied with a standard pellet 
diet and tap water ad libitum. The experimental protocol was conducted according to the ethics of research 
animals National Institutes of Health (NIH) guidelines and the recommendations of the Institutional Animal 
Ethical Committee (EAC), Faculty of Science, Tanta University, Tanta, Egypt. This study was approved by the 
Faculty of Science, Tanta University’s Scientific Induction Ethics Committee, and guidelines for the humane care 
of animals (IACUC-SCI–TU-0412). It is also confirmed that this study is reported in accordance with ARRIVE 
guidelines.
Study design and treatment
Seven groups of mice were used. The 1st, 2nd, and 3rd groups intraperitoneally (i.p.) received saline (normal 
control), no treatment (CCL4 negative control), and drug (silymarin at 50 mg/kg, positive control), respectively. 
The 4th and 5th groups (post-treatment groups) were intraperitoneally injected with P . pavonica extract (2.5 µg/
mouse) and J. rubens extract (2.3 µg/mouse), respectively, twice a week for seven consecutive weeks post CCL4. 
The 6th and 7th groups (pre-treatment groups), i.p., received P . pavonica extract (2.5  µg/mouse) and Jania. 
rubens extract (2.3 µg/mouse), respectively seven days before CCL 4 injection and then twice a week for seven 
consecutive weeks post-CCL4 injection. Hepatic chronic inflammation in mice groups 2–7 was induced by i.p. 
administration of 0.5 ml/kg of CCl 4 (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) suspended in PBS (final volume, 0.1 mL/mouse) 
twice/week for six constitutive weeks. At the end of the experimentation, mice were sacrificed by cervical 
dislocation, and sera and blood were collected to calculate the count of white blood cells (WBCs), percentage 
of lymphocytes, monocytes, and neutrophils, the level of some pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin 6 
(IL-6), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), inflammatory C-reactive protein (CRP) and antioxidant enzymes 
glutathione (GSH) and malondialdehyde (MDA) and liver function. Liver tissues were dissected to analyze the 
histopathological changes in the treated liver. The pre-treatment and post-treatment doses of P . pavonica and J. 
rubens extracts were determined according to our previous study38.
Leucocytes analysis
At the end of the experimentation, mice were anesthetized, and blood was drained from their retro-orbital 
plexus in heparinized microhematocrit tubes. Blood parameters such as white blood cells (WBC) (103/cm) and 
the relative number of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes in peripheral blood (PB) were evaluated using 
a Nihon Kohden automated hematology analyzer (model MEK-6318 K, Japan).
Sera preparation
The blood of treated mice was collected and left for 3 h to verify complete coagulation. The collected blood was 
centrifuged for 10 min at 3000 rpm. The sera were collected and held at − 80 °C for biochemical investigations.
Assay the functions of liver and kidney
Serum aminotransferase enzymes: aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (U/l) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 
(U/l), creatinine (mg/dl), and urea mg/dl) levels were calorimetrically evaluated by a fully automatic biochemical 
analyzer (Vita lab Selectra E, German) via standard ready-to-use kits (Human Gesellschaft Für Biochemica and 
Diagnostica MBH, Germany). The manufacturer’s manuals were precisely followed throughout the experiment.
Plate 1. Photo of (A) Jania rubens and (B) Padina pavonica.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 3| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Assay of malondialdehyde and antioxidants
Liver specimens were rapidly dissected from treated mice. A liver piece was homogenized in ice-cold KCl 
(1.15% w/v) to get a liver homogenate (10% w/v). Antioxidant enzymes such as malondialdehyde (MDA) and 
glutathione (GSH) were investigated in liver tissue homogenates by enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) 
according to the instructor manual of ready-made kits (CUSABIO, USA).
Assay of inflammatory cytokines and proteins
IL-6, TNF-α, and CRP were estimated by ELISA (enzyme-linked immunoassay) according to the manufacturer’s 
protocol of ELISA-specific kits (CUSABIO, USA).
Histopathological examination
The liver tissues were dissected from the mice and fixed in 10% formalin for three days. The fixed liver tissues were 
dehydrated and rinsed several times in absolute alcohol and then embedded in paraffin. Serial 4–5 μm sections 
from each group were mounted on glass slides. Slides were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) dye for 
microscopic investigation. Under a light microscope, the stained sections were examined and photographed.
Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as the mean ± standard deviation ( n = 10). Results were analyzed by one-way analysis of 
variance (ANOV A), followed by Dunnett’s test, Tukey’s test, or the t-test as post hoc tests. Probability values less 
than 0.05 were considered significant.
Results
Leucocytes profile
In the present study, i.p. pre-treatment and post-treatment of P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts remarkably 
increased WBCs counts in CCL 4/mice by 2.0 and 2.0-fold for Padina. pavonia extract, respectively, and 1.8 
and 1.7-fold for Jania. rubens extract, respectively, compared to CCL 4/mice control. Compared to Silymarin-
treated CCL4/mice (positive control), i.p., pre-treatment and post-treatment of CCL4/mice with Padina. pavonia 
increased the total number of WBCs by 1.2 and 1.2-folds, respectively (Table  1). Notably, intraperitoneal pre-
treatment and post-treatment of CCL 4/mice with P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts successfully increased the 
total number of WBCs. They revealed a remarkable potential in retaining their total number to be closely related 
to the naïve mice control (Table 1).
I.p. pretreatment of CCL 4/mice with Padina pavonia extract and i.p. pre-treatment and post-treatment 
of CCL4/mice with Jania rubens extract increased the lymphocytes relative number compared to CCL 4/mice 
control. In addition, CCL 4/mice pre-treated with Jania rubens extract recorded higher lymphocytes relative 
number compared with CCL4/mice control and Silymarin-treated CCL4/mice (positive control) (Table 1).
Noticeably, i.p. post-treatment of CCL 4/mice with Padina pavonia  extract remarkably increased the 
neutrophil relative number by 2.0, 1.6, and 1.9-fold compared to naïve mice control, naïve CCL 4/mice control, 
and Silymarin-treated CCL4/mice (positive control), respectively (Table 1). Furthermore, i.p. pre-treatment and 
post-treatment of CCL4/mice with J. rubens extract increased the neutrophil relative number by 1.2- and 1.3-
fold compared to naïve mice control. Additionally, CCL4/mice pre-treated with J. rubens recorded an increased 
relative number of neutrophils by 1.2-fold compared to Silymarin-treated CCL4/mice (positive control) (Table 1).
I.p. pre-treatment and post-treatment of CCL 4/mice with P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts  resulted in a 
noticeable nonsignificant reduction of monocytes relative number that reached the least value in CCl 4/mice 
pre-treated with J. rubens extract compared to naïve CCL 4/mice control (Table  1). Furthermore, CCL 4/mice 
pre-treated and post-treated with P . pavonica extracts recorded an increase in the relative number of monocytes 
by 1.2 and 1.3, respectively, and their post-treatment with Jania rubens extract increased the relative number of 
monocytes by 1.1-fold compared to Silymarin-treated CCL4/mice (positive control) (Table 1).
Assay of inflammatory cytokines and proteins
As shown in Fig.  1, CCL4/mice pre- and post-treated with P . pavonica and Jania rubens extracts significantly 
reduced serum TNF-α levels compared to naïve CCL 4/mice control. Additionally, the pre-treatment of CCL 4/
Treatments WBC (× 103)
Leucocytes differentials relative number 
(%)
Lymphocytes Neutrophils Monocytes
Control 9.10 ± 1.70 82.70 ± 4.40 12.10 ± 6.70 6.90 ± 0.78
CCL4 4.70 ± 0.40 70.90 ± 7.00 16.00 ± 5.90 7.90 ± 0.11
CCL4 + Silymarin 8.10 ± 1.60 75.80 ± 7.50 13.20 ± 5.10 6.90 ± 0.65
P . pavonia
Therapeutic dose 9.60 ± 5.70 61.60 ± 5.60 25.30 ± 6.40 7.80 ± 0.06
Prophylactic dose 9.80 ± 5.90 72.50 ± 13.80 12.10 ± 6.20 7.40 ± 0.92
J. rubens
Therapeutic dose 8.60 ± 3.50 71.00 ± 11.50 13.80 ± 6.70 7.20 ± 0.75
Prophylactic dose 8.40 ± 1.90 76.10 ± 8.20 14.90 ± 4.90 5.30 ± 2.30
Table 1. Cellular alternation in peripheral blood leucocytes profile of CCL4/mice treated with PBS, silymarin, 
P . Pavonia and J. Ruben extracts. Data were represented as mean ± SD.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 4| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
mice with J. rubens  extract led to a nonsignificant decrease in serum TNF-α concentration compared to 
silymarin-treated CCL4/mice (positive control) (Fig. 1). Noticeably, CCL4/mice pre-treated with P . pavonica and 
J. rubens extracts recorded the best results in significantly decreasing the serum TNF-α concentration compared 
to the naïve CCL4/mice control and silymarin-treated CCL4/mice (positive control) (Fig. 1).
The effectiveness of the P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts on the serum IL-6 concentration has been investigated 
as shown in Fig.  2. I.P . pre-treatment and post-treatment of CCL4/mice with P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts 
resulted in a significant reduction in serum IL-6 level compared to naïve CCL4/mice control. CCL4/mice i.p. pre-
Fig. 2. Inhibitory effects of P . pavonia and J. rubens extracts on IL-6 (pg/ml) in CCl4-induced liver injury mice. 
Data were represented as mean ± SD. The difference between groups was considered statistically significant 
at P < 0.05. CCL4/mice (n = 10) were i.p inoculated with P . pavonia extract (therapeutic dose: 2.5 µg/mouse; 
prophylactic dose: 2.5 µg/mouse), J. rubens (therapeutic dose: 2.3 µg/mouse; prophylactic dose: 2.3 µg/mouse), 
Silymarin (50 mg/kg) or phosphate buffer saline (PBS). aStatistically significant vs. mice received PBS alone 
(normal control). bStatistically significant vs. CCL4/mice control group received PBS alone (negative control). 
cStatistically significant vs. CCL4/mice group received Silymarin (positive control).
 
Fig. 1. Inhibitory effects of P . pavonia and J. rubens extracts on TNF-α (pg/ml) in CCl4-induced liver injury 
mice. Data were represented as mean ± SD. The difference between groups was considered statistically 
significant at P < 0.05. CCL4/mice (n = 10) were i.p inoculated with P . pavonia extract (therapeutic dose: 2.5 µg/
mouse; prophylactic dose: 2.5 µg/mouse), J. rubens (therapeutic dose: 2.3 µg/mouse; prophylactic dose: 2.3 µg/
mouse), Silymarin (50 mg/kg) or phosphate buffer saline (PBS). aStatistically significant vs. mice received PBS 
alone (normal control). bStatistically significant vs. CCL4/mice control group received PBS alone (negative 
control).
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 5| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
treated and post-treated with P . pavonica and post-treated with J. rubens recorded a significant increase in the 
level of serum IL-6 compared to silymarin-treated CCL 4/mice (positive control). Contrarily, i.p. pre-treatment 
of CCL4/mice with J. rubens extract showed a significant decrease in serum IL-6 concentration compared to 
Silymarin-treated CCL4/mice (positive control) (Fig. 2).
Interestingly, i.p., pre-treatment and post-treatment of CCL 4/mice with the extracts of P . pavonica and J. 
rubens significantly decreased the serum level of CRP compared to naïve CCL4/mice control. Additionally, pre-
treatment and post-treatment of CCL4/mice P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts produced the highest significant 
inhibition in the level of serum CRP comparing to the CCL 4 control group and silymarin-treated CCL 4/mice 
(positive control) (Fig. 3). Intraperitoneal pre-treatment and post-treatment of CCL4/mice with P . pavonica and 
J. rubens significantly increased the serum level of CRP compared to silymarin-treated CCL 4/mice (positive 
control) (Fig. 3).
Assay of malondialdehyde and antioxidants
Oxidative stress plays a key role in liver damage. Hepatotoxicity results in rising ROS generation in hepatocytes, 
triggering GSH depletion and MDA, lipid peroxidation end product, and elevation. MDA is an indicator of 
oxidative stress. ROS production also caused a significant reduction in the activity of antioxidant enzymes, such 
as GSH. Oxidative stress parameters were evaluated by measuring the levels of GSH and MDA due to understand 
the possible mechanisms of the observed hepatoprotective effects. The administration of mice with CCl4 resulted 
in severe liver injury, as showed by the marked elevation in MDA level (Fig.  4). As can be seen in Fig.  1, MDA 
contents were significantly decreased in CCL4/mice pre-treated and post-treated with P . pavonica and J. rubens 
extract compared to those in the naïve CCL 4/mice control. The data showed that i.p., pre-treatment of CCL 4/
mice with P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts produced the highest significant decrease in the hepatic MDA level 
compared to the naïve CCL 4/mice control. Meanwhile, hepatic MDA levels decreased significantly in CCL 4/
mice pre-treated with Jania rubens extract compared to silymarin-treated CCL4/mice (positive control) (Fig. 4). 
However, hepatic GSH level increased significantly in CCL 4/mice post-treated with P . pavonica and J. rubens 
extracts compared to naïve CCL 4/mice control. Post-treatment of CCL 4/mice with Padina pavonia and Jania 
rubens extract led to a significant increase in hepatic GSH level and their pre-treatment with J. rubens extract 
resulted in a significant increase in hepatic GSH level compared to Silymarin-treated CCL 4/mice (positive 
control) (Fig. 5). However, the i.p. pre-treatment and post-treatment of CCL4/mice with P . pavonica and J. rubens 
decreased the MDA level in liver tissues (Fig.  4), and the diminished GSH levels were retained (Fig.  5). These 
results suggest that P . pavonica and J. rubens extract exerts hepatoprotective effects by alleviating oxidative.
Assay of liver and kidney function
Post-treatment of CCL4/mice with P . pavonica extract significantly decreased the level of serum AST. Their pre-
treatment with P . pavonica nonsignificantly reduced the level of serum AST compared to CCL 4/mice control. 
Contrarily, i.p. post-treatment of CCL 4/mice with J. rubens extract significantly increased the level of serum 
AST and their pre-treatment with J. rubens extract nonsignificant increased the level of serum AST compared 
to naïve CCL4/mice control (Table 2). Additionally, i.p. post-treatment of CCL 4/mice with P . pavonica extract 
Fig. 3. Inhibitory effects of P . pavonia and J. rubens extracts on CRP (ng/ml) in CCl4-induced liver injury mice. 
Data were represented as mean ± SD. The difference between groups was considered statistically significant 
at P < 0.05. CCL4/mice (n = 10) were i.p inoculated with P . pavonia extract (therapeutic dose: 2.5 µg/mouse; 
prophylactic dose: 2.5 µg/mouse), J. rubens (therapeutic dose: 2.3 µg/mouse; prophylactic dose: 2.3 µg/mouse), 
Silymarin (50 mg/kg) or phosphate buffer saline (PBS). aStatistically significant vs. mice received PBS alone 
(normal control). bStatistically significant vs. CCL4/mice control group received PBS alone (negative control). 
cStatistically significant vs. CCL4/mice group received Silymarin (positive control).
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 6| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
nonsignificant decreased the level of serum AST compared to Silymarin-treated CCL4/mice. Meanwhile, CCL4/
mice post-treated with J. rubens extract recorded a significant increase in the level of serum AST, and their pre-
treatment with J. rubens nonsignificant increased the level of serum AST compared to Silymarin-treated CCL4/
mice (positive control) (Table 2). Moreover, i.p. pre-treatment and post-treatment of CCL4/mice with P . pavonica 
and J. rubens extract significantly decreased the level of serum ALT compared to naïve CCL 4/mice control. 
Additionally, i.p. post-treatment of CCL 4/mice with P . pavonica extract nonsignificant decreased the level of 
Fig. 5. Attenuated effects of P . pavonia and J. rubens extracts on GSH (ng/mg) in CCl4-induced liver injury 
mice. Data were represented as mean ± SD. The difference between groups was considered statistically 
significant at P < 0.05. CCL4/mice (n = 10) were i.p inoculated with P . pavonia extract (therapeutic dose: 2.5 µg/
mouse; prophylactic dose: 2.5 µg/mouse), J. rubens (therapeutic dose: 2.3 µg/mouse; prophylactic dose: 2.3 µg/
mouse), Silymarin (50 mg/kg ) or phosphate buffer saline (PBS). aStatistically significant vs. mice received PBS 
alone (normal control). bStatistically significant vs. CCL4/mice control group received PBS alone (negative 
control). cStatistically significant vs. CCL4/mice group received Silymarin (positive control).
 
Fig. 4. Inhibitory effects of P . pavonia and J. rubens extracts on MDA (nmol/mg) in CCl4-induced liver 
injury mice. Data were represented as mean ± SD. The difference between groups was considered statistically 
significant at P < 0.05. CCL4/mice (n = 10) were i.p inoculated with p. pavonia extract (therapeutic dose: 2.5 µg/
mouse; prophylactic dose: 2.5 µg/mouse), J. rubens (therapeutic dose: 2.3 µg/mouse; prophylactic dose: 2.3 µg/
mouse), Silymarin (50 mg/kg) or phosphate buffer saline (PBS). aStatistically significant vs. mice received PBS 
alone (normal control). bStatistically significant vs. CCL4/mice control group received PBS alone (negative 
control). cStatistically significant vs. CCL4/mice group received Silymarin (positive control).
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 7| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
serum ALT that was significantly increased in CCL4/mice pre-and post-treated with J. rubens extract compared 
to Silymarin-treated CCL4/mice (positive control) (Table 2).
Intraperitoneal pre- and post-treatment of CCL 4/mice with P . pavonica and J. rubens extract significantly 
decreased serum urea levels compared to naïve CCL 4/mice control (Table  3). Intraperitoneal pre- and post-
treatment of CCL4/mice with P . pavonica extract markedly decreased serum urea levels compared to Silymarin-
treated CCL4/mice (positive control) (Table 3). Meanwhile, CCL4/mice pre- and post-treated with P . pavonica 
extract recorded a marked decrease in serum creatinine level compared to Silymarin-treated CCL 4/mice 
(positive control) (Table 3).
Histopathological examination
Light microscopic examination of the liver sections of the normal control group received PBS alone revealed 
normal hepatocytes organized in cords around the central vein (Fig.  6A). Still, the CCL 4 control group 
recorded marked hepatic degenerative changes indicating cytoplasmic eosinophilia and nuclear pyknosis and 
vacuolation of hepatocytes associated with perivascular fibroblastic activity marked hepatic necrotic changes 
associated with obvious periportal and per lobular hepatic fibrosis (Fig.  6B). Liver sections of the CCL 4/mice 
that received Silymarin (positive control) detected mild to moderate periportal hepatic fibrosis (Fig.  6C). On 
the other hand, i.p. pre- and post-treatment of CCL4/mice with J. rubens extracts detected a marked decrease in 
periportal hepatic degeneration and inflammation. In contrast, i.p., pre-and post-treatment of CCL4/mice with 
P . pavonica extracts showed a marked decrease in periportal hepatic fibrosis and prominent hepatic regeneration 
(Fig. 6D–G). It implies that P . pavonica and Jaina rubens extracts may have hepatoprotective effects against liver 
damage (Fig.  6D-G). Liver sections of CCL 4/mice post-treated with J. rubens extract showed hepatic fibrosis 
Treatments
Kidney biochemical markers
Creatinine (mg/dl) Urea (mg/dl)
Control 0.64 ± 0.05 37.70 ± 2.50
CCL4 0.97 ± 0.05a 94.70 ± 7.02a
CCL4 + Silymarin 0.91 ± 0.04a 69.00 ± 5.60a, b
P . pavonia
Therapeutic dose 0.68 ± 0.16b, c 60.00 ± 4.00a, b
Prophylactic dose 0.77 ± 0.03 67.70 ± 2.50a, b
J. rubens
Therapeutic dose 1.06 ± 0.07a 89.00 ± 4.60a, b,c
Prophylactic dose 0.99 ± 0.05a 76.30 ± 3.50a, b
Table 3. The inhibitory effects of P . Pavonia and J. Rubens extracts on the level of kidney biochemical markers; 
creatinine (mg/dl) and urea (mg/dl) in CCl4-induced liver injury mice. Data were represented as mean ± SD. 
The difference between groups was considered statistically significant at P < 0.05. CCL4/mice (n = 10) were i.p 
inoculated with P . pavonia extract (therapeutic dose: 2.5 µg/mouse; prophylactic dose: 2.5 µg/mouse), J. rubens 
(therapeutic dose: 2.3 µg/mouse; prophylactic dose: 2.3 µg/mouse), Silymarin (50 mg/kg) or phosphate buffer 
saline (PBS). aStatistically significant vs. mice received PBS alone (normal control). bStatistically significant vs. 
CCL4/mice control group received PBS alone (negative control). cStatistically significant vs. CCL4/mice group 
received Silymarin (positive control).
 
Treatments
Liver marker enzymes
AST (U/l) ALT (U/l)
Control 127.00 ± 9.90 83.90 ± 12.20
CCL4 199.00 ± 15.70a 264.10 ± 11.10a
CCL4 + Silymarin 183.70 ± 9.30a 130.70 ± 12.30a, b
P . pavonia
Therapeutic dose 146.90 ± 10.90b 162.20 ± 14.80a, b
Prophylactic dose 184.20 ± 17.40a 95.60 ± 21.50b
J. rubens
Therapeutic dose 282.10 ± 27.90a, b,c 224.70 ± 10.90a, b,c
Prophylactic dose 223.40 ± 26.70a 193.50 ± 12.80a, b,c
Table 2. The inhibitory effects of P . Pavonia and J. Rubens extracts on the level of hepatic marker enzymes; 
serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (U/l), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (U/l) in CCl4-induced liver 
injury mice. Data were represented as mean ± SD. The difference between groups was considered statistically 
significant at P < 0.05. CCL4/mice (n = 10) were i.p inoculated with p. pavonia extract (therapeutic dose: 2.5 µg/
mouse; prophylactic dose: 2.5 µg/mouse), J. rubens (therapeutic dose: 2.3 µg/mouse; prophylactic dose: 2.3 µg/
mouse), Silymarin (50 mg/kg) or phosphate buffer saline (PBS). aStatistically significant vs. mice received PBS 
alone (normal control). bStatistically significant vs. CCL4/mice control group received PBS alone (negative 
control). cStatistically significant vs. CCL4/mice group received Silymarin (positive control).
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 8| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
limited to the periportal area (collagen deposition) and portal inflammation (mononuclear inflammatory cells 
infiltration), smudge-shaped pyknosis nucleus (Fig. 6F).
Furthermore, liver sections of diseased animals post-treated with P . pavonica extract showed mild to 
moderate fibroblastic cell activity and decreased hepatic degeneration and inflammation (Fig.  6D). In general, 
pre-treatment of CCL4/mice with P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts showed superior ameliorative histological 
results of liver sections equally or nearly to the normal control group received PBS alone and this indicated the 
ability of methanol extract of Jania rubens and P . pavonica to keep hepatoprotective potentials against liver CCl4 
poisoning (Fig.  6A–G). The histopathological impairments in the hepatic tissue in all mice groups are briefly 
shown in Table 4.
Discussion
Chronic inflammation damages hepatocytes over time, resulting in hepatic inflammation and fibrogenesis 
caused by a range of injuries in the liver, indicating common pathogenesis39. Inflammation and fibrogenesis are 
accompanied by the recruitment and the migration of the immune components such as lymphocytes, neutrophils, 
macrophages, monocytes, Kupffer cells, and the inflammatory and proinflammatory mediators TNF-α, IL-6, and 
CRP that are important in the hepatic inflammation and fibrosis progression and immune defense mechanism 
against liver injury40,41. The need for natural therapies for inflammatory treatment and prevention is attaining 
rising popularity in contemporary therapeutics. Marine seaweed compounds may influence the immune and 
inflammatory systems, affecting hepatic inflammation and the progression of fibrogenesis. The potential effects 
of P . pavonia and Jania rubens extracts against chronic liver inflammation and a possible mechanistic pathway 
Fig. 6. Histopathological graphs of liver sections stained by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). (A) Naïve mice 
received PBS alone (Normal control), showing normal hepatocytes arranged in cords around the central 
vein with oval cytoplasm and vesicular-shaped nucleus. (B) CCL4/mice received PBS (negative control) 
showing hepatic degenerative and necrotic changes (arrow), cytoplasmic eosinophilia and nuclear pyknosis 
(arrowhead), hepatocytes vacuolation with perivascular fibroblastic activity and periportal and perilobular 
hepatic fibrosis (tailed-arrow). (C) CCL4/mice received Silymarin (50 mg/kg) (positive control) showing 
moderate degree of periportal hepatic fibrosis (tailed-arrows). (D) CCL4/mice received therapeutic dose of P.  
pavonia extract (2.5 µg/mouse) showing mild to moderate degree of fibroblastic cells activity (tailed-arrow) 
and decrease both hepatic degeneration (arrow head) and inflammation (arrow). (E) CCL4/mice received 
prophylactic dose of P . pavonia (2.5 µg/mouse) showing prominent hepatic regeneration (arrow) and marked 
decrease of periportal hepatic fibrosis (tailed-arrow). (F) CCL4/mice received therapeutic dose of J. rubens 
(2.3 µg/mouse) showing hepatic fibrosis limited to the periportal area and collagen deposition (arrow), portal 
inflammation, mononuclear inflammatory cells infiltration (arrow), indicates smudge-shaped pyknotic nucleus 
(arrowhead). (G) CCL4/mice received prophylactic dose of J. rubens (2.3 µg/mouse) showing marked decrease 
of inflammation (arrow) and decrease of periportal hepatic degeneration (arrowhead). X200, bar = 40 μm.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 9| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
for its hepatoprotective, immune stimulation, immunomodulatory, antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory activity 
were investigated in the present study.
Leucocytes profile
In the current study, i.p., pre- and post-treatment of CCL4/mice with P . pavonica or J. rubens extracts significantly 
increased WBCs count and lymphocytes relative number compared to the naïve CCL 4/mice that recorded a 
significant decrease in WBCs count that could be due to the immune system’s defense function and resulted in a 
significant decrease in blood lymphocyte population that was described by the lowering in immune activity by 
long-term liver injury in CCL 4 intoxication42,43. These results conformed with the data of Lavakumar et al. 44. , 
who reported a reduction in WBCs profile, including lymphocytes in tumor-induced mice, which was recovered 
and associated with an increase in WBCs counts and lymphocytes relatives number in the mice treated with 
seaweeds Acanthophora spicifera extract. CCL 4 metabolism induces ROS that triggered a significant reduction 
in leukocyte count (leucopoenia) in peripheral blood of mice 45,46. The potential of ROS, an inflammatory-
producing candidate in hepatic intoxication, to enhance WBCs count suggests that they can impact defensive 
mechanisms and mediate inflammation and fibrogenesis 47. Our results indicated that the neutrophils and 
monocytes relative numbers become pretty close to that in naïve mice and Silymarin-treated CCL4/mice in CCL4/
mice groups pre- and post-treated with Padina pavonia and Jania rubens extract. The abnormal hematologic 
parameter alternations in total and differential leukocytes induced by hepatic inflammatory response result in 
the development of many cells from bone marrow, involving neutrophils, which subsequently produce H2O2 that 
might destroy surrounding tissues and cells 48. Monocytes can extravasate into inflammatory sites, distinguish 
into dendritic cells and tissue macrophages, and respond to infections49. In pathological conditions, monocytes 
can react to various stimuli, reducing inflammation 50. This investigation revealed that P . pavonica and Jania 
rubens extracts can preserve the hematopoietic cells from the damaging effects of hepatic toxicity, and this 
protection might be due to their antioxidative mechanism and increasing the immune cell types involved in the 
primary defense mechanism. It is well-known that liver macrophages, particularly activated Kupffer cells, are 
well known for their roles in initiating, maintaining, and even limiting inflammation in hepatocytes51,52. Based 
on our in vivo findings, P . pavonica and J. rubens extract is thought to target liver macrophages to suppress 
uncontrolled inflammatory responses, inhibiting further hepatic damage and enhancing liver tissue repairing. 
However, this hypothesis needs more studies.
Assay of inflammatory cytokines and proteins
Our data revealed that along with the increased number of WBCs, the serum levels of TNF-α, IL-6, and 
CRP in CCL 4/mice pre- and post-treated with t Padina pavonia and Jania rubens extract CCL 4-treated mice 
significantly decreased compared to the CCL 4/mice group, which significantly increased. The current study 
revealed that the treatment of CCL 4/mice with P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts substantially reduced CCL 4-
induced liver inflammatory damage by inhibiting TNF-, IL-6, and CRP and by enhancing immune defense 
mechanism by recruitment and migration of the immune components such as lymphocytes, neutrophils, 
and monocytes that are the critical candidate in the liver inflammation progression and immune defense 
mechanism against liver damage 39. Although CCL 4 metabolism is linked to liver injuries, secondary damage 
occurs due to the inflammatory progression triggered by Kupffer cell stimulation 53. Kupffer cells stimulate 
the production of inflammatory mediators TNF-, IL-6, and CRP , which are potent inflammatory cytokines 
implicated in macrophage activation, neutrophil infiltration, and other aspects of inflammation that worsen 
both inflammatory responses and oxidative stress5,54–57. NF-κB is a transcription factor known to be stimulated 
by ROS. Activated NF-κB enhances the production of several inflammatory mediators, including TNF-α, IL-6, 
and CRP58. Here, CCl4 augmented the secretion of liver NF-κB and consequently increased serum TNF-α, IL-6, 
and CRP . Chronic inflammation is well known to precede fibrosis and to be related to cirrhosis development59. 
Some phytochemicals and others of seaweeds extracts have been demonstrated to suppress inflammatory 
pathways downstream of proinflammatory mediators, inhibiting inflammation60. Our findings are in line with 
the reports of Boshy et al61. , who revealed that the serum level of TNF-α, IL-6, and CRP decreased in fucoidan 
extract from seaweeds Laminaria species, which may be contributing to its anti-inflammatory activities by 
suppressing the production of inflammatory cytokines. CRP is a molecule for pattern recognition, attaching to 
particular molecular configurations typically exposed during cell death or observed on pathogen surfaces. Its fast 
Treatments Vascular lesions Degeneration and necrosis Inflammation Fibrosis Extent of lesions
Control – – – – –
CCL4 ++++ ++++ +++ +++ +++
CCL4 + Silymarin + + ++ ++ ++
P . pavonia
Therapeutic dose ++ ++ ++ ++ ++
Prophylactic dose + + + + +
J. rubens
Therapeutic dose ++ ++ ++ ++ ++
Prophylactic dose + + + + +
Table 4. Scores of different hepatic lesions of CCL4/ mice treated with silymarin, P . Pavonia and J. Ruben 
extracts. (–) means no detectable lesions; (+) indicates mild lesions; (++) indicates moderate lesions; (+++) 
indicates severe focal lesions; (++++) indicates severe diffuse lesions.
 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 10| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
increment in synthesis within hours after tissue damage or infection indicates that it participates in the defense 
of the host and is part of the innate immune response 62. CRP has been shown to have a vital effect on several 
inflammatory conditions, particularly preserving mice from fatal challenges with bacterial lipopolysaccharides 
and several inflammation mediators. Certain immunomodulatory cytokines, TNF-α, IL-6, and CRP , can help 
produce an anti-inflammatory state in the liver and ameliorate the damage severity. Inhibiting the expression of 
proinflammatory cytokines TNF-α, IL-6, and CRP by the action of seaweeds has significant anti-inflammatory 
and immunosuppressive characteristics63.
The increase of ROS in hepatotoxicity-stressed mice is the main factor in activating the HSCs (Hepatic stellate 
cells) and producing proinflammatory and inflammatory cytokines and CRP64. There is a reciprocal association 
between oxidative stress and TNF-α, IL-6, and CRP secretion, i.e., oxidative stress raises TNF-α, IL-6, and CRP 
expression, and TNF-α, IL-6, and CRP enhances oxidative stress 65,66. Hence, increased TNF-α, IL-6, and CRP 
expression here may directly result from hepatic CCL 4 intoxication or an indirect oxidative stress potential. 
TNF-α, IL-6, and CRP can directly cause intoxication in the hepatic and glomerular cells and likely contribute 
to the organ damage found in the present work67,68. Subsequently, the assessment of the variation in the levels of 
serum pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-α and IL-6 and the proinflammatory protein CRP upon P . pavonica and 
J. rubens pre- and post-treatment confirmed the involvement of anti-inflammation for P . pavonia and J. rubens 
against liver damage, which is consistent with previous findings of Wills and Asha55, Tripathi et al.5. and Seki et 
al.41. Interestingly, the i.p. therapy of CCl 4/mice with P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts significantly decreased 
and ameliorated TNF-α, IL-6, and CRP levels being very close to the normal levels in the normal control group, 
which may be attributed to the ability of P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts to prevent the free radical generation, 
promote the endogenous antioxidant mechanism beyond their free radical scavenging functions and the anti-
inflammatory action69.
Assay of malondialdehyde and antioxidants
Inflammation due to hepatic injury produces excessive ROS in the body, resulting in oxidative stress and lipid 
peroxidation, leading to decreases in the antioxidant levels and increases in lipid peroxidation marker MDA 
levels. MDA is a severe factor in hepatic pathogenesis and hepatocyte damage 70–73. In the present study, a 
significant increase in the activity of antioxidant enzymes GSH and a significant reduction in the MDA level 
in the inflammatory diseased liver after pre- and post-treatment of CCL 4/mice with P . pavonica and J. rubens 
extracts indicated the hepatoprotective potentials of several marine seaweeds by scavenging of free radicals 
produced by chemical-induced hepatic inflammation 74–76. These findings are in consistent with the findings 
of previous studies and provide a novel indication of the effects of marine seaweeds extract on oxidative stress 
and lipid metabolism 70 providing additional proof that P . pavonica and J. rubens treatment may enhance the 
attenuation of chemically induced liver damage. GSH is a vital antioxidant that scavenges ROS and keeps protein 
sulfhydryl groups.
Additionally, our findings confirmed that P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts have hepatoprotective impacts 
against CCl 4-induced injury through alleviating oxidative stress by recovering the antioxidant enzymes’ 
activities, restoring the GSH reservoir, and decreasing lipid peroxidation specifically, and alleviating MDA level. 
Antioxidant enzymes, GSH, scavengers of hepatic ROS, are considered the first defense line against oxidative 
stress-induced tissue injury by reducing oxidative stress and inhibiting the inflammatory response, which could 
be mediated by immune defense mechanisms such as immune stimulation and immunomodulation77. Previous 
studies have reported that brown seaweeds components such as P . pavonica and J. rubens extract could suppress 
ROS production78–80. Knowing that both oxidative stress and inflammatory processes are interlaced, the clinical 
applications and therapeutic approaches for liver diseases primarily concentrate on antioxidative and anti-
inflammatory processes52,81,82, we hypothesize that natural products that extracted from brown seaweed such 
as P . pavonica and J. rubens could be a promising source to screen effective hepatic disease with high efficiency 
and low cytotoxicity. Consequently, inhibition of oxidative stress and inflammation plays a significant role in the 
ameliorative efficacy of seaweeds P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts against liver fibrogenesis.
Our in vivo results showed that P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts had hepatoprotective effects against acute 
liver injury. Meanwhile, P . pavonica and J. rubens  have multiple pharmacological characteristics, including 
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory approaches. Therefore, we assumed that P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts 
would exert hepatoprotective approaches against acute liver injury by reducing oxidative stress and suppressing 
the inflammatory response, and the probable mechanism mediated by immune defense mechanisms including 
immune stimulation and immunomodulation.
Assay of liver and kidney function
According to the obtained data of the current study, pre-and post-treatment of CCL4/mice with P . pavonica and 
J. rubens extracts led to a significant decrease in AST and ALT levels, dropping their elevated levels recorded in 
CCL4 intoxication and reversing them to a normal level comparable with control groups, indicating restoration 
of hepatic function and integrity and supporting the antioxidant hepatoprotective potentials of the seaweeds P.  
pavonica and Jania rubens, and this could be due to the fucoidan content of brown algae. Overall, the present 
results agree with research by Hira et al. 83. , in which administration of brown seaweeds Sargassum ilicifolium, 
Sargassum lanceolatum, and Sargassum swartzii extracts in CCL4-induced liver damage mice preserved the level 
of hepatic enzymes AST and ALT low. Boshy et al. 61. stated that fucoidan’s hepatoprotective efficacy against 
toxicity of CCl4 might be due to the downregulation of the inflammatory mediators and fucoidan’s antioxidant 
activities. P . pavonica and J. rubens treatment reduced serum levels of ALT and AST, implying a hepatoprotective 
impact against CCl 4-induced liver damage, and pathological investigation verified this potential effect by 
successfully reducing the centrolobular necrosis area. Two pathogenic events were considered when trying to 
figure out the underlying mechanism: oxidative stress and inflammation because these two events usually act 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 11| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
as the mechanisms for acute liver damage81,84. Oxidative stress-induced fibrosis occurs because of the excessive 
generation of ROS and its consequent hepatocyte damage by membrane lipid peroxidation 85. CCL 4-derived 
ROS results in hepatocyte membrane injury and leak of the hepatic enzymes into the circulation, which was 
confirmed by elevating the concentrations of serum ALT and AST86.
CCl4 at overdoses causes major hepatic lesions with large elevations in transaminases followed by liver and 
kidney damage87,88. Karakus et al. 89. stated that acute liver injury affects kidney function and increases serum 
urea and creatinine levels. Importantly, our results revealed that intraperitoneal pre- and post-treatment of 
CCL4/mice with P . pavonica extracts showed the best results in significantly decreasing the level of serum urea 
creatinine compared to the naïve CCL4/mice control group. These results agree with Hira et al.83. , who revealed 
that rats treated with Sargassum ilicifolium and Sargassum swartzii extracts decreased the raised concentrations 
of renal function markers urea and creatinine in the CCL 4-induced liver injury rats. This decrease may be 
owing to reduced oxidative stress or elevated excretion of hepato-toxicants outside the body. As a result, P.  
pavonica extract can be a challenged nephroprotective agent that could suppress the induction and progress of 
nephrocellular damage in association with its antioxidant efficacy. This efficacy might be owing to the antioxidant 
potentiation of its active antioxidant components.
Histopathological examination
For further estimation of the hepatoprotective impacts of P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts in liver inflammation, 
a liver histopathology investigation was achieved to show the degree of the hepatic injury. After CCl4 intoxication 
in mice, hepatocyte necrosis was apparent in the central lobular areas of the liver section. However, pre- and 
post-treatment of CCL4/mice with P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts efficiently alleviated hepatotoxin-induced 
centrolobular necrosis. Significantly, all CCL4-induced histological changes were ameliorated by P . pavonica and 
J. rubens extracts. These findings support the results obtained from the current study’s immunomodulatory, 
anti-inflammatory, and antioxidant assays and strengthen the P . pavonica and Jania rubens  extracts were 
able to minimize the deleterious effects of liver inflammation. Histological analyses of the P . pavonica and J. 
rubens extracts-treated mice groups exhibited reduced inflammatory process and suppressed liver necrosis and 
fibrosis. Chemically induced liver hepatotoxicity leads to the immediate production of ROS, resulting in lipid 
peroxidation and, consequently, membrane injury. Stimulated Kupffer cell generates toxic metabolites, including 
reactive oxygen intermediates and inflammatory cytokines, which are associated with the deterioration of 
hepatic parenchymal cells71,73. Our histological investigations agree with those of Barros-Gomes et al.90. and Cao 
et al.91. , who assessed the protective role of the Gracilaria birdiae algae in the liver of hepato-toxin-treated mice.
Additionally, treatment with brown seaweed Padina boergesenii extract inhibited hepato-toxin, triggering 
morphological changes in the liver, such as edematous hepatocytes. It displayed fewer cytoplasmic degeneration, 
fewer inflammatory infiltrations, and no necrosis92. Administration of the P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts could 
improve CCL4-induced histopathological alterations via changes in liver marker enzymes. The hepatoprotective 
action of P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts may be primarily due to the effects of their antioxidant-sulfated 
polysaccharides93.
The In vitro half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of methanol extract of P . pavonia and J. rubens on 
hepatoblastoma cell line (HepG2) cell line after 24 h were estimated at 613 µg/ml and 475 µg/ml for, respectively. 
Additionally, In vivo half maximal lethal dose (LD) values of the methanol extract of P . pavonia and J. rubens 
were estimated at 1150 µg /kg and 1074 µg /kg, respectively38.
Brown seaweed extracts exhibit relatively high levels of chlorophyll, carotenoids, fucoxanthin polyphenol 
phlorotannins that have been shown to possess a range of bioactive properties, including anti-oxidant, anti-
inflammatory, anti-allergic, anti-cancer, anti-obesity, and neuroprotective activities35.
The utilization of seaweed extracts as candidates for anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer therapies presents 
several drawbacks and challenges, including issues related to low bioavailability and chemical stability. The 
extensive side effects associated with these extracts can significantly hinder their therapeutic efficacy. Consequently, 
the quest of low-toxicity marine-derived pharmaceuticals aimed at preventing and treating inflammation and 
cancer has emerged as a key focus area for researchers 94. Despite comprehensive investigations into the anti-
inflammatory and anti-cancer properties of seaweed extracts, the application of fucoidan—an active component 
found in many seaweeds—as a therapeutic agent or drug delivery system has encountered notable obstacles. 
Primarily, the high cost and limited availability of pure fucoidan, a natural polymer sourced from seaweed, pose 
significant challenges in obtaining adequate quantities for research purposes95. Additionally, the extraction and 
purification processes are complex and labor-intensive. Furthermore, the structural complexity of these marine 
natural products complicates their manipulation and the development of cost-effective synthetic alternatives96. 
Another significant hurdle is the biological activity and selectivity of seaweeds natural products, as their origin 
from marine species rather than mammals may lead to undesirable biological responses in humans 97. Lastly, 
ongoing safety assessments and biodegradability tests are crucial, as, despite the long-standing use of seaweed-
derived bioactive components in food and dietary supplements, there remains a need to evaluate their safety and 
potential hepatotoxicity.
Conclusion
Based on the above findings, our studies indicated that P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts could be potential 
candidates for chemical liver injury treatment by enhancing the immune and anti-inflammatory systems affecting 
hepatic inflammation and fibrogenesis progression. The hepatoprotective effects of P . pavonica and J. rubens 
may be mediated through their immune stimulation, immunomodulatory, anti-inflammatory, and antioxidant 
potentials. Additionally, P . pavonica and J. rubens extracts may be recommended as a potential natural therapy 
to cure, delay, or prevent conditions associated with inflammation or immune system disorders. Therefore, in 
another future study, we must search for their therapeutic potential in humans.
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 12| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Data availability
The datasets used and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author upon 
reasonable request.
Received: 9 January 2024; Accepted: 20 January 2025
References
 1. Bataller, R. & Brenner, D. A. Liver fibrosis. J. Clin. Investig. 115 (2), 209–218 (2005).
 2. Billiau, A. & Matthys, P . Interferon-γ: a historical perspective. Cytokine Growth Factor. Rev. 20 (2), 97–113 (2009).
 3. Murray, J. et al. Regulation of neutrophil apoptosis by tumor necrosis factor-α: requirement for TNFR55 and TNFR75 for induction 
of apoptosis in vitro. Blood J. Am. Soc. Hematol. 90 (7), 2772–2783 (1997).
 4. Smyth, M. J., Cretney, E., Kershaw, M. H. & Hayakawa, Y . Cytokines in cancer immunity and immunotherapy. Immunol. Rev. 202 
(1), 275–293 (2004).
 5. Tripathi, S., Maier, K. G., Bruch, D. & Kittur, D. S. Effect of 6-gingerol on pro-inflammatory cytokine production and costimulatory 
molecule expression in murine peritoneal macrophages. J. Surg. Res. 138 (2), 209–213 (2007).
 6. Keane, M. & Streiter, R. M. The importance of balanced pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory mechanism in diffuse lung 
disease. Respir. Res. 3, 5–12 (2002).
 7. Margetic, S. Inflammation and haemostasis. Biochem. Med. (Zagreb) 22, 49–62.
 8. McCoy, J. M., Wicks, J. R. & Audoly, L. P . The role of prostaglandin E2 receptors in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. J. Clin. 
Investig. 110 (5), 651–658 (2012).
 9. Rodríguez, R. M. & López-Vázquez, A. & López-Larrea, C. Immune systems evolution. Sens. Nat. 237–251 (2012).
 10. Fujiwara, N. & Kobayashi, K. Macrophages in inflammation. Curr. Drug Targets Inflamm. Allergy 4 (3), 281–286 (2005).
 11. Wang, B. S., Chen, J. H., Liang, Y . C. & Duh, P . D. Effects of Welsh onion on oxidation of low-density lipoprotein and nitric oxide 
production in macrophage cell line RAW 264.7. Food Chem. 91 (1), 147–155 (2005).
 12. Fiocchi, C. Early versus late immune mediated inflammatory diseases. Acta Gastro-enterol. Belg. 74 (4), 548–552 (2011).
 13. Xu, Z., Chen, X., Zhong, Z., Chen, L. & Wang, Y . GanoLucidumucidum polysaccharides: immunomodulation and potential anti-
tumor activities. Am. J. Chin. Med. 39 (01), 15–27 (2011).
 14. Gabele, E., Brenner, D. A. & Rippe, R. A. Liver fibrosis: signals leading to the amplification of the fibrogenic hepatic stellate cell. 
Front. Biosci. 8 (1), 69–77 (2003).
 15. Nagarathna, P . K. M., Reena, K., Sriram, R. & Johnson, W . Review on Immunomodulation and Immunomodulatory Activity of 
some herbal plants. Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Rev. Res. 22 (1), 223–230 (2013).
 16. Escobar, J. A., Rubio, M. A. & Lissi, E. A. SOD and catalase inactivation by singlet oxygen and peroxyl radicals. Free Radic. Biol. 
Med. 20 (3), 285–290 (1996).
 17. Fahmy, S. R. & Soliman, A. M. Protective effect of silymarin, honey and ethanolic extract of Zizyphus spina-christi leaves against 
carbon tetrachloride toxicity in rats. Egypt. J. Zool. 49 (2), 345–359 (2007).
 18. Öner, A. C. et al. Anti-inflammatory and hepatoprotective activities of Trigonella foenum-graecum L. Pharmacol. Online 2 (9), 
126–132 (2008).
 19. Kurata, M., Suzuki, M. & Agar, N. S. Antioxidant systems and erythrocyte life-span in mammals. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. B Comp. 
Biochem. 106 (3), 477–487 (1993).
 20. Liu, J. et al. The preventive effects of heparin–superoxide dismutase on carbon tetrachloride-induced acute liver failure and hepatic 
fibrosis in mice. Mol. Cell. Biochem. 327 (1), 219–228 (2009).
 21. Olsthoorn, S. E. et al. Brown seaweed food supplementation: effects on allergy and inflammation and its consequences. Nutrients 
13 (8), 2613 (2021).
 22. Sanjeewa, K. A. et al. In vitro and in vivo anti-inflammatory activities of high molecular weight sulfated polysaccharide containing 
fucose separated from Sargassum horneri. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 107, 803–807 (2018).
 23. Jayawardena, T. U. et al. Isolation and purification of fucoidan fraction in Turbinaria ornata from the Maldives; inflammation 
inhibitory potential under LPS stimulated conditions in in-vitro and in-vivo models. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 131, 614–623 (2019).
 24. Madkour, F . F ., Khalil, W . F . & Dessouki, A. A. Protective effect of ethanol extract of Sargassum dentifolium (Phaeophyceae) in 
carbon tetrachloride-induced hepatitis in rats. Int. J. Pharm. Pharm. Sci. 4 (3), 637–641 (2012).
 25. Dias, P . F . et al. Antiangiogenic and antitumoral properties of a polysaccharide isolated from the seaweed Sargassum stenophyllum. 
Cancer Chemother. Pharmacol. 56 (4), 436–446 (2005).
 26. Y eh, S. T., Lee, C. S. & Chen, J. C. Administration of hot water extract of brown seaweed Sargassum duplicatum via immersion and 
injection enhances the immune resistance of white shrimp Litopenaeus vannamei. Fish. Shellfish Immunol. 20 (3), 332–345 (2006).
 27. Kang, J. Y . et al. Antipyretic, analgesic, and anti-inflammatory activities of the seaweed Sargassum fulvellum and Sargassum 
thunbergii in mice. J. Ethnopharmacol. 116 (1), 187–190 (2008).
 28. Meena, B. et al. Antihepatotoxic potential of Sargassum polycystum  (Phaeophyceae) on antioxidant defense status in 
D-galactosamine-induced hepatitis in rats. Afr. J. Biochem. Res. 2 (2), 51–55 (2008).
 29. Paskaleva, E. E. et al. Sargassum fusiforme fraction is a potent and specific inhibitor of HIV-1 fusion and reverse transcriptase. 
Virol. J. 5, 8 (2008).
 30. Gheda, S., El-Sheekh, M. M. & AbouZeid, A. In vitro anticancer activity of polysaccharide extracted from the red alga Jania rubens 
against breast and colon cancer cell lines. Asian Pac. J. Trop. Med. 11 (10), 583–589 (2018).
 31. Assreuy, A. M. S. et al. Anti-inflammatory effect of glucose—mannose binding lectins isolated from Brazilian beans. Mediat. 
Inflamm. 6 (3), 201–210 (1997).
 32. Rocha, B. A. et al. Structural basis for both pro-and anti-inflammatory response induced by mannose-specific legume lectin from 
Cymbosema roseum. Biochimica 93 (5), 806–816 (2011).
 33. Vinegar, R., Schreiber, W . & Hugo, R. Biphasic development of carrageenan edema in rats. J. Pharmacol. Exp. Therap. 166, 96–103 
(1969).
 34. Vinegar, R. A. L. P . H. et al. Pathway to carrageenan-induced inflammation in the hind limb of the rat. Feder. Proc. 46 (1), 118–126 
(1987).
 35. Olsson, J., Toth, G. B. & Albers, E. Biochemical composition of red, green and brown seaweeds on the Swedish west coast. J. Appl. 
Phycol. 32, 3305–3317 (2020).
 36. Guiry, M. D. & Guiry, G. M. AlgaeBase (Worldwide Electronic Publication, National University of Ireland, 2019).
 37. El-Sheekh, M. M., El-shenody, R. A. & Bases, E. A. El Shafay, S. M. comparative assessment of antioxidant activity and biochemical 
composition of four seaweeds, Rocky Bay of Abu Qir in Alexandria, Egypt. Food Sci. Technol. 41, 29–40 (2020).
 38. El-Sheekh, M. M., Nassef, M., Bases, E., Shafay, S. E. & El-Shenody, R. Antitumor immunity and therapeutic properties of marine 
seaweeds-derived extracts in the treatment of cancer. Cancer Cell Int. 22 (1), 267 (2022).
 39. Friedman, S. L. Mechanisms of hepatic fibrogenesis. Gastroenterology 134 (6), 1655–1669 (2008).
 40. Laskin, D. L. & Pendino, K. J. Macrophages and inflammatory mediators in tissue injury. Ann. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 35 (1), 
655–677 (1995).
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 13| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
 41. Seki, E. et al. A. CCR2 promotes hepatic fibrosis in mice. Hepatology 50 (1), 185–197 (2009).
 42. Hau, D. M. Effects of electroacupuncture on leukocytes and plasma protein in the X-irradiated rats. Am. J. Chin. Med. 12, 106–114 
(1984).
 43. Patrick-Iwuanyanwu, K. C., Wegwu, M. O. & Ayalogu, E. O. Prevention of CCI4-induced liver damage by ginger, garlic and 
vitamin E. Pak. J. Biol. Sci. 10 (4), 617–621 (2007).
 44. Lavakumar, V ., Ahamed, K. F . H., Ravichandran, V . & Anticancer and antioxidant effect of Acanthophora spicifera against EAC 
induced carcinoma in mice. J. Pharm. Res. 5 (3), 1503–1507 (2012).
 45. Slater, T. F . & Sawyer, B. C. The stimulatory effects of carbon tetrachloride and other halogenoalkanes on peroxidative reactions in 
rat liver fractions in vitro. General features of the systems used. Biochem. J. 123 (5), 805–814 (1971).
 46. Ali, M., Shikha, Ahmed, S. S., Kumar, R., Singh, J. K. & Kumar, A. Impact of ganoderma lucidium on carbon tetra chloride (ccl4) 
induced haematological profiles of mice. World J. Pharm. Res. 3 (3), 4520–4526 (2014).
 47. Oluyemi, K. A. et al. Erythropoietic and anti-obesity effects of Garcinia Cambogia (bitter kola) in Wistar rats. Biotechnol. Appl. 
Biochem. 46 (1), 69–72 (2007).
 48. Abuharfeil, N., Sarsour, E. & Hassuneh, M. The effect of sodium nitrite on some parameters of the immune system. Food Chem. 
Toxicol. 39 (2), 119–124 (2001).
 49. Qian, B. Z. et al. CCL2 recruits inflammatory monocytes to facilitate breast-tumour metastasis. Nature 475 (7355), 222–225 
(2011).
 50. Hanna, R. N. et al. NR4A1 (Nur77) deletion polarizes macrophages toward an inflammatory phenotype and increases 
atherosclerosis. Circ. Res. 110 (3), 416–427 (2012).
 51. Li, P ., He, K., Li, J., Liu, Z. & Gong, J. The role of Kupffer cells in hepatic diseases. Mol. Immunol. 85, 222–229 (2017).
 52. Tacke, F . Targeting hepatic macrophages to treat liver diseases. J. Hepatol. 66 (6), 1300–1312 (2017).
 53. Edwards, M. J., Keller, B. J., Kauffman, F . & Thurman, R. G. The involvement of Kupffer cells in carbon tetrachloride toxicity. 
Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 119 (2), 275–279 (1993).
 54. Durum, S. K., Schmidt, J. A. & Oppenheim, J. J. Interleukin 1: an immunological perspective. Ann. Rev. Immunol. 3 (1), 263–287 
(1985).
 55. Wills, P . J. & Asha, V . V . Protective mechanism of Lygodium flexuosum extract in treating and preventing carbon tetrachloride 
induced hepatic fibrosis in rats. Chem.-Biol Interact. 165 (1), 76–85 (2007).
 56. Zhang, B. J. et al. Protection by and antioxidant mechanism of berberine against rat liver fibrosis induced by multiple hepatotoxic 
factors. Clin. Exp. Pharmacol. Physiol. 35 (3), 303–309 (2008).
 57. Achur, R. N., Freeman, W . M. & Vrana, K. E. Circulating cytokines as biomarkers of alcohol abuse and alcoholism. J. Neuroimmune 
Pharmacol. 5 (1), 83–91 (2010).
 58. Lingappan, L. NF-κB in oxidative stress. Curr. Opin. Toxicol. 7, 81–86 (2018).
 59. Czaja, A. J. & Carpenter, H. A. Progressive fibrosis during corticosteroid therapy of autoimmune Hepatitis. Hepatology 39 (6), 
1631–1638 (2004).
 60. Grattagliano, I. et al. Severe liver steatosis correlates with nitrosative and oxidative stress in rats. Eur. J. Clin. Investig. 38 (7), 
523–530 (2008).
 61. Boshy, M. et al. Attenuation of CCl4 induced oxidative stress, immunosuppressive, hepatorenal damage by fucoidan in rats. J. Clin. 
Toxicol. 7 (348), 495–2161 (2017).
 62. Black, S., Kushner, I. & Samols, D. C-reactive protein. J. Biol. Chem. 279 (47), 48487–48490 (2004).
 63. Xia, D. & Samols, D. Transgenic mice expressing rabbit C-reactive protein are resistant to endotoxemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94 (6), 
2575–2580 (1997).
 64. Park, J. et al. Fucoidan inhibits LPS-induced inflammation in vitro and during the acute response in vivo. Int. Immunopharmacol. 
43, 91–98 (2017).
 65. Fischer, R. & Maier, O. Interrelation of oxidative stress and inflammation in neurodegenerative disease: role of TNF . Oxid. Med. 
Cell. Longev. 2015, 1 (2015).
 66. Voltan, R. et al. Redox signaling and oxidative stress: cross talk with TNF-related apoptosis inducing ligand activity. Int. J. Biochem. 
Cell. Biol. 81, 364–374 (2016).
 67. Jo, M. et al. Apoptosis induced in normal human hepatocytes by tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand. Nat. 
Med. 6, 564–567 (2000).
 68. Navarro, J. J. et al. Tumor necrosis factor-α gene expression in diabetic nephropathy: relationship with urinary albumin excretion 
and effect of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition. Kidney Int. 68, S98–S102 (2005).
 69. Vynograd, N., Vynograd, I. & Sosnowski, Z. A comparative multi-centre study of the efficacy of propolis, acyclovir and placebo in 
the treatment of genital herpes (HSV). Phytomedicine 7 (1), 1–6 (2000).
 70. Joensuu, H., Pylkkänen, L. & Toikkanen, S. Bcl-2 protein expression and long-term survival in breast cancer. Am. J. Pathol. 145 (5), 
1191–1198 (1994).
 71. Ebaid, H., Bashandy, S. A. E., Alhazza, I. M., Rady, A. & El-Shehry, S. Folic acid and melatonin ameliorate carbon tetrachloride-
induced hepatic injury, oxidative stress and inflammation in rats. Nutr. Metabol. 10 (1), 20 (2013).
 72. Fauziah, F . & Mahdi, C. A study on brown seaweed therapy (Sargassum sp.) toward MDA levels and histological improvement on 
rat foot suffering rheumatoid arthritis. J. Pure Appl. Chem. Res. 2 (3), 102 (2013).
 73. Sharma, G., Kar, S., Ball, W . B., Ghosh, K. & Das, P . K. The curative effect of fucoidan on visceral leishmaniasis is mediated by 
activation of MAP kinases through specific protein kinase C isoforms. Cell. Mol. Immunol. 11 (3), 263–274 (2014).
 74. Pareek, A., Godavarthi, A., Issarani, R. & Nagori, B. P . Antioxidant and hepatoprotective activity of Fagonia schweinfurthii (Hadidi) 
Hadidi extract in carbon tetrachloride induced hepatotoxicity in HepG2 cell line and rats. J. Ethnopharmacol. 150 (3), 973–981 
(2013).
 75. Al-Sayed, E., El-Lakkany, N. M., el-Din, S., Sabra, S. H., Hammam, O. A. & A. N. A. & Hepatoprotective and antioxidant activity 
of Melaleuca styphelioides on carbon tetrachloride-induced hepatotoxicity in mice. Pharm. Biol. 52 (12), 1581–1590 (2014).
 76. Pu, X. et al. Polysaccharides from Angelica and Astragalus exert hepatoprotective effects against carbon-tetrachloride-induced 
intoxication in mice. Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 93 (1), 39–43 (2015).
 77. Xu, M. et al. Oxidative damage induced by arsenic in mice or rats: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 176 
(1), 154–175 (2017).
 78. Vinayak, R. C., Sabu, A. S. & Chatterji, A. Bio-prospecting of a few brown seaweeds for their cytotoxic and antioxidant activities. 
Evid.-Based Complement. Altern. Med. 2011, 1–9 (2011).
 79. Martins, C. D. et al. Antioxidant properties and total phenolic contents of some tropical seaweeds of the Brazilian coast. J. Appl. 
Phycol. 25 (4), 1179–1187 (2013).
 80. Rajauria, G., Jaiswal, A. K., Abu-Gannam, N. & Gupta, S. Antimicrobial, antioxidant and free radical‐scavenging capacity of brown 
seaweed Himanthalia elongata from western coast of Ireland. J. Food Biochem. 37 (3), 322–335 (2013).
 81. Reyes-Gordillo, K., Shah, R. & Muriel, P . Oxidative stress and inflammation in hepatic diseases: current and future therapy. Oxid. 
Med. Cell. Longev. 2017, 3140673 (2017).
 82. Patten, D. A., Shepherd, E. L., Weston, C. J. & Shetty, S. Novel targets in the immune microenvironment of the hepatic sinusoids 
for treating liver diseases. Semin. Liver Dis. 39 (2), 111–123 (2017).
 83. Hira, K., Sultana, V ., Ara, J. & Ehteshamul-Haque, S. Protective role of Sargassum species in liver and kidney dysfunctions and 
associated disorders in rats intoxicated with carbon tetrachloride and acetaminophen. Pak. J. Pharm. Sci. 30, 721–728 (2017).
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 14| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
 84. Woolbright, B. L. & Jaeschke, H. The impact of sterile inflammation in acute liver injury. J. Clin. Transl. Res. 3 (1), 170–188 (2017).
 85. Sun, J. et al. Anthocyanins isolated from blueberry ameliorates CCl4 induced liver fibrosis by modulation of oxidative stress, 
inflammation and stellate cell activation in mice. Food Chem. Toxicol. 120, 491–499 (2018).
 86. Weber, L. W ., Boll, M. & Stampfl, A. Hepatotoxicity and mechanism of action of haloalkanes: carbon tetrachloride as a toxicological 
model. Crit. Rev. Toxicol. 33 (2), 105–136 (2003).
 87. Hinson, J. A., Pumford, N. R. & Roberts, D. W . Mechanisms of acetaminophen toxicity: immunochemical detection of drug-
protein adducts. Drug Metabol. Rev. 27 (1–2), 73–92 (1995).
 88. Rusu, M. A., Bucur, N., Puicǎ, C. & Tǎmaş, M. Effects of Corylus avellana in acetaminophen and CCl4 induced toxicosis. Phytother. 
Res. 13 (2), 120–123 (1999).
 89. Karakus, E. et al. Protective effect of Panax ginseng against serum biochemical changes and apoptosis in liver of rats treated with 
carbon tetrachloride (CCl4). J. Hazard. Mater. 195, 208–213 (2011).
 90. Barros-Gomes, J. A. C. et al. In vivo evaluation of the antioxidant activity and protective action of the seaweed Gracilaria birdiae. 
Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2018, 1 (2018).
 91. Cao, J. J., Lv, Q. Q., Zhang, B. & Chen, H. Q. Structural characterization and hepatoprotective activities of polysaccharides from the 
leaves of Toona sinensis (A. Juss) Roem. Carbohyd. Polym. 212, 89–101 (2019).
 92. Karthikeyan, R., Somasundaram, S. T., Manivasagam, T., Balasubramanian, T. & Anantharaman, P . Hepatoprotective activity of 
brown alga Padina boergesenii against CCl4 induced oxidative damage in Wistar rats. Asian Pac. J. Trop. Med.  3 (9), 696–701 
(2010).
 93. Mattioli, R., Mosca, L., Sánchez-Lamar, A., Tempera, I. & Hausmann, R. Natural bioactive compounds acting against oxidative 
stress in chronic, degenerative, and infectious diseases. Oxid. Med. Cell. Longev. 2018, 1–2 (2018).
 94. Jin, J. O. et al. Seaweeds in the oncology arena: anti-cancer potential of fucoidan as a drug—A review. Molecules 27 (18), 6032 
(2022).
 95. Montaser, R. & Luesch, H. Marine natural products: a new wave of drugs? Future Med. Chem. 3, 1475–1489 (2011).
 96. Bilan, M. I. & Usov, A. I. Structural analysis of fucoidans. Nat. Prod. Commun. 3, 1639–1648 (2008).
 97. Lear, M. J., Hirai, K., Ogawa, K., Y amashita, S. & Hirama, M. A convergent total synthesis of the kedarcidin chromophore: 20-years 
in the making. J. Antibiot. 72, 350–363 (2019).
Author contributions
EB participated in research experiments, data collection, and manuscript writing; MN participate in manuscript 
writing processing and analysis. ME participated in research design, supervision, and manuscript writing and 
editing. SE and RE participated in research design, supervision, and draft manuscript writing. All authors read 
and approved the final manuscript.
Funding
Open access funding provided by The Science, Technology & Innovation Funding Authority (STDF) in cooper-
ation with The Egyptian Knowledge Bank (EKB).
Declarations
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Ethical approval and consent to participate
All animal experimentation protocols were carried out in agreement with the National Institutes of Health 
guide for the care and use of laboratory animals (NIH Publications No. 8023, revised 1978) and following 
the recommendation of the proper care and use of laboratory animals regulated by Faculty of Science, Tanta 
University IACUC, Tanta, Egypt. This study was approved by the Faculty of Science, Tanta University’s 
Scientific Induction Ethics Committee, and guidelines for the humane care of animals (IACUC-SCI–TU-
0412). It is also confirmed that this study is reported in accordance with ARRIVE guidelines.
Consent to publish
The authors agreed to publish this manuscript for publication.
Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M.M.E.-S.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which 
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and 
indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s 
Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included 
in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy 
of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025 
Scientific Reports |         (2025) 15:4370 15| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-87379-9
www.nature.com/scientificreports/