Academic Editor: Didac Mauricio
Received: 8 January 2025
Revised: 31 January 2025
Accepted: 5 February 2025
Published: 7 February 2025
Citation: Cheung-Flynn, J.;
Rathmacher, J.A.; Pitchford, L.M.;
Xiong, Y.; Flynn, C.R. Reactive
Dicarbonyl Scavenging with
2-Hydroxybenzylamine Improves
MASH. Nutrients 2025, 17, 610.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
nu17040610
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
Reactive Dicarbonyl Scavenging with 2-Hydroxybenzylamine
Improves MASH
Joyce Cheung-Flynn 1, John A. Rathmacher 2,3
 , Lisa M. Pitchford 2, Yanhua Xiong 4 and Charles Robert Flynn 4, *
1 Department of Vascular Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA;
joyce.cheung-flynn@vumc.org
2 MTI Biotech Inc., Iowa State University Research Park, Ames, IA 50010, USA;
rathmacher@mtibiotech.com (J.A.R.); pitchford@mtibiotech.com (L.M.P .)
3 Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA
4 Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232, USA
* Correspondence: robb.flynn@vumc.org; Tel.: +1-(615)-343-8329
Abstract: Background: Products of lipid peroxidation include a number of reactive lipid
aldehydes including reactive dicarbonyl electrophiles (DEs) and contribute to disease
processes. DEs play a significant role in the development and progression of metabolic-
associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) by contributing to oxidative stress, inflamma-
tion, protein dysfunction, and mitochondrial impairment. Reducing DE stress may be
a potential strategy for managing MASLD. We hypothesized that the DE scavenger 2-
hydroxybenzylamine (2-HOBA) would reduce liver injury by reducing liver protein adduct
formation by DE in mouse models of MASLD. Methods: Protein adducts were measured
in human livers by immunohistochemistry and immunoblot. The effects of 2-HOBA were
assessed in two different mouse models of MASLD. Results: Isolevuglandin (IsoLG) pro-
tein adducts were increased in MASH-staged human livers relative to histologically normal
controls. Diet-Induced Animal Model of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (DIAMOND)
mice treated with 2-HOBA exhibited significantly lower fibrosis scores (* p = 0.012) and
reduced liver transaminases (AST, p = 0.03) and ALT, p = 0.012) by over 40%. In STAM
(Stelic Animal Model) mice, 2-HOBA improved NAFLD activity scores ( p = 0.03, NAS),
hyperglycemia, and inflammatory cytokines and reduced serum F2-isoprostanes (IsoPs)
by 30%, p = 0.05. These improvements were absent mRNA changes in hepatic antioxidant
enzymes (Cat, Gpx1, or Sod2) or ROS-generating proteins (p22PHOX, p47PHOX, NOX4
or COX1). Conclusions: DE scavenging with 2-HOBA may be a promising therapeutic
strategy for managing MASLD. While findings are currently limited to male mice, a nu-
traceutical that reduces liver fibrosis could significantly improve the management of MASH
by offering a non-invasive treatment option to potentially slow or reverse liver scarring,
delay progression to cirrhosis, and improve patient outcomes, while also providing a
potential treatment option for patients who may not be suitable for other interventions like
liver transplantation.
Keywords: fatty liver disease; fibrosis; steatohepatitis
1. Introduction
Metabolic-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) is intricately linked to metabolic
syndrome, with obesity, high serum triglycerides, and hyperglycemia as key contributors.
Notably, MASLD also occurs in lean individuals, particularly in Asian populations, with
prevalence estimates ranging from 8 to 23% [1]. The progression to Metabolic-Associated
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 https://doi.org/10.3390/nu17040610
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 2 of 17
Steatohepatitis (MASH) involves complex pathophysiological processes, including insulin
resistance and hyperinsulinemia, which exacerbate hepatic steatosis [2,3], and increased
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the liver through mitochondrial β oxidation
and dysfunction, inflammation, and metal redox cycling [ 4]. Despite the concerning
epidemiologic trends, targeted medical treatments for MASH remain limited. Resmetirom
(Rezdiffra®) only recently emerged as the sole targeted medical treatment for MASH [5].
Resmetirom reduces liver fat by enhancing hepatic β-oxidation upon partial activation
of thyroid hormone receptor β [6]. Unfortunately, over half of MASH patients taking
Resmetirom did not show any improvement in their condition, underscoring a need for
additional and adjunctive therapies.
MASLD progresses to MASH though a complex series of mechanisms that involve
lipid accumulation, oxidative stress, and inflammation. Increased insulin resistance and
hyperinsulinemia exacerbate hepatic steatosis by diverting sugars from glycogen synthesis
to de novo lipogenesis and by inhibiting lipolysis [ 3]. Increased ROS production in the
liver occurs through mitochondrial β oxidation and dysfunction, inflammation, and metal
redox cycling [4]. Lipid peroxidation is considered a key contributor to liver damage in
MASLD, where excessive oxidative stress leads to the breakdown of lipids within liver
cells, generating harmful compounds that promote inflammation and fibrosis [7,8]. Insulin
and lipid peroxidation have an inverse relationship, meaning that high levels of insulin
can lead to decreased lipid peroxidation, while conditions causing insulin resistance often
result in increased lipid peroxidation, contributing to further insulin resistance through
damage to cellular components involved in insulin signaling pathways; essentially, when
insulin signaling is impaired, the body can experience increased oxidative stress and lipid
peroxidation, creating a vicious cycle. Furthermore, lipid peroxidation by-products can
directly impair insulin receptor signaling by modifying key proteins within the pathway,
further hindering glucose uptake and exacerbating insulin resistance. ROS-catalyzed lipid
peroxidation generates highly reactive dicarbonyl electrophiles (DEs), including 4-oxo-2-
nonenal, malondialdehyde (MDA), and isolevuglandins (IsoLGs). The most reactive is
IsoLGs, which are highly reactive toxic products of lipid peroxidation and prostaglandin
endoperoxide rearrangement. They rapidly react with primary amines on lysine residues in
proteins [9,10]. IsoLGs also react with phosphatidylethanolamines (PEs) in lipoproteins and
lipid membranes [11,12] and dC bases in DNA [13]. IsoLG-protein adducts disrupt various
cellular processes, including protein folding, oligomerization, binding, proteasome degra-
dation, and promotion of inter-molecular crosslinking and stimulate immune responses [14].
Previous research has shown elevated IsoLG-modified high-density lipoprotein (HDL) in
MASH patients [15]. Additionally, IsoLGs activate hepatic stellate cells in vitro, leading to
increased MAPK activation (ERK/JNK), cytokine and chemokine production, associated
with intracellular ROS production, and autophagy induction. These findings link oxidative
injury from IsoLGs to disease progression in fibrotic liver diseases [16].
There are no large-scale clinical studies definitively proving that directly targeting lipid
peroxidation is effective in reducing the disease burden of MASLD or MASH. While some
clinical trials have explored the use of antioxidants in MASLD, the results have been mixed,
with limitations like small sample sizes and lack of specific biomarkers to directly measure
lipid peroxidation in the liver. One compound, pentoxifylline, has been demonstrated
to decrease the oxidized lipid products 9-hydroxy-octadecadienoic acid (9-HODE) and
13-oxo-octadecadienoic acid (13-oxoODE) in NASH [17]. However, other studies examining
the liver-protecting effects of other antioxidants, such as vitamin E, in MASLD did not see
correlations between 9-HODE and 13-HODE with hepatic 4-HNE protein adduct levels
after treatment, suggesting that these oxidized lipids may reflect systemic and not liver-
specific lipid peroxidation [18]. Of note, lipid peroxidation in NAFLD (now referred to as
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 3 of 17
MASLD) has been studied primarily by examining peroxidation markers in circulation and
not in liver biopsies [19,20].
2-Hydroxybenzylamine (2-HOBA) is a natural product of buckwheat seeds that acts
as a selective DE scavenger reacting ~1600-fold faster with IsoLGs than lysine, preventing
molecular adduction in vitro and in vivo (Figure 1), as previously described [21]. 2-HOBA
has been shown to be non-toxic, with proven safety in humans and animals [22–24] and with
demonstrated efficacy in reducing atherosclerosis, lipid peroxide formation, and inflam-
mation in the Ldlr−/− mouse model [25]. 2-HOBA has also shown promise in preclinical
models for other indications including hypertension [26], atrial fibrillation [27], systemic
lupus erythematosus [28], pulmonary hypertension [29], gastric cancer [30], Alzheimer’s
disease [31], and hypertension-induced end-organ damage [32].
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 18 
 
 
adduct levels after treatment, suggesting that these oxidized lipids may reflect systemic 
and not liver-specific lipid peroxidation [18]. Of note, lipid peroxidation in NAFLD (now 
referred to as MASLD) has been studied primarily by examining peroxidation markers in 
circulation and not in liver biopsies [19,20]. 
2-Hydroxybenzylamine (2-HOBA) is a natural product of buckwheat seeds that acts 
as a selective DE scavenger reacting ~1600-fold faster with IsoLGs than lysine, preventing 
molecular adduction in vitro and in vivo (Figure 1), as previously described [21]. 2-HOBA 
has been shown to be non-toxic, with proven  safety in humans and animals [22–24] and 
with demonstrated efficacy in reducing atherosclerosis, lipid peroxide formation, and in-
flammation in the Ldlr
−/− mouse model [25]. 2-HOBA has also shown promise in preclinical 
models for other indications including hypertension [26], atrial fibrillation [27], systemic 
lupus erythematosus [28], pulmonary hypertension [29], gastric cancer [30], Alzheimer’s 
disease [31], and hypertension-induced end-organ damage [32]. 
 
Figure 1. Multiple oxidized lipid peroxidation protein products (OxLPPs), including iso-
levuglandins (IsoLGs), once formed, adduct with liver lipids, DNA, and proteins. ( A) Dicarbonyl 
electrophiles (DEs) react with lysine or other primary amines to form Schiff base and pyrrole ad-
ducts. 2-HOBA prevents adduct formation. (B) Gel electrophoresis of DE-adducted chicken albumin 
over time showing progression of protein cross-linking and aggregate formation.  
This study aims to assess the relative ab undance of IsoLG adducts in human livers 
staged for MASLD and to evaluate the efficacy of 2-HOBA in mitigating MASH progres-
sion in two pre-clinical mouse models, a diet-induced animal model of MASLD (DIA-
MOND), and the Stelic Animal Model (STAM). These models were chosen for their ability 
to exhibit histopathological features of human MASLD and MASH and display progres-
sive disease courses that recapitulate MASH development from simple steatosis (MASL) 
to advanced steatohepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). By investigat-
ing the role of IsoLG adducts and the potential of 2-HOBA as a therapeutic agent, this 
study aims to contribute to the development of adjuvant novel strategies for MASH treat-
ment and prevention. 
2. Methods 
2.1. Human Studies 
Wedge liver biopsies of the left lateral lobe of the liver were obtained during elective 
bariatric surgery. Liver histology was report ed by a minimum of tw o pathologists with 
experience in reporting hepatic histopathology. Hepatic steatosis, ballooning, lobular in-
flammation, and fibrosis were reported in accordance with the NASH Clinical Research 
Figure 1. Multiple oxidized lipid peroxidation protein products (OxLPPs), including isolevuglandins
(IsoLGs), once formed, adduct with liver lipids, DNA, and proteins. ( A) Dicarbonyl electrophiles
(DEs) react with lysine or other primary amines to form Schiff base and pyrrole adducts. 2-HOBA
prevents adduct formation. ( B) Gel electrophoresis of DE-adducted chicken albumin over time
showing progression of protein cross-linking and aggregate formation.
This study aims to assess the relative abundance of IsoLG adducts in human livers
staged for MASLD and to evaluate the efficacy of 2-HOBA in mitigating MASH progression
in two pre-clinical mouse models, a diet-induced animal model of MASLD (DIAMOND),
and the Stelic Animal Model (STAM). These models were chosen for their ability to exhibit
histopathological features of human MASLD and MASH and display progressive disease
courses that recapitulate MASH development from simple steatosis (MASL) to advanced
steatohepatitis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). By investigating the role
of IsoLG adducts and the potential of 2-HOBA as a therapeutic agent, this study aims
to contribute to the development of adjuvant novel strategies for MASH treatment and
prevention.
2. Methods
2.1. Human Studies
Wedge liver biopsies of the left lateral lobe of the liver were obtained during elective
bariatric surgery. Liver histology was reported by a minimum of two pathologists with
experience in reporting hepatic histopathology. Hepatic steatosis, ballooning, lobular in-
flammation, and fibrosis were reported in accordance with the NASH Clinical Research
Network (NASH-CRN) scoring criteria [ 33]. Definite histological MASH was defined
as NAFLD activity score (NAS) ≥ 5. Inclusion criteria included scheduling for bariatric
surgery, obesity ≥ 40 kg/m2 or ≥35 kg/m2, and one comorbidity (type 2 diabetes [fasting
blood glucose ≥ 120 mg/dL; HbA1C ≥ 6.5%], known fatty liver disease, hypertension,
cardiovascular disease, or hyperlipidemia). Patients were excluded if they had prior
bariatric surgery, malignancy (<5 years), known history of intestinal disease, malabsorp-
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 4 of 17
tive syndrome, established organ dysfunction, renal disease, alpha 1 ant-trypsin disease,
Wilson’s disease, viral hepatis, alcoholic liver disease, were pregnant or breastfeeding, or
smoked > 7 cigarettes per day. The study adhered to the following ethical guidelines as
approved by the Internal Review Board of Vanderbilt University (090657 and 171845) and
registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT00983463 and NCT03407833). Studies were conducted
in accordance with NIH and institutional guidelines for human subject research and con-
formed to the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki; subjects provided
informed written consent.
2.2. Animal Studies
All experiments followed established guidelines for the care and use of laboratory ani-
mals [34] and were approved by the VUMC Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(IACUC) (M/13/257). Animals were housed under 12 h light/darkness cycles at 23 ± 2 ◦C
and 45 ± 10% relative humidity, with ad libitum access to food and water. There were no
interventions taken to address differences in diet intake, water consumption, or physical
activity between treatment and control groups. Sample sizes of 14 mice per strain with a 1:1
control to 2-HOBA allocation ratio were calculated to have a power of 0.96 to detect a 48%
reduction (effect size d of 2.20) in ALT based on a similar study examining the effects of
pentoxifylline on NAFLD in obese mice [35]. However, practical considerations in animal
costs and availability limited sample sizes to 12 mice per study (n/6 group), yielding a
power of 0.94 (assuming the same effect size), which we deemed acceptable.
The DIAMOND model mice included 12 male mice (3-week-old), obtained from
Sanyal Biotechnology (Chesterfield, VA, USA). The mice were quarantined for 7 weeks
and screened for pathogens and parasites as part of standard institutional quarantine
procedures. During this time, their diet included normal chow + Fenbendazole (150 mg/kg;
ENVIGO TD.01432) from 3 weeks to 8 weeks of age. The mice were then switched to a
high-fat diet (ENVIGO TD.02183, 42% fat chow + Fenbendazole 150 mg/kg) plus sugar
water (23.1 g/L fructose and 18.9 g/L glucose in 10 L water) from 8 to 24 weeks of age.
Treatment groups (from 12 weeks) consisted of control (n = 6) or 2-HOBA (n = 6) included
in drinking water (1 g/L). The mice were sacrificed at the end of 24 weeks, and tissues
were harvested.
STAM: Fourteen-day pregnant C57BL/6 dams were purchased from Japan SLC, Inc.
(Hamamatsu, Japan). Male mice from each litter (n = 12 total) were administered a single
subcutaneous injection of streptozotocin (200 µg; STZ; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA)
48 h after birth to induce MASH [ 36]. At 3 weeks of age, mice were divided into two
groups: vehicle control ( n = 6), and 2-HOBA ( n = 6, 1 g/L in drinking water). The diet
consisted of ad libitum high-fat diet (HFD32, CLEA Japan, Tokyo, Japan) from 3 weeks of
age for 6 weeks (sacrifice at 9 weeks of age). Mice in the 2-HOBA group received 2-HOBA
in drinking water (1 g/L), while the vehicle control group received plain water without
2-HOBA. Body weight and food/water intake were monitored weekly. Animals were
sacrificed at 9 weeks of age following 6 weeks of 2-HOBA or vehicle treatment.
2.3. Serum and Plasma Analyses
Serum levels of alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate transaminase (AST), and
gamma-glutamyl transaminase (GGT) were measured by the Vanderbilt Tissue Pathology
Core (ACE Alera chemistry, Alfa Wasserman, West Caldwell, NJ, USA). Cytokines (IL-1α,
IL-6, IL-1β, IL-10, IL-17, MCP-1, TNFα) were measured using the MILLIPLEXMAP Mouse
Metabolic Hormone Magnetic Bead Panel immunoassay (MMHMAG-44K; Millipore, Bil-
lerica, MA, USA). Oxidative stress markers of IsoPs [37] and IsoLGs [38] were measured
as previously described using mass spectrometry employing [2H4]8-iso-PGF2α [37] and
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 5 of 17
purified 13C γ-KA, [9], respectively, as internal standards. Anti-γ-KA titers, an index of
adaptive immune response, were measured using a single-chain monoclonal antibody
against IsoLG-lysine adducts independent of protein backbone [39]. Plasma 2-HOBA was
measured as previously described [24].
2.4. Murine Histopathological Analyses
Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded liver sections, stained with hematoxylin/eosin
(H/E) or picrosirius red (for fibrosis), were scored blindly by an experienced pathologist,
with scoring criteria of steatosis (0–4), ballooning (0–3), inflammation (0–4), and fibrosis
(0–4).
2.5. Immunoblotting
We performed immunoblotting on tissue preparations using snap-frozen liver samples
homogenized in lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM tris pH 8, 1% NP40, 0.5% deoxycholate,
5 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA), protease inhibitor cocktail I (1:100 dilution, Sigma Aldrich,
St. Louis, MO, USA), and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails II and III (1:100 dilutions each,
Sigma Aldrich) and then pelleted. Protein separation was carried out using 4–12% gradient
polyacrylamide gels with MOPS buffer (Invitrogen). Primary antibodies raised in rabbit
against AKT (#9272), p-AKT Ser473 (#9271), GSK3 β (#5676), and p-GSK3β Ser9 (#5558)
(Cell Signaling Technologies, Danvers, MA, USA) were used at 1:1000 dilution. Antibodies
raised against IsoLG-lysyl adduct (D11) were diluted in 1% polyvinylpyrrolidone blocking
buffer and incubated at room temperature for 1 h as previously described [39]. Secondary
antibodies, including fluorescently labeled goat anti-rabbit and donkey anti-goat (Li-Cor
Inc., Lincoln, NE, USA), were diluted 1:10,000 and incubated in blocking buffer at room
temperature for 1 h with shaking. Imaging was performed using the Odyssey Infrared
Imaging System (Li-Cor Inc.) as previously described [39].
2.6. RNA Isolation
Liver tissues were lysed in RLT lysis buffer and RNA were isolated using the RNeasy
Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germantown, MD, USA; #74101) following the manufacturer’s protocol.
RNA quality was determined using the Agilent Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa
Clara, CA, USA). Total RNA yield and 260/280 ratios were measured using a NanoDrop
spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).
2.7. Quantitative Real-Time Polymerase Chain Reaction
Total RNA was reverse-transcribed into complementary DNA with the SuperScript
VILO cDNA synthesis kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA, #11754050). Quantification of
the complementary DNA template was performed by real-time PCR using SYBR green
fluorescence on a Bio-Rad CFX96 thermal cycler (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA,
USA). Expression was normalized to that of 18S as an internal control. We used the 2−∆∆Ct
method to determine the relative RNA levels. The primers used in this study were 18S-F
5′-GTAACCCGTTGAACCCCATT-3′, 18s-R 5′-CCATCCAATCGGTAGTAGCG-3′, Cat-F
5′-ATTGCCGTCCGATTCTCC-3′, Cat-R 5′-CCAGTTACCATCTTCAGTGTAG-3′, Gpx1-F 5′-
GCTGCTCATTGAGAATGTCG-3′, Gpx1-R 5′-GAATCTCTTCATTCTTGCCATT-3′, Sod2-F
5′-GCTGCACCACAGCAAGCA-3′, Sod2-R 5′-TCGGTGACGTTCAGGTTGTTC-3′, Nox4-F
5′-TCATGGATCTTTGCCTGGAGGGTT-3′, Nox4-R 5′-AGGTCTGTGGGAAATGAGCTTGG
A-3′, p22phox-F 5′-TGTTGCAGGAGTGCTCATCTGTCT-3′, p22phox-R 5′-AGGACAGCCC
GGACGTAGTAATTT-3′, p47phox-F 5′-AGGTTGGGTCTGCATCCTATTT-3′, p47phox-R
5′-TGGTTACATACGGTTCACCTGCGT-3′, Cox1-F 5′-AGGGCTGGCCGGATTG-3′, and
Cox1-R 5′-CAGCCACATGCAGAACATGAT-3′.
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 6 of 17
2.8. Statistics
All data are expressed as mean ± standard error. Unless otherwise indicated, one-way
analysis of variance with Dunn’s post-test was used to compare three or more groups,
while either an unpaired Student’s t-test (two-tailed) or Mann–Whitney U-test (two-tailed)
was used for binary comparisons. The t-test was applied to data with a normal distribution,
while the Mann–Whitney U-test was used for non-normally distributed data. A p-value of
≤0.05 was considered statistically significant. Robust Regression Outlier Testing (ROUT)
with false discovery rate Q set at 1% was used to detect outliers. Prism 10.1.2 (GraphPad,
San Diego, CA, USA) was used for data analysis.
3. Results
3.1. Lipid Adducts in MASLD
We recently reported that high-density lipoprotein (HDL) isolated from MASH patients
showed higher levels of IsoLG adducts and elicited greater inflammatory responsesin vitro
(IL-1β and TNFα) compared to HDL from non-MASH patients [15]. In the current study,
we used immunohistochemistry (IHC) to probe normal, MASL, and MASH liver biopsies
with a D11 antibody specific to IsoLG-lysyl adduct epitopes. Our results show robust
cross-reactivity in MASL and MASH samples compared to normal liver tissue (Figure 2A,
B), with the highest antibody reactivity in hepatocytes and fenestrated endothelial cells
lining liver sinusoids. We also quantified 4-oxo-2-nonenal (4-HNE) protein adducts in
human liver specimens by immunoblot. 4-HNE adduct levels increased progressively with
worsening MASLD severity ranging from 5.08 ± 0.73 in histologically normal specimens to
8.01 ± 0.85 in MASL and 8.8 ± 0.46 AU/µg protein in MASH (Figure 2C, p = 0.021).
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 18 
 
 
p22phox-R 5 ′-AGGACAGCCC GGACGTAGTAATTT-3 ′, p47phox-F 5 ′-AGGTT-
GGGTCTGCATCCTATTT-3′, p47phox-R 5 ′-TGGTTACATACGGTTCACCTGCGT-3′, 
Cox1-F 5 ′-AGGGCTGGCCGGATTG-3′, and Cox1-R 5 ′-
CAGCCACATGCAGAACATGAT-3′. 
2.8. Statistics 
All data are expressed as mean ± standard  error. Unless otherwise indicated, one-
way analysis of variance with Dunn’s post-test was used to compare three or more groups, 
while either an unpaired Student’s t-test (two-tailed) or Mann–Whitney U-test (two-
tailed) was used for binary comparisons. The t-test was applied to data with a normal 
distribution, while the Mann–Whitney U-test was used for non-normally distributed data. 
A p-value of ≤0.05 was considered statistically significant. Robust Regression Outlier Test-
ing (ROUT) with false discovery rate Q set at 1% was used to detect outliers. Prism 10.1.2 
(GraphPad, San Diego, CA, USA) was used for data analysis. 
3. Results 
3.1. Lipid Adducts in MASLD 
We recently reported that high-density lipoprotein (HDL) isolated from MASH pa-
tients showed higher levels of IsoLG adducts and elicited greater inflammatory responses 
in vitro (IL-1β and TNFα) compared to HDL from non-MASH patients [15]. In the current 
study, we used immunohistochemistry (IHC ) to probe normal, MASL, and MASH liver 
biopsies with a D11 antibody specific to Is oLG-lysyl adduct epitopes. Our results show 
robust cross-reactivity in MASL and MASH samples compared to normal liver tissue (Fig-
ure 2A, B), with the highest antibody reactivity in hepatocytes and fenestrated endothelial 
cells lining liver sinusoids. We also quanti fied 4-oxo-2-nonenal (4-HNE) protein adducts 
in human liver specimens by immunoblot. 4-HNE adduct levels increased progressively 
with worsening MASLD severity ranging from 5.08 ± 0.73 in histologically normal speci-
mens to 8.01 ± 0.85 in MASL and 8.8 ± 0.46 AU/μg protein in MASH (Figure 2C, p = 0.021). 
 
Figure 2. Liver protein adducts increase with MASLD severity. ( A) Immunohistochemistry detect-
ing IsoLG-lysyl adducts in normal, MASL, or MASH human liver. Scale bar = 200 μm. (B) Immunob-
lot and (C) quantitation of 4-HNE-adducted proteins (absorbance units per microgram protein) in 
MASLD human livers. * p ≤ 0.05 by 1-way ANOVA. Data are expressed as mean ± SEM. 
Figure 2. Liver protein adducts increase with MASLD severity. (A) Immunohistochemistry detecting
IsoLG-lysyl adducts in normal, MASL, or MASH human liver. Scale bar = 200 µm. (B) Immunoblot
and (C) quantitation of 4-HNE-adducted proteins (absorbance units per microgram protein) in
MASLD human livers. * p ≤ 0.05 by 1-way ANOVA. Data are expressed as mean± SEM.
3.2. Effects of 2-HOBA in DIAMOND Mice
DIAMOND mice showed slightly reduced food and water intake in the 2-HOBA
group (Figure 3A, B) but no significant differences in body weight or liver-to-body weight
ratio (Figure 3C–E). Gross liver morphology between groups was similar (Figure 3F), but
despite equivocal steatosis severity, mice treated with 2-HOBA exhibited significantly
lower fibrosis scores (* p = 0.012) (Figure 4A,B) and were associated with a 24% decrease
in liver IsoPs ( r = 0.69, p = 0.04). 2-HOBA and untreated mice exhibited similar blood
glucose levels ( ~150 mg/dL) (Figure 4C) and demonstrated trends ( p = 0.132) towards
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 7 of 17
lower liver IsoPs in the 2-HOBA group (Figure 4D), although the differences did not reach
statistical significance. Serum AST and ALT levels in 2-HOBA-treated mice (Figure 4E)
were significantly reduced versus untreated controls (AST * p = 0.025, ALT * p = 0.012).
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 18 
 
 
3.2. Effects of 2-HOBA in DIAMOND Mice 
DIAMOND mice showed slightly reduced food and water intake in the 2-HOBA 
group (Figure 3A, B) but no significant differences in body weight or liver-to-body weight 
ratio (Figure 3C–E). Gross liver morphology between groups was similar (Figure 3F), but 
despite equivocal steatosis severity, mice treated with 2-HOBA exhibited significantly 
lower fibrosis scores (* p = 0.012) (Figure 4A, B) and were associated with a 24% decrease 
in liver IsoPs (r = 069, p = 0.04). 2-HOBA and untreated mice exhibited similar blood glu-
cose levels (~150 mg/dL) (Figure 4C) and demonstrated trends ( p = 0.132) towards lower 
liver IsoPs in the 2-HOBA group (Figure 4D),  although the differences did not reach sta-
tistical significance. Serum AST and ALT levels in 2-HOBA-treated mice (Figure 4E) were 
significantly reduced versus untreated controls (AST * p = 0.025, ALT * p = 0.012). 
 
Figure 3. Food intake and water intake in DIAMOND mice treated with 2-HOBA. (A) Food intake 
and water intake ( B) over the last seven weeks and in tota l over twelve weeks were measured in 
DIAMOND mice with (white) or without (dark) 2-HOBA (1g/L). ( C) Body weights over time, ( D) 
body weights at study end, and (E) liver to body weight ratios with (▪) or without (●) 2-HOBA were 
also measured. ( F) Representative gross morphology of livers from control and 2-HOBA-treated 
DIAMOND mice. Scale bar = 3 mm. * p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01 by unpaired Student t-test. 
Figure 3. Food intake and water intake in DIAMOND mice treated with 2-HOBA. (A) Food intake
and water intake ( B) over the last seven weeks and in total over twelve weeks were measured
in DIAMOND mice with (white) or without (dark) 2-HOBA (1 g/L). ( C) Body weights over time,
(D) body weights at study end, and (E) liver to body weight ratios with (■) or without (•) 2-HOBA
were also measured. (F) Representative gross morphology of livers from control and 2-HOBA-treated
DIAMOND mice. Scale bar = 3 mm. * p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01 by unpaired Student t-test.
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Effects of 2-HOBA on MASH severity in DIAMOND mice. (A) Left are H&E- and right are 
picrosirius-red-stained images of control (top) and 2-HOBA-treated mouse livers. (B) Average com-
ponent (steatosis, inflammation, ballooning, and fibrosis) and composite histology scores for control 
and 2-HOBA-treated mice. (C) Glucose, (D) liver isoprostanes, and (E) transaminase levels in DIA-
MOND mice with (black bars) or without 2-HOBA. Scale bar = 200 μm. * p ≤ 0.05 by unpaired Stu-
dent t-test.  
3.3. Effects of 2-HOBA in STAM Mice 
The STAM Mouse Model Study showed significantly reduced liver mass and liver-to-
body weight ratio in the 2-HOBA group by 11% (p = 0.04) (Figure 5D–F), with no significant 
differences in serum glucose and insulin levels (Supplemental Figure S1A, B). Liver 2-HOBA 
levels averaged 10 ng/mg tissue (Figure 6A), and these were associated with a 30% reduction 
in serum IsoPs (p = 0.05, oxidative stress marker) (Figure 6B) and improved AST levels, with 
no change in serum ALT (Supplemental Figure S1C) or serum TG levels (Supplemental Figure 
S1D). There were no significant differences in cytokine levels, but some trends were observed 
(Figure 6C), such as decreased IL-6 (p = 0.11) and IL-1β (p = 0.15). Histopathology demon-
strated reduced steatosis and better-defined hepatic lobules in the 2-HOBA group (Figure 7A), 
with a significantly lower NAS in the 2-HOBA group (3.0 vs. 4.2 in controls, p = 0.03), lower 
inflammation (0.3 vs. 1.1, p = 0.01), and lower steatosis (0.7 vs. 1.2, p = 0.05). Molecular analysis 
showed decreased IsoLG-lysyl adducts in the 2-HOBA group (Figure 8A). The gene expres-
sion changes shown in Figure 8B demonstrated no changes in mRNAs encoding catalase (Cat), 
with trends towards lower glutathione peroxidase 1 (Gpx1; p = 0.13) and phagocyte NADPH-
oxidase subunit 22 (p22phox; p = 0.07), as well as reduced expression of superoxide dismutase 
2 (Sod2; p = 0.25), phagocyte NADPH-oxidase subunit 47 (p47phox; p = 0.329), and cytochrome 
c oxidase subunit 1(Cox1; p = 0.13). To investigate the effects of 2-HOBA on AKT/GSK3β sig-
naling in STAM mice, we probed levels of total and phosphorylated GSK3β and AKT by im-
munoblot (Supplemental Figure S2). Mouse livers after 2-HOBA treatment showed signifi-
cantly increased ratios of pSer473 AKT/total AKT (* p = 0.015) and pSer9 GSK3β/total GSK3β 
(*** p = 0.001). 
Figure 4. Effects of 2-HOBA on MASH severity in DIAMOND mice. ( A) Left are H&E- and right
are picrosirius-red-stained images of control (top) and 2-HOBA-treated mouse livers. (B) Average
component (steatosis, inflammation, ballooning, and fibrosis) and composite histology scores for
control and 2-HOBA-treated mice. (C) Glucose, (D) liver isoprostanes, and (E) transaminase levels in
DIAMOND mice with (black bars) or without 2-HOBA. Scale bar = 200 µm. * p ≤ 0.05 by unpaired
Student t-test.
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 8 of 17
3.3. Effects of 2-HOBA in STAM Mice
The STAM Mouse Model Study showed significantly reduced liver mass and liver-
to-body weight ratio in the 2-HOBA group by 11% ( p = 0.04) (Figure 5D–F), with no
significant differences in serum glucose and insulin levels (Supplemental Figure S1A,B).
Liver 2-HOBA levels averaged 10 ng/mg tissue (Figure 6A), and these were associated
with a 30% reduction in serum IsoPs ( p = 0.05, oxidative stress marker) (Figure 6B) and
improved AST levels, with no change in serum ALT (Supplemental Figure S1C) or serum
TG levels (Supplemental Figure S1D). There were no significant differences in cytokine
levels, but some trends were observed (Figure 6C), such as decreased IL-6 ( p = 0.11)
and IL-1β (p = 0.15). Histopathology demonstrated reduced steatosis and better-defined
hepatic lobules in the 2-HOBA group (Figure 7A), with a significantly lower NAS in the
2-HOBA group (3.0 vs. 4.2 in controls, p = 0.03), lower inflammation (0.3 vs. 1.1, p = 0.01),
and lower steatosis (0.7 vs. 1.2, p = 0.05). Molecular analysis showed decreased IsoLG-
lysyl adducts in the 2-HOBA group (Figure 8A). The gene expression changes shown in
Figure 8B demonstrated no changes in mRNAs encoding catalase (Cat), with trends towards
lower glutathione peroxidase 1 (Gpx1; p = 0.13) and phagocyte NADPH-oxidase subunit
22 (p22phox; p = 0.07), as well as reduced expression of superoxide dismutase 2 ( Sod2;
p = 0.25), phagocyte NADPH-oxidase subunit 47 (p47phox; p = 0.329), and cytochrome c
oxidase subunit 1(Cox1; p = 0.13). To investigate the effects of 2-HOBA on AKT/GSK3β
signaling in STAM mice, we probed levels of total and phosphorylated GSK3β and AKT
by immunoblot (Supplemental Figure S2). Mouse livers after 2-HOBA treatment showed
significantly increased ratios of pSer473 AKT/total AKT (*p = 0.015) and pSer9 GSK3β/total
GSK3β (*** p = 0.001).
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Food intake and water intake in STAM mice treated with 2-HOBA. ( A) Food intake and 
water intake (B) over time and in total over six weeks were measured in STAM mice with (white) 
or without 2-HOBA (1g/L). (C) Body weights over time, (D) body weights at study end, and (E) liver 
to body weight ratios with or without 2-HOBA were also measured. ( F) Representative gross mor-
phology of livers from control and 2-HOBA -treated STAM mice. Scale bar = 3 mm. * p ≤ 0.05 by 
unpaired Student t-test. 
 
Figure 6. Effects of 2-HOBA on serum clinical chemistry and systemic inflammation in STAM mice. 
Fasting serum (A) 2-HOBA, (B) isoprostanes, and (C) the inflammatory cytokines IL-1α, MCP-1, IL-
6, IL-10, IL-17, IL-1 β, and TNF α measured by multiplexed ELISA. * p ≤ 0.05 and *** p ≤ 0.001 by 
unpaired Student t-test. 
Figure 5. Food intake and water intake in STAM mice treated with 2-HOBA. (A) Food intake and
water intake (B) over time and in total over six weeks were measured in STAM mice with (white)
or without 2-HOBA (1 g/L). ( C) Body weights over time, ( D) body weights at study end, and
(E) liver to body weight ratios with or without 2-HOBA were also measured. (F) Representative gross
morphology of livers from control and 2-HOBA-treated STAM mice. Scale bar = 3 mm. * p ≤ 0.05 by
unpaired Student t-test.
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 9 of 17
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Food intake and water intake in STAM mice treated with 2-HOBA. ( A) Food intake and 
water intake (B) over time and in total over six weeks were measured in STAM mice with (white) 
or without 2-HOBA (1g/L). (C) Body weights over time, (D) body weights at study end, and (E) liver 
to body weight ratios with or without 2-HOBA were also measured. ( F) Representative gross mor-
phology of livers from control and 2-HOBA -treated STAM mice. Scale bar = 3 mm. * p ≤ 0.05 by 
unpaired Student t-test. 
 
Figure 6. Effects of 2-HOBA on serum clinical chemistry and systemic inflammation in STAM mice. 
Fasting serum (A) 2-HOBA, (B) isoprostanes, and (C) the inflammatory cytokines IL-1α, MCP-1, IL-
6, IL-10, IL-17, IL-1 β, and TNF α measured by multiplexed ELISA. * p ≤ 0.05 and *** p ≤ 0.001 by 
unpaired Student t-test. 
Figure 6. Effects of 2-HOBA on serum clinical chemistry and systemic inflammation in STAM mice.
Fasting serum (A) 2-HOBA, (B) isoprostanes, and ( C) the inflammatory cytokines IL-1 α, MCP-1,
IL-6, IL-10, IL-17, IL-1β, and TNFα measured by multiplexed ELISA. * p ≤ 0.05 and *** p ≤ 0.001 by
unpaired Student t-test.
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Effects of 2-HOBA on MASH severity in STAM mice.  (A) Left are H&E- and right are 
picrosirius-red-stained images of control (top) and 2-HOBA-treated mouse livers. (B) Average indi-
vidual component and composite scores for control and 2-HOBA-treated mice. Mag bar = 200 μm. 
* p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01 by unpaired Student t-test. 
In summary, 2-HOBA treatment showed promising effects in both DIAMOND and 
STAM mouse models of MASLD manifested by reduced live r mass and improved liver 
function markers, decreased oxidative stress and inflammatory markers, improved histo-
pathological features of MASH, and enhanced AKT/GSK3 β signaling, like metformin’s 
effects [40]. These findings suggest that 2-HOBA may have therapeutic potential in 
MASLD progression, consistent with previous studies on dicarbonyl scavengers in related 
metabolic disorders. 
Figure 7. Effects of 2-HOBA on MASH severity in STAM mice. ( A) Left are H&E- and right
are picrosirius-red-stained images of control (top) and 2-HOBA-treated mouse livers. (B) Average
individual component and composite scores for control and 2-HOBA-treated mice. Magbar = 200 µm.
* p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01 by unpaired Student t-test.
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 10 of 17
Nutrients 2025, 17, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 8. 2-HOBA reduces dicarbonyl adducts in STAM mouse liver without altering the expression 
of key enzymes regulating ROS. (A) Immunoblot of liver total protein extracts from STAM control 
(blot left) or 2-HOBA-treated mice (blot right) probed with anti-D11 antibody. Bands of 42 kD and 
48 kD were significantly differentially detected and are noted by arrows. (B) Relative levels of genes 
encoding antioxidant enzymes or reactive oxygen species (ROS)-generating proteins expressed in 
control (blue) and 2-HOBA-treated mouse livers. Cat, catalase; Gpx1, glutathione peroxidase 1; Sod2, 
superoxide dismutase 2; Nox4, NADPH oxidase 4; P22phox, protein 22 kd of phagocyte NADPH 
oxidase; P47phox, protein 47 kd of phagocyte NADPH oxidase; Cox1, cytochrome oxidase 1. p ≤ 0.05, 
** p ≤ 0.01 by unpaired Student t-test. 
4. Discussion 
This study investigated the abundance of isolevuglandin (IsoLG) adducts in humans 
with Metabolic-Associated Steatohepatitis (MASH) and evaluated the efficacy of 2-hy-
droxybenzylamine (2-HOBA) in mitigating MASH development in two preclinical dia-
betic MASH-HCC models: the DIAMOND model, an isogenic B6/I129 hybrid strain fed a 
Western diet with high-fructose –sucrose solution, exhibiting  hypertriglyceridemia, and 
the STAM, chosen for its comprehensive representation of metabolic dysfunction, includ-
ing obesity, insulin resistance, hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia, adipose tissue dysfunction, 
and adipokine imbalance. This study demons trated the efficacy of 2-HOBA treatment 
manifested by significant reductions in liver weight to body weight ratio (Figure 5E), de-
creased NAFLD activity score (NAS) of hepatic steatosis (Figure 7B), attenuated NAS in-
flammation (Figure 3E), and a significantly decreased fibrosis score (Figure 4A,B), but 
Figure 8. 2-HOBA reduces dicarbonyl adducts in STAM mouse liver without altering the expression
of key enzymes regulating ROS. (A) Immunoblot of liver total protein extracts from STAM control
(blot left) or 2-HOBA-treated mice (blot right) probed with anti-D11 antibody. Bands of 42 kD and
48 kD were significantly differentially detected and are noted by arrows. (B) Relative levels of genes
encoding antioxidant enzymes or reactive oxygen species (ROS)-generating proteins expressed in
control (blue) and 2-HOBA-treated mouse livers. Cat, catalase; Gpx1, glutathione peroxidase 1; Sod2,
superoxide dismutase 2; Nox4, NADPH oxidase 4; P22phox, protein 22 kd of phagocyte NADPH
oxidase; P47phox, protein 47 kd of phagocyte NADPH oxidase; Cox1, cytochrome oxidase 1. p ≤ 0.05,
** p ≤ 0.01 by unpaired Student t-test.
In summary, 2-HOBA treatment showed promising effects in both DIAMOND and
STAM mouse models of MASLD manifested by reduced liver mass and improved liver func-
tion markers, decreased oxidative stress and inflammatory markers, improved histopatho-
logical features of MASH, and enhanced AKT/GSK3 β signaling, like metformin’s ef-
fects [40]. These findings suggest that 2-HOBA may have therapeutic potential in MASLD
progression, consistent with previous studies on dicarbonyl scavengers in related metabolic
disorders.
4. Discussion
This study investigated the abundance of isolevuglandin (IsoLG) adducts in hu-
mans with Metabolic-Associated Steatohepatitis (MASH) and evaluated the efficacy of
2-hydroxybenzylamine (2-HOBA) in mitigating MASH development in two preclinical
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 11 of 17
diabetic MASH-HCC models: the DIAMOND model, an isogenic B6/I129 hybrid strain fed
a Western diet with high-fructose–sucrose solution, exhibiting hypertriglyceridemia, and
the STAM, chosen for its comprehensive representation of metabolic dysfunction, includ-
ing obesity, insulin resistance, hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia, adipose tissue dysfunction,
and adipokine imbalance. This study demonstrated the efficacy of 2-HOBA treatment
manifested by significant reductions in liver weight to body weight ratio (Figure 5E), de-
creased NAFLD activity score (NAS) of hepatic steatosis (Figure 7B), attenuated NAS
inflammation (Figure 3E), and a significantly decreased fibrosis score (Figure 4A,B), but
with no significant reduction in serum cytokines (Figure 6C) or genes encoding liver
antioxidants/ROS-generating enzymes (Figure 8B). Interestingly, these improvements were
accompanied by increased liver AKT Ser473 and GSK3β Ser9 phosphorylation in 2-HOBA-
treated mice, with potential effects on hepatic glucose metabolism and improved glucose
homeostasis and insulin sensitivity.
The accumulation of TG in the liver stems from an increased influx of free fatty
acids (FFAs) primarily from adipose tissue lipolysis (60%) and to a lesser degree from de
novo lipogenesis (25%) and uptake of chylomicron dietary FFAs (15%) [ 41]. TG can be
removed from liver hepatocytes through FFA oxidation or upon export as very-low-density
lipoprotein (VLDL). In a state of lipid oversupply, ROS and other reactive intermediates
are generated that react with lipids, proteins, and other biomolecules, leading to DE forma-
tion. The DE attacks rate-limiting enzymes in fatty acid (FA) metabolism such as carnitine
palmitoyl transferase 1 (CPT1), monounsaturated FA formation (stearoyl-CoA desaturase;
SCD), TG synthesis (diglyceride acyltransferase; DGAT), fatty acid synthesis (fatty acid
synthase; FASN, and acetyl-CoA carboxylase; ACC), and lipoprotein assembly (microsomal
triglyceride transfer protein; MTTP), potentially causing injury to hepatocytes. Similar
injury could also occur upon DE modification of transcription factors (TFs) such as sterol
regulatory element-binding protein-1c (SREBP-1C) and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-α a (PPARα) and -γ (PPARγ). Additionally, the metabolic dysregulation associated
with hepatic steatosis, including insulin resistance and oxidative stress, can further exac-
erbate the production of DEs through various mechanisms, such as increased glycolysis,
impaired detoxification pathways, and disruption of redox homeostasis. Collectively, these
processes may cause injury to hepatocytes and perpetuate the formation of Des, creating
an environment conducive to immune cell recruitment, stellate cell activation, and fibrosis.
This hypothesis is supported by our findings of increased DE adducts in human MASH
tissues (Figure 2), reduced serum IsoPs in 2-HOBA-treated STAM mice (Figure 6B), and
decreased 48 kD immunoreactive band in 2-HOBA-treated STAM mice livers.
AKT (also known as Protein Kinase B) plays a central role in regulating glucose uptake,
glycogen synthesis, and lipid metabolism, and cell survival with phosphorylation at Ser473
is a key marker of insulin signaling and its activation. Glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3)
is a multifunctional serine/threonine kinase with two isoforms, GSK3α and GSK3β, that
regulate glycogen synthesis and glucose metabolism, with GSK3β being particularly impli-
cated in liver diseases. GSK3β is a major kinase in MASH and a potential driver of lipotoxic
inflammation that is pathogenically activated in numerous inflammatory conditions across
multiple organs. Regulation of GSK3B activity occurs primarily through phosphorylation
at serine 9 (pSer9 GSK3β), with increased pSer9 GSK3β being inhibitory [42]. Phosphory-
lation of serine 9 on GSK3β is directly regulated by the phosphorylation of serine 473 on
Akt, meaning that when Akt is activated by phosphorylation at Ser473, it then phosphory-
lates GSK3β at Ser9, effectively inhibiting GSK3β activity [43,44]. Essentially, Ser473 Akt
phosphorylation acts as an upstream signal that leads to Ser9 GSK3β phosphorylation and
inactivation of GSK3β.
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 12 of 17
The liver is exposed to a number toxic compounds that must be detoxified but leads
to the production of ROS. Toxicants such as carbon tetrachloride and ethanol are associated
with oxidative injury to the liver [ 45]. The formation of IsoLG protein adducts in the
liver was observed in rats given an oral gavage of a lipid and carbon tetrachloride. Four
hours after the oral gavage, high levels of IsoLG protein adducts were observed in the
liver [46], which can affect structural and functional modification proteins. Ethanol is a
more common toxicant for humans, and consumption increases the risk of alcoholic fatty
liver disease. Alcohol consumption in mice for 39 days led to an elevation in IsoLG protein
adduct levels in a dose-dependent manner [47] and contributed to ethanol-mediated liver
injury via a TNFR1/CYP2E1-dependent, but cyclooxygenase-independent, mechanism
in the mouse liver. We have shown in C57BL/6J mice using the NIAAA model that pre-
treatment with 2-HOBA for 14 days at 1.0 g/L prior to ethanol injury reduced liver injury,
ameliorated the significant increases in hepatic IsoPs and IsoFs, and additionally decreased
kidney F2-isoprostane formation (unpublished data). Further, we have shown that ethanol
injury activated a robust hepatic overexpression of genes regulating oxidative stress, redox
status, iron handling, xenobiotic metabolism, and lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-mediated RXR
activation, whereas 2-HOBA ameliorated the expression of these pathways in the liver
(unpublished data).
Treatment of cultured hepatic stellate cells (cells that drive hepatic fibrosis) with low
doses of iso-LG induces cell activation and transformation to a profibrotic phenotype [16]
and the expression of α-smooth muscle actin and cytokines, which are phenotypes of
fibrosis and inflammation involved in MASLD. Likewise, increased electrophile stress and
oxidized lipid peroxidation protein products (oxLPPs) are prominent in hepatocytes loaded
with fatty acids (FAs) [48]. While in cultured cells these iso-LGs sustained activation of ERK
and JNK signaling pathways, our in vivo data from 2-HOBA-treated STAM mice suggest
that enhanced AKT/GSK3β signaling is a molecular feature of IsoLG scavenging. Further
experiments are needed to establish which protein, DNA, or other biomolecular targets are
responsible for this effect.
Recent findings on aspirin’s effects in MASLD patients provide context for potential
2-HOBA efficacy. A recent Phase 2 trial in 80 adults with MASLD, without cirrhosis,
showed that one daily dose of aspirin, acetylsalicylic acid (81 mg), for 6 months reduced
liver fat content by 6.6% versus placebo [ 49]. In preclinical studies, aspirin has been
shown to exhibit anti-inflammatory effects in the liver through inhibition of cyclooxygenase
enzymes and platelet-derived growth factor signaling. Aspirin also reduces bioactive
lipid formation and DE availability via release of FAs from phospholipids and TGs [50],
inhibits long chain 3-hydroxyacyl-coA dehydrogenase-mediated FA β-oxidation [51], and
activates AMP-activated protein kinase A [ 52]. Aspirin has also been shown to reduce
VLDL production [53] and inhibit elevated lipoprotein lipase (Lp(a)) [54] thereby altering
hepatic availability of FFAs and potentiating accumulation of oxLPPs. Aspirin has been
shown to inhibit the phosphorylation of Akt at Ser473 and decrease the activation of Akt
signaling [55]. This effect is often observed in cancer cells, where aspirin can potentially
suppress tumor growth by modulating this pathway [56]. Given the structural similarities
between aspirin and 2-HOBA, and their favorable safety profiles [22–24,57], further studies
on 2-HOBA in human MASLD may be warranted.
This study has limitations. We were only able to study male mice. While human
MASLD is more prevalent in men than in women [ 58], it is unclear whether there are
sex-associated differences in MASLD pathology or response to treatment. Future studies
should investigate the efficacy of 2-HOBA in both sexes. There also appeared to be po-
tential associated differences in MASH pathology and 2-HOBA responses that were not
further investigated. Several potential factors contributing to these discrepancies, such as
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 13 of 17
genetic background, diet, age, and extent of MASLD severity differ between the STAM and
DIAMOND models. Future studies attempting to standardize these variables as much as
possible to allow for more comparable results may be warranted. Additional approaches
utilizing primary hepatocytes in in vitro studies, co-culture experiments with hepatocytes
and other cell types, and/or additional biomarker analyses may be warranted. 2-HOBA
administration began prior to MASH development, demonstrating a protective effect rather
than a therapeutic one. An alternative approach would be to treat mice with MASH in a
therapeutic setting, where MASLD and/or MASH have already developed. In these stud-
ies, careful consideration is warranted regarding dosing, timing, and duration of 2-HOBA
exposure as MASH can develop into cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma in both STAM
and DIAMOND models. Furthermore, preclinical studies may not fully recapitulate the
complex pathophysiology of human MASLD and MASH. Factors such as inter-individual
variability, drug–drug interactions, and unforeseen adverse events can significantly impact
the clinical efficacy and safety of therapeutic interventions. First-in-human studies already
have established 2-HOBA as safe and well-tolerated, with defined pharmacokinetics [59,60].
Clinical studies with 2-HOBA are presently being evaluated for efficacy in preventing
Alzheimer’s disease, rheumatoid arthritis, familial hypercholesterolemia, and pulmonary
arterial hypertension. Finally, the study does not address the potential for 2-HOBA to
reverse established MASH pathogenesis. Some drug classes, such as FGF21 analogs, have
shown potential to reverse fibrosis, with reduction in liver fibrosis biomarkers alongside
improvements in liver fat and inflammation [ 61]. These drugs, like 2-HOBA, may offer
broader metabolic benefits by multiple mechanisms including improving insulin sensitiv-
ity and reducing dyslipidemia, potentially contributing to further improvements in liver
health.
5. Conclusions
In conclusion, our data support the potential of 2-HOBA, an electrophile scavenger,
as a strategy to reduce MASLD inflammation and steatosis associated with progression to
MASH. Future studies should investigate 2-HOBA efficacy in both sexes, evaluate 2-HOBA
treatment after the onset of clinical MASH to determine its therapeutic value, and further
explore the molecular mechanisms underlying 2-HOBA’s effects, particularly its impact on
AKT/GSK3β signaling in liver tissue. These findings pave the way for potential clinical
trials to assess 2-HOBA’s efficacy in human MASLD patients.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https://
www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/nu17040610/s1, Figure S1: Effects of 2-HOBA on the liver;Figure S2:
2-HOBA enhances insulin signaling in STAM mouse liver.
Author Contributions: All authors contributed to the conception and design of the study. Material
preparation, data collection, and analysis were performed by J.C.-F., L.M.P ., Y.X., C.R.F. and J.A.R. The
first draft of the manuscript was co-written by J.C.-F., J.A.R. and C.R.F. and all authors commented
on previous versions of the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This grant was supported by R43 AA023715 to Metabolic Technologies Inc.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki, and approved by the Internal Review Board of Vanderbilt University (#090657 was
approved on 14 October 2009; #171845 was approved on 9 April 2018.). The animal study protocol
was approved by the VUMC Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) M/13/257, 30
October 2014.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all patients involved in the
study.
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 14 of 17
Data Availability Statement: The datasets generated and/or analyzed during the current study are
available from the corresponding authors on reasonable request.
Acknowledgments: Figure 1B is reprinted from Prostaglandins, 37, Iyer, R.S., Ghosh, S., Salomon,
R.G., Levuglandin E2 crosslinks proteins, 471–480, Copyright 1989, with permission from Elsevier.
Conflicts of Interest: The study was supported in part by the MTI Biotech Inc (Ames, IA). TSI Group
Ltd. also supplied the 2-hyroxybenzylamine acetate used in the study. The authors declare the
following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing
interests. J.A.R. reports financial support provided by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
J.A.R. is employed by MTI Biotech Inc. and formerly by Metabolic Technologies Inc. and is named as
an inventor on several 2-Hydroxybenzylamine patents. LM.P . is a former employee of MTI Biotech Inc.
and Metabolic Technologies Inc. MTI Biotech Inc has a licensing agreement with Vanderbilt University
for future use of electrophile scavenger drugs, including 2-hydroxybenzylamine. C.R.F. is employed
by Vanderbilt University Medical Center and is named as an inventor on a 2-Hydroxybenzylamine
patent. J.C. and Y.X. declare that they do not have any conflicts of interest.
Abbreviations
2-HOBA, 2-hydroxybenzylamine, 4-HNE 4-oxo-2-nonenal; ACC, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; AKT, viral
v-akt gene product/serine/threonine protein kinase; AMP , adenine mononucleotide phosphate;
CAT, catalase; COX1, cyclooxygenase 1; CPT1, carnitine palmitoyl transferase 1; dC, deoxycyti-
dine; DE, dicarbonyl electrophile; DGAT, diglyceride acyltransferase; DIAMOND, Diet-Induced
Animal Model of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease; ERK, Extra-cellular Signal Regulated Kinase;
FA, fatty acid; FASN, fatty acid synthase; GPX1, glutathione peroxidase; GSK3β, glucose synthase
kinase β; HDL, high-density lipoprotein; IsoLG, isolevuglandin; IsoPs, isoprostanes; JNK, jun kinase;
Ldlr, low-density lipoprotein receptor; MASLD, metabolic-associated steatotic liver disease; MASH,
Metabolic-Associated Steatohepatitis; MDA, malondialdehyde; MTTP , microsomal triglyceride trans-
fer protein; MDA, malondialdehyde; NOX4, nitric oxide synthase 4; HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma;
OxLPPs, oxidized lipid peroxidation protein products; p47phox, protein 22 kd of phagocyte NADPH
oxidase; p22phox, protein 47 kd of phagocyte NADPH oxidase; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PE,
phosphatidylethanolamine; PGH2, prostaglandin endoperoxide; PPARα, peroxisome proliferator-
activated receptor-α; PPARγ, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ; ROS, reactive oxygen
species; SCD, stearoyl-CoA desaturase; SOD2, superoxide dismutase 2; SREBP-1C, sterol regulatory
element-binding protein-1c; STAM, Stelic Animal Model.
References
1. Younossi, Z.M.; Henry, L. Understanding the Burden of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease: Time for Action. Diabetes Spectr. 2024,
37, 9–19. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Younossi, Z.; Stepanova, M.; Ong, J.P .; Jacobson, I.M.; Bugianesi, E.; Duseja, A.; Eguchi, Y.; Wong, V .W.; Negro, F.; Yilmaz, Y.; et al.
Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis Is the Fastest Growing Cause of Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Liver Transplant Candidates.Clin.
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2019, 17, 748–755.e743. [CrossRef]
3. Loomba, R.; Friedman, S.L.; Shulman, G.I. Mechanisms and disease consequences of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Cell 2021,
184, 2537–2564. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Friedman, S.L.; Neuschwander-Tetri, B.A.; Rinella, M.; Sanyal, A.J. Mechanisms of NAFLD development and therapeutic
strategies. Nat. Med. 2018, 24, 908–922. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Harrison, S.A.; Bedossa, P .; Guy, C.D.; Schattenberg, J.M.; Loomba, R.; Taub, R.; Labriola, D.; Moussa, S.E.; Neff, G.W.; Rinella,
M.E.; et al. A Phase 3, Randomized, Controlled Trial of Resmetirom in NASH with Liver Fibrosis. N. Engl. J. Med. 2024, 390,
497–509. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Karim, G.; Bansal, M.B. Resmetirom: An Orally Administered, Smallmolecule, Liver-directed, beta-selective THR Agonist for the
Treatment of Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease and Non-alcoholic Steatohepatitis. touchREVIEWS Endocrinol. 2023, 19, 60–70.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 15 of 17
7. Albano, E.; Mottaran, E.; Vidali, M.; Reale, E.; Saksena, S.; Occhino, G.; Burt, A.D.; Day, C.P . Immune response towards lipid
peroxidation products as a predictor of progression of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease to advanced fibrosis. Gut 2005, 54, 987–993.
[CrossRef]
8. Yesilova, Z.; Yaman, H.; Oktenli, C.; Ozcan, A.; Uygun, A.; Cakir, E.; Sanisoglu, S.Y.; Erdil, A.; Ates, Y.; Aslan, M.; et al. Systemic
markers of lipid peroxidation and antioxidants in patients with nonalcoholic Fatty liver disease. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2005, 100,
850–855. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Roberts, L.J., 2nd; Salomon, R.G.; Morrow, J.D.; Brame, C.J. New developments in the isoprostane pathway: Identification of
novel highly reactive gamma-ketoaldehydes (isolevuglandins) and characterization of their protein adducts. FASEB J. 1999, 13,
1157–1168. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Salomon, R.G.; Miller, D.B.; Zagorski, M.G.; Coughlin, D.J. Solvent-induced fragmentation of prostaglandin endoperoxies. New
aldehydeproducts from PGH2 and a novel intramolecular 1,2-hydride shift during endoperoxide fragmentation in aqueous
solution. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1984, 106, 6049–6060. [CrossRef]
11. Bernoud-Hubac, N.; Alam, D.A.; Lefils, J.; Davies, S.S.; Amarnath, V .; Guichardant, M.; Roberts, L.J., 2nd; Lagarde, M. Low
concentrations of reactive gamma-ketoaldehydes prime thromboxane-dependent human platelet aggregation via p38-MAPK
activation. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2009, 1791, 307–313. [CrossRef]
12. Sullivan, C.B.; Matafonova, E.; Roberts, L.J., 2nd; Amarnath, V .; Davies, S.S. Isoketals form cytotoxic phosphatidylethanolamine
adducts in cells. J. Lipid Res. 2010, 51, 999–1009. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Carrier, E.J.; Zagol-Ikapitte, I.; Amarnath, V .; Boutaud, O.; Oates, J.A. Levuglandin forms adducts with histone h4 in a
cyclooxygenase-2-dependent manner, altering its interaction with DNA. Biochemistry 2014, 53, 2436–2441. [CrossRef]
14. Palinski, W.; Witztum, J.L. Immune responses to oxidative neoepitopes on LDL and phospholipids modulate the development of
atherosclerosis. J. Intern. Med. 2000, 247, 371–380. [CrossRef]
15. Sarkar, S.; Tsuchida, Y.; Diab, R.; Xu, C.; Yermalitsky, V .; Davies, S.S.; Ikizler, T.A.; Hung, A.M.; Kon, V .; Flynn, C.R. Pro-
inflammatory HDL in women with obesity and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Obes. Res. Clin. Pract. 2020, 14, 333–338. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
16. Longato, L.; Andreola, F.; Davies, S.S.; Roberts, J.L.; Fusai, G.; Pinzani, M.; Moore, K.; Rombouts, K. Reactive gamma-
ketoaldehydes as novel activators of hepatic stellate cells in vitro. Free. Radic. Biol. Med. 2017, 102, 162–173. [CrossRef]
17. Zein, C.O.; Lopez, R.; Fu, X.; Kirwan, J.P .; Yerian, L.M.; McCullough, A.J.; Hazen, S.L.; Feldstein, A.E. Pentoxifylline decreases
oxidized lipid products in nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: New evidence on the potential therapeutic mechanism. Hepatology 2012,
56, 1291–1299. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Podszun, M.C.; Chung, J.Y.; Ylaya, K.; Kleiner, D.E.; Hewitt, S.M.; Rotman, Y. 4-HNE Immunohistochemistry and Image Analysis
for Detection of Lipid Peroxidation in Human Liver Samples Using Vitamin E Treatment in NAFLD as a Proof of Concept. J.
Histochem. Cytochem. 2020, 68, 635–643. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Swiderska, M.; Maciejczyk, M.; Zalewska, A.; Pogorzelska, J.; Flisiak, R.; Chabowski, A. Oxidative stress biomarkers in the serum
and plasma of patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). Can plasma AGE be a marker of NAFLD? Oxidative
stress biomarkers in NAFLD patients. Free Radic. Res. 2019, 53, 841–850. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Ye, Q.; Zou, B.; Yeo, Y.H.; Li, J.; Huang, D.Q.; Wu, Y.; Yang, H.; Liu, C.; Kam, L.Y.; Tan, X.X.E.; et al. Global prevalence, incidence,
and outcomes of non-obese or lean non-alcoholic fatty liver disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet Gastroenterol.
Hepatol. 2020, 5, 739–752. [CrossRef]
21. Iyer, R.S.; Ghosh, S.; Salomon, R.G. Levuglandin E2 crosslinks proteins. Prostaglandins 1989, 37, 471–480. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Fuller, J.C., Jr.; Pitchford, L.M.; Abumrad, N.N.; Rathmacher, J.A. Subchronic (90-day) repeated dose oral toxicity study of
2-hydroxybenzylamine acetate in rabbit. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2018, 100, 52–58. [CrossRef]
23. Fuller, J.C., Jr.; Pitchford, L.M.; Abumrad, N.N.; Rathmacher, J.A. Subchronic (90-day) repeated dose toxicity study of 2-
hydroxybenzylamine acetate in rats. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2018, 99, 225–232. [CrossRef]
24. Fuller, J.C., Jr.; Pitchford, L.M.; Morrison, R.D.; Daniels, J.S.; Flynn, C.R.; Abumrad, N.N.; Oates, J.A.; Boutaud, O.; Rathmacher,
J.A. In vitro safety pharmacology evaluation of 2-hydroxybenzylamine acetate. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2018, 121, 541–548. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
25. Tao, H.; Huang, J.; Yancey, P .G.; Yermalitsky, V .; Blakemore, J.L.; Zhang, Y.; Ding, L.; Zagol-Ikapitte, I.; Ye, F.; Amarnath, V .; et al.
Scavenging of reactive dicarbonyls with 2-hydroxybenzylamine reduces atherosclerosis in hypercholesterolemic Ldlr(-/-) mice.
Nat. Commun. 2020, 11, 4084. [CrossRef]
26. Kirabo, A.; Wu, J.; Chen, W.; Thabet, S.R.; Bikineyeva, A.T.; Dikalov, S.; Amarnath, A.; Davies, S.S.; Roberts, J.L.; Harrison, D.G.
Activation of T cells by dendritic cells in hypertension: A potential role of isoketal-modified proteins. Hypertension 2012, 60, A166.
[CrossRef]
27. Prinsen, J.K.; Kannankeril, P .J.; Sidorova, T.N.; Yermalitskaya, L.V .; Boutaud, O.; Zagol-Ikapitte, I.; Barnett, J.V .; Murphy, M.B.;
Subati, T.; Stark, J.M.; et al. Highly Reactive Isolevuglandins Promote Atrial Fibrillation Caused by Hypertension. JACC Basic.
Transl. Sci. 2020, 5, 602–615. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 16 of 17
28. Patrick, D.M.; de la Visitacion, N.; Kirabo, A.; Ao, M.; Kalkum, M.; Daniel, R.; Harrison, D.G. A common mechanism of
autoinflammation in systemic lupus erythematosus and essential hypertension. Circulation 2019, 140, A15543.
29. Egnatchik, R.A.; Brittain, E.L.; Shah, A.T.; Fares, W.H.; Ford, H.J.; Monahan, K.; Kang, C.J.; Kocurek, E.G.; Zhu, S.; Luong, T.; et al.
Dysfunctional BMPR2 signaling drives an abnormal endothelial requirement for glutamine in pulmonary arterial hypertension.
Pulm. Circ. 2017, 7, 186–199. [CrossRef]
30. Gobert, A.P .; Asim, M.; Smith, T.M.; Williams, K.J.; Barry, D.P .; Allaman, M.M.; McNamara, K.M.; Hawkins, C.V .; Delgado, A.G.;
Blanca Piazuelo, M.; et al. The nutraceutical electrophile scavenger 2-hydroxybenzylamine (2-HOBA) attenuates gastric cancer
development caused by Helicobacter pylori. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2022, 158, 114092. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. Davies, S.S.; Bodine, C.; Matafonova, E.; Pantazides, B.G.; Bernoud-Hubac, N.; Harrison, F.E.; Olson, S.J.; Montine, T.J.; Amarnath,
V .; Roberts, L.J. Treatment with a gamma-ketoaldehyde scavenger prevents working memory deficits in hApoE4 mice. J.
Alzheimers. Dis. 2011, 27, 49–59. [CrossRef]
32. Wu, J.; Saleh, M.A.; Kirabo, A.; Itani, H.A.; Montaniel, K.R.; Xiao, L.; Chen, W.; Mernaugh, R.L.; Cai, H.; Bernstein, K.E.; et al.
Immune activation caused by vascular oxidation promotes fibrosis and hypertension. J. Clin. Investig. 2016, 126, 50–67. [CrossRef]
33. Kleiner, D.E.; Brunt, E.M.; Van Natta, M.; Behling, C.; Contos, M.J.; Cummings, O.W.; Ferrell, L.D.; Liu, Y.C.; Torbenson, M.S.;
Unalp-Arida, A.; et al. Design and validation of a histological scoring system for nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. Hepatology 2005,
41, 1313–1321. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. National Research Council. Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals; National Academies Press: Washington, DC, USA,
2010.
35. Acedo, S.C.; Caria, C.R.; Gotardo, E.M.; Pereira, J.A.; Pedrazzoli, J.; Ribeiro, M.L.; Gambero, A. Role of pentoxifylline in
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in high-fat diet-induced obesity in mice.World J. Hepatol. 2015, 7, 2551–2558. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Fujii, M.; Shibazaki, Y.; Wakamatsu, K.; Honda, Y.; Kawauchi, Y.; Suzuki, K.; Arumugam, S.; Watanabe, K.; Ichida, T.; Asakura, H.;
et al. A murine model for non-alcoholic steatohepatitis showing evidence of association between diabetes and hepatocellular
carcinoma. Med. Mol. Morphol. 2013, 46, 141–152. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Morrow, J.D.; Hill, K.E.; Burk, R.F.; Nammour, T.M.; Badr, K.F.; Roberts, L.J., 2nd. A series of prostaglandin F2-like compounds
are produced in vivo in humans by a non-cyclooxygenase, free radical-catalyzed mechanism. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 1990, 87,
9383–9387. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Davies, S.S.; Amarnath, V .; Montine, K.S.; Bernoud-Hubac, N.; Boutaud, O.; Montine, T.J.; Roberts, L.J., 2nd. Effects of reactive
gamma-ketoaldehydes formed by the isoprostane pathway (isoketals) and cyclooxygenase pathway (levuglandins) on proteasome
function. Faseb J. 2002, 16, 715–717. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Davies, S.S.; Talati, M.; Wang, X.; Mernaugh, R.L.; Amarnath, V .; Fessel, J.; Meyrick, B.O.; Sheller, J.; Roberts, L.J., 2nd. Localization
of isoketal adducts in vivo using a single-chain antibody. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2004, 36, 1163–1174. [CrossRef]
40. Xu, H.; Zhou, Y.; Liu, Y.; Ping, J.; Shou, Q.; Chen, F.; Ruo, R. Metformin improves hepatic IRS2/PI3K/Akt signaling in insulin-
resistant rats of NASH and cirrhosis. J. Endocrinol. 2016, 229, 133–144. [CrossRef]
41. Machado, M.V .; Diehl, A.M. Pathogenesis of Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis. Gastroenterology 2016, 150, 1769–1777. [CrossRef]
42. Fang, X.; Yu, S.X.; Lu, Y.; Bast, R.C., Jr.; Woodgett, J.R.; Mills, G.B. Phosphorylation and inactivation of glycogen synthase kinase 3
by protein kinase A. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2000, 97, 11960–11965. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Case, N.; Thomas, J.; Sen, B.; Styner, M.; Xie, Z.; Galior, K.; Rubin, J. Mechanical regulation of glycogen synthase kinase 3beta
(GSK3beta) in mesenchymal stem cells is dependent on Akt protein serine 473 phosphorylation via mTORC2 protein. J. Biol.
Chem. 2011, 286, 39450–39456. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Beurel, E.; Grieco, S.F.; Jope, R.S. Glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3): Regulation, actions, and diseases. Pharmacol. Ther. 2015,
148, 114–131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Rouach, H.; Fataccioli, V .; Gentil, M.; French, S.W.; Morimoto, M.; Nordmann, R. Effect of chronic ethanol feeding on lipid
peroxidation and protein oxidation in relation to liver pathology. Hepatology 1997, 25, 351–355. [CrossRef]
46. Brame, C.J.; Boutaud, O.; Davies, S.S.; Yang, T.; Oates, J.A.; Roden, D.; Roberts, L.J. Modification of proteins by isoketal-containing
oxidized phospholipids. J. Biol. Chem. 2004, 279, 13447–13451. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Roychowdhury, S.; McMullen, M.R.; Pritchard, M.T.; Li, W.; Salomon, R.G.; Nagy, L.E. Formation of gamma-ketoaldehyde-protein
adducts during ethanol-induced liver injury in mice. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2009, 47, 1526–1538. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Anavi, S.; Ni, Z.; Tirosh, O.; Fedorova, M. Steatosis-induced proteins adducts with lipid peroxidation products and nuclear
electrophilic stress in hepatocytes. Redox Biol. 2015, 4, 158–168. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. Simon, T.G.; Wilechansky, R.M.; Stoyanova, S.; Grossman, A.; Dichtel, L.E.; Lauer, G.M.; Miller, K.K.; Hoshida, Y.; Corey, K.E.;
Loomba, R.; et al. Aspirin for Metabolic Dysfunction-Associated Steatotic Liver Disease Without Cirrhosis: A Randomized
Clinical Trial. JAMA 2024, 331, 920–929. [CrossRef]
50. Calder, P .C. Polyunsaturated fatty acids, inflammation, and immunity. Lipids 2001, 36, 1007–1024. [CrossRef]
51. Glasgow, J.F.; Middleton, B.; Moore, R.; Gray, A.; Hill, J. The mechanism of inhibition of beta-oxidation by aspirin metabolites in
skin fibroblasts from Reye’s syndrome patients and controls. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1999, 1454, 115–125. [CrossRef]
Nutrients 2025, 17, 610 17 of 17
52. Hawley, S.A.; Fullerton, M.D.; Ross, F.A.; Schertzer, J.D.; Chevtzoff, C.; Walker, K.J.; Peggie, M.W.; Zibrova, D.; Green, K.A.;
Mustard, K.J.; et al. The ancient drug salicylate directly activates AMP-activated protein kinase. Science 2012, 336, 918–922.
[CrossRef]
53. van Diepen, J.A.; Vroegrijk, I.O.; Berbee, J.F.; Shoelson, S.E.; Romijn, J.A.; Havekes, L.M.; Rensen, P .C.; Voshol, P .J. Aspirin reduces
hypertriglyceridemia by lowering VLDL-triglyceride production in mice fed a high-fat diet. Am. J. Physiol. Endocrinol. Metab.
2011, 301, E1099–E1107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Tsimikas, S.; Bhatia, H.S.; Erlinge, D. Clinical trials to improve outcomes in patients with elevated Lp(a) undergoing PCI: The
time has arrived. J. Clin. Lipidol. 2023, 17, 567–570. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Khan, P .; Bhattacharya, A.; Sengupta, D.; Banerjee, S.; Adhikary, A.; Das, T. Aspirin enhances cisplatin sensitivity of resistant
non-small cell lung carcinoma stem-like cells by targeting mTOR-Akt axis to repress migration.Sci. Rep. 2019, 9, 16913. [CrossRef]
56. Henry, W.S.; Laszewski, T.; Tsang, T.; Beca, F.; Beck, A.H.; McAllister, S.S.; Toker, A. Aspirin Suppresses Growth in PI3K-Mutant
Breast Cancer by Activating AMPK and Inhibiting mTORC1 Signaling. Cancer Res. 2017, 77, 790–801. [CrossRef]
57. Rathmacher, J.A.; Fuller, J.C., Jr.; Abumrad, N.N.; Flynn, C.R. Inflammation Biomarker Response to Oral 2-Hydroxybenzylamine
(2-HOBA) Acetate in Healthy Humans. Inflammation 2023, 46, 1343–1352. [CrossRef]
58. Shen, T.H.; Wu, C.H.; Lee, Y.W.; Chang, C.C. Prevalence, trends, and characteristics of metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic
liver disease among the US population aged 12-79 years. Eur. J. Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2024, 36, 636–645. [CrossRef]
59. Pitchford, L.M.; Driver, P .M.; Fuller, J.C., Jr.; Akers, W.S.; Abumrad, N.N.; Amarnath, V .; Milne, G.L.; Chen, S.C.; Ye, F.; Roberts,
L.J., 2nd; et al. Safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of repeated oral doses of 2-hydroxybenzylamine acetate in healthy
volunteers: A double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial. BMC Pharmacol. Toxicol. 2020, 21, 3. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
60. Pitchford, L.M.; Rathmacher, J.A.; Fuller, J.C., Jr.; Daniels, J.S.; Morrison, R.D.; Akers, W.S.; Abumrad, N.N.; Amarnath, V .; Currey,
P .M.; Roberts, L.J.; et al. First-in-human study assessing safety, tolerability, and pharmacokinetics of 2-hydroxybenzylamine
acetate, a selective dicarbonyl electrophile scavenger, in healthy volunteers. BMC Pharmacol. Toxicol. 2019, 20, 1. [CrossRef]
61. Harrison, S.A.; Rolph, T.; Knott, M.; Dubourg, J. FGF21 agonists: An emerging therapeutic for metabolic dysfunction-associated
steatohepatitis and beyond. J. Hepatol. 2024, 81, 562–576. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.