Crystallization-Assisted Asymmetric Synthesis of Enantiopure
Amines Using Membrane-Immobilized Transaminase
Hippolyte Meersseman Arango, Neal Bachus, Xuan Dieu Linh Nguyen, Basile Bredun, Patricia Luis,
Tom Leyssens, David Roura Padrosa, Francesca Paradisi, and Damien P. Debecker*
Cite This: Chem Bio Eng. 2025, 2, 272−282
 Read Online
ACCESS
Metrics & More
 Article Recommendations *
sı Supporting Information
ABSTRACT: The production of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) requires enantiopure chiral amines, for which greener
synthesis processes are needed. Transaminases (TAs) are enzymes that catalyze the enantioselective production of chiral amines
from prochiral ketones through transamination under mild conditions. Yet, industrial applications of biocatalytic transamination
remain currently hindered by the limited stability of soluble enzymes and by the unfavorable thermodynamic equilibrium of targeted
asymmetric reactions. Enzyme immobilization can be applied to address stability, recoverability, and reusability issues. In the
perspective of process intensification, we chose to immobilize TAs on polymeric (polypropylene) membranes. In the asymmetric
synthesis of (R)-2-fluoro-α-methylbenzylamine ((R)-FMBA), such membrane-immobilized TAs exhibited superior specific activity
and stability compared with soluble TAs; they also outperformed TAs immobilized on resins. The reaction yield remained, however,
limited by thermodynamics. To further enhance the synthesis yield, the reaction was coupled with the in situ crystallization of (R)-
FMBA with 3,3-diphenylpropionic acid (DPPA). By doing so, the theoretical equilibrium conversion was pushed from ∼44% to
∼83%. In fact, a 72% overall recovery yield of crystallized (R)-FMBA was demonstrated. The enantioselectivity of the reaction
mixture was preserved. Importantly, purification was greatly facilitated since the target enantiopure amine was readily recovered as
high-purity (R)-FMBA:DPPA crystals. The biocatalytic membranes were found to be fully reusable, performing successive high-yield
asymmetric syntheses with only minor deactivation. Overall, the crystallization-assisted strategy proposed herein offers a greener
path for the biocatalytic production of valuable chiral targets.
KEYWORDS: biocatalysis, immobilized enzymes, chiral amines, crystallization, membranes, process intensification
1. INTRODUCTION
Enantiopure amines represent crucial building blocks for the
pharmaceutical industry, as they end up in approximately half
of the current commercial active pharmaceutical ingredients
(API).
1−3
There is a growing interest for synthesis methods of
enantiopure amines that better align with sustainable catalysis
practices.
4,5
Amine transaminases (TAs) are increasingly
considered as potent biocatalysts for such purpose.
6−15
TAs
catalyze the direct synthesis of chiral amines from pro-chiral
ketones with excellent enantioselectivity under mild con-
ditions, using inexpensive amino donors through trans-
amination reactions. Despite the impressive deployment of
TAs in the scholarly literature, their industrial applications
remain limited, as they face two major challenges.
9
On the one
hand, TAs employed as free enzymes (soluble) display limited
stability and poor recyclability, even when working in mild
operating conditions. On the second hand, TAs tend to suffer
from substrate/product inhibitions, and most industrially
relevant transaminations feature unfavorable thermodynam-
ics.
16
Thus, efforts are underway to enhance the TAs’
Received: December 19, 2024
Revised: February 20, 2025
Accepted: March 5, 2025
Published: March 18, 2025
Articlepubs.acs.org/ChemBioEng
© 2025 The Authors. Co-published by
Zhejiang University and American
Chemical Society 272
https://doi.org/10.1021/cbe.4c00186
Chem Bio Eng. 2025, 2, 272−282
ACS Partner Journal
This article is licensed under CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0

robustness and develop strategies to shift the transamination
equilibrium toward the product side.
Enzyme immobilization has proven effective in creating
heterogeneous biocatalysts that are more versatile and
amenable to more productive processes (e.g., continuous
flow).
3,17−22
Polymeric membranes are available and relatively
cheap supports to immobilize biocatalysts (50 €/m
2
can be
estimated for membrane contactors,
15,23,24
comparable to
other materials classically employed for enzyme immobilization
purposes, e.g., epoxy-resins from ReliZyme
25,26
). Membrane
materials typically offer high surface-to-volume ratios when
implemented as modules. Enzyme immobilization on poly-
meric membranes is now well-documented,
27
and the TA
membrane immobilization has been demonstrated.
28
In the
literature, researchers have already implemented membrane
contactors as downstream processing to purify the trans-
amination products.
29−31
However, immobilizing enzymes on
membrane supports could be of further interest, as it
additionally offers the possibility to perform biocatalytic
reactions along with membrane separation in a one-pot
fashion. For example, the removal of a product could favorably
shift the biocatalytic reaction equilibrium toward product
formation and mitigate inhibition issues (e.g., acetone removal
via pervaporation
32
), and hence increase the reaction rate and
final yield. In the specific case of equilibrated transamination
reactions, this aspect is of great relevance.
Building up on this aspect, different in situ (co)product
removal (ISPR) strategies have been applied to drive
transamination reactions toward the products side, such as
product extraction (using organic cosolvent or a membrane
module), capture/absorption (using ion-exchange resins), and
crystallization.
15,31,33−37
Among these product separation
strategies, crystallization of the target enantiopure amine
product seems particularly suited for the pharmaceutical
industry, owing to the high selectivity and high (enantio)purity
that can be generally obtained.
38,39
Moreover, it enables the
straightforward recovery of the API via simple filtration.
40
von
Langermann et al.
36
recently disclosed a crystallization-assisted
transamination process for the gram-scale preparation of S-(3-
methoxyphenyl)ethylamine, a precursor of Rivastigmine. The
in situ product crystallization strategy relied on the use of 3,3-
diphenylpropionic acid (DPPA), which is able to form poorly
soluble crystalline salts with amine compounds.
34
It enabled
the production of a pure enantiopure amine product at high
concentration (>1 M) and its straightforward recovery via
filtration, and was found applicable to a wide variety of amine
targets.
41
In essence, enzyme-membrane reactors coupled with
product crystallization can pave the way to greener and more
intensified chiral amine synthesis processes. Here, we
demonstrate the proof of concept of a crystallization-assisted
transamination using a membrane-immobilized TA. Polypro-
pylene (PP) was employed as a model polymeric membrane to
immobilize TAs. An industrially relevant transamination
reaction was targeted, i.e., the asymmetric synthesis of (R)-2-
fluoro-α-methylbenzylamine ((R)-FMBA) from 2′-fluoroace-
tophenone (using isopropylamine as amino donor). (R)-
FMBA is a precursor of valuable fluorinated chiral N-
arylamines,
42
and its separation is not straightforward (i.e.,
liquid at room temperature). To the best of our knowledge,
such an amine building block is not commercially available in
its enantiopure form. We show that using a membrane-
immobilized TA, in the presence of DPPA, allowed reaching
yields of pure FMBA:DPPA crystals markedly surpassing the
equilibrium yield of the nonassisted reaction. The biocatalytic
membrane was also stable and reusable, showing only minor
deactivation upon recycling.
2. EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
2.1. Materials. Hydrochloric acid (37 wt %, aqueous solution),
pyridoxal 5′-phosphate hydrate (PLP; ≥98%), glycerol diglycidyl
ether (GDE; technical grade), carbonate-bicarbonate buffer capsules,
and Bradford reagent were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Sodium
hydroxide (NaOH; ≥99%), N-2-hydroxyethylpiperazine-N′-2-ethane-
sulfonic acid (HEPES; ≥99.5%), and HEPES sodium salt (≥99%)
were purchased from Carl Roth. Branched polyethylenimine (PEI; 50
wt %, aqueous solution, M.N. 60,000) and isopropylamine (ISO;
99%) were purchased from Acros Organics. Dichloromethane (DCM;
HPLC grade), ethanol absolute (EtOH), and dimethylformamide
(DMF; ≥99.9%) were purchased from VWR Chemicals. Tris-
(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris; >99%), 3-hydroxytyramine
hydrochloride (dopamine hydrochloride; 98%), tert-butyl methyl
ether (MTBE; >99%), 3,3-diphenylpropionic acid (3-DPPA; 97%),
isopropyl alcohol (iPOH; 99.5%), tert-butyl alcohol (tBuOH; >99%),
2′-fluoroacetophenone (FAP; 97%), and acetophenone (AP, 97%)
were purchased from Tokyo Chemical Industry. Methanol (MeOH;
99.8%) was purchased from Thermo Scientific. 2-Fluoro-α-methyl-
benzylamine (FMBA; 97%) was purchased from BLD Pharm.
Commercial poly(propylene) membranes (PP) were purchased
from 3M (USA).
Transaminases HeWT (from Halomonas elongata) and TsRTA
(from Thermomyces stellatus) were expressed and lyophilized as
previously described by Paradisi et al.
43,44
and then used as cell-free
extracts. In some cases, the enzymes were also purified by
immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) in order to be
used as pure enzymes (pTA). Distilled water was applied for all
synthesis and treatment processes.
2.2. Transaminase Immobilization. In this work, the trans-
aminase from Thermomyces stellatus (TsRTA) was immobilized onto
solid functionalized polypropylene membranes and on ReliZymes
resin to run the subsequent heterogeneous transaminations.
2.2.1. Polypropylene Membrane (PP). Polypropylene (PP)
membrane surface was functionalized prior to immobilization in
order to enable the covalent grafting of TAs, following the method
described in detail in our previous study.
45
Details and experimental
protocols related to these PP functionalization steps are fully
described in the Supporting Information (ESI). Briefly, it consisted
of the successive modifications of a PP membrane with polydopamine
(PDA), glycerol diglycidyl ether (GDE), and polyethylenimine (PEI),
separated by intermittent rinsing steps (Figure S1).
A disk of 7 cm
2
(c.a. 35 mg) functionalized PP membrane was
immersed into 7.5 mL of buffered solution (HEPES 0.1 M buffer, PLP
1 mM) containing the desired TA concentration (C
0
= 1 mg·mL
−1
) at
pH 8, and incubated for 18 h at 35 °C under gentle stirring. After
immobilization, the resulting membrane-immobilized transaminase
was rinsed with 7.5 mL of rinsing solution (containing PLP 1 mM in
HEPES 0.1 M buffer pH 8) for 30 min (repeated two times) to
eliminate the loosely attached TAs. The immobilization and washing
steps were carried out in 10 mL round-bottom glass flasks. The
heterogeneous biocatalysts obtained upon immobilization of the TA
cell-free extract (cfe) and pure TA (pTA) were denoted TA_PP and
pTA_PP, respectively.
In a variation of this protocol, we also attempted to prepare “self-
sufficient” biocatalysts (i.e., not requiring external addition of cofactor
during reaction). Inspired by Lo ́pez-Gallego et al.,
46
we immobilized
the TA cfe (using 1 mg·mL
−1
into 0.1 mM PLP in HEPES 0.1 M
buffer pH 8) onto a disk of 7 cm
2
functionalized PP, then rinsed the
resulting membrane three time (with 7.5 mL HEPES 0.1 M buffer pH
8, 30 min) and directly incubated it with PLP (1 mM in HEPES 10
mM pH 8 for 90 min at room temperature under gentle stirring).
Additional rinsing was applied again (four times 7.5 mL of HEPES 0.1
Chem & Bio Engineering pubs.acs.org/ChemBioEng Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/cbe.4c00186
Chem Bio Eng. 2025, 2, 272−282
273
M buffer pH 8, 30 min). The obtained membrane was denoted as
TA_PP_SS, where “SS” stands for self-sufficient.
The enzyme loading was evaluated by mass balance using Bradford
titration (see ESI) on the fresh enzyme solutions and on the rinsing
solutions.
2.2.2. Benchmark Carriers − ReliZymes. For comparison, TA
immobilization was also performed on epoxy-resins (ReliZymeEP and
ReliZymeHFA), which are the ubiquitous support materials to
immobilize enzymes. First, 35 mg of epoxy-resin was immersed into
7.5 mL of buffered solution (HEPES 0.1 M buffer, PLP 1 mM)
containing the desired TA concentration (C
0
= 1 mg·mL
−1
) at pH 8
and incubated for 18 h at 35 °C under gentle shaking. After
immobilization, the resulting immobilized transaminase was separated
by centrifugation (5 min at 14,000 rpm in a Heraeus MultifugeX1R
Centrifuge) and rinsed with 7.5 mL of rinsing solution (containing
PLP 1 mM in HEPES 0.1 M buffer pH 8) for 30 min under gentle
shaking (repeated two times) to eliminate the loosely attached TAs.
The immobilization and washing steps were carried out in 15 mL
Falcon tubes. The resulting benchmark heterogeneous biocatalysts
were labeled TA_ReliZymeEP and TA_ReliZymeHFA, depending on
the employed epoxy-resin.
2.3. Immobilized Enzyme Loading Evaluation. The immobi-
lized enzyme loading (L) (i.e., the mass of enzyme loaded on the
support) was evaluated by mass balance via eq 1 using Bradford
titration (see Section 1 of the ESI). C
0
and C
1
stand for the TA
immobilization solution and the residual solution (i.e., obtained after
immobilization), respectively, while C
3
and C
4
stand for the first and
second rinsing solutions.
= × [ ]L V C C C C C ( ) mg 0 0 1 2 3 4
(1)
The immobilization yield (%) is defined as the ratio between
immobilized TA (L) and the total TA mass introduced during the
immobilization (7.5 × C
0
).
2.4. Asymmetric Synthesis of (R)-2-Fluoro-α-methylbenzyl-
amine ((R)-FMBA). The asymmetric synthesis of (R)-2-fluorome-
thylbenzylamine ((R)-FMBA) was carried out in batch mode using
free or immobilized transaminases. 2′-Fluoroacetophenone (FAP,
10−50 mM) was employed as the amino-acceptor. In order to shift
the transamination equilibrium, the reaction was run with an excess of
isopropylamine (ISO). Typically, HEPES and PLP were dissolved in
distilled water to obtain a HEPES 0.1 M, PLP 1 mM solution. ISO
(125−500 mM) was then added, and the pH was adjusted to pH 8
(using HCl 37%). TsRTA enzyme (either free or immobilized (as
(p)TA_PP, TA_PP_SS, TA_ReliZymeEP, or TA_ReliZymeHFA))
was then added to the solution. Then, FAP was added to start the
biocatalytic reaction. Reactions were typically run at 35 °C in 7.5 mL
total volume (with 10 vol % methanol), in a 10 mL round-bottom
glass flask under moderate magnetic stirring.
In some cases, 3,3-diphenylpropionic acid (DPPA) was added
(concomitantly with the ISO addition) to crystallize the produced
(R)-FMBA in the form of crystal salts to shift the transamination
equilibrium (Figure 1). The crystals obtained at the end of the
reaction were recovered by filtration, and rinsed two times with 7.5
mL of HEPES 0.1 M buffer and then once with methyl tert-butyl ether
(MTBE). Crystals were then dried overnight before further analyses
(NMR, chiral-HPLC, pXRD, TGA; see ESI). They were labeled as
FMBA:DPPA (x:y), where x and y correspond to the initial FAP and
DPPA concentrations, respectively. The FMBA:DPPA crystal
recovery yield (Y
cryst
) was defined by eq 2 as the ratio of the actual
mass of FMBA:DPPA in the obtained crystals (m
FMBA:DPPAobt
)
compared to the maximum theoretical mass of FMBA:DPPA
produced, which is able to crystallize. [FMBA]
prod
stands for the
concentration of FMBA obtained at the end of the biocatalytic test,
while s
FMBA
is the molar solubility of FMBA in the given reaction
medium. M
w,FMBA:DPPA
represents the molecular weight of the
FMBA:DPPA crystal.
=
 [ ] × ×
×
i
 k
j
j
j
j
j
 j
y
 {
z
z
z
z
z
 z
Y
m
 s M V
(%)
 ( FMBA )
100
cryst
FMBA:DPPA
obt
 prod FMBA w ,FMBA:DPP A
(2)
The reaction was followed by analyzing 100 μL samples from the
reaction medium. Thirty microliters of sodium hydroxide (2 M) was
added to dissolve the crystal salts, and the mixture was vortexed for 5
s. Then, 400 μL of dichloromethane was added to the aqueous phase,
vortexed for 15 s, and rested for 5 min to allow extraction of reactants
(ISO, FAP) and products (FMBA, acetone) into the organic phase.
Extraction was repeated twice and the organic phases were pooled and
analyzed by gas chromatography (see Section 1 of the ESI). The
specific activity is defined as the number of μmol of 2′-
fluoroacetophenone converted per minute per milligram of enzyme.
It was evaluated by eq 3, where L is the immobilized enzyme loading
(determined by mass balance via the Bradford method (in mg)) and t
is the reaction time (in min). Unless stated otherwise, the specific
activity was determined after 20 h of reaction.
=
 ×
[ · ]
 ·
n
 t L
specific a
ctivity U m
g
FAP conver
ted
 imm TA
1
(3)
2.4.1. FAP and Crystal Solubility Measurements. To measure the
solubility of the FAP substrate and of the FMBA:DPPA crystals in the
considered reaction media (HEPES 0.1 M pH 8 buffer containing
PLP 1 mM and [0−20] % v/v of cosolvent), it is necessary to first
create an oversaturated medium. Hence, saturated solutions were
created by adding excess crystals or FAP, leading to the obtention of
biphasic media (i.e., suspensions or emulsion). Afterward, 100 μL of
the saturated aqueous phase of the resulting mixtures were sampled
(i.e., by filtrating suspensions (containing the FMBA:DPPA crystals)
with 0.2 μm filter, or by exclusively pipetting the aqueous solution
(containing the FAP substrate)), basified with 30 μL of NaOH 2 M,
and then extracted using DCM (as described in the previous section),
and analyzed by gas chromatography (see Section 1 of the ESI).
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the targeted heterogeneous
asymmetric synthesis of (R)-2-fluoro-α-methylbenzylamine ((R)-
FMBA) assisted by product crystallization, using membrane-
immobilized TsRTA. Upon addition of 3,3-diphenylpropionic acid
(DPPA) in the reaction medium, a donor crystal salt (of molar
solubility and solubility product s
1
and K
sp 1
, respectively) is formed.
As soon as transamination takes place, the produced (R)-FMBA is
continuously removed from the medium through the formation of a
product crystal salt (of molar solubility and solubility product s
2
and
K
sp 2
, respectively), thereby shifting the equilibrium toward the
product side.
Chem & Bio Engineering pubs.acs.org/ChemBioEng Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/cbe.4c00186
Chem Bio Eng. 2025, 2, 272−282
274
2.5. Crystal Characterization. After having been rinsed and
filtered, the obtained crystals were analyzed and compared to
reference crystals (namely, FMBA:DPPA ref and ISO:DPPA ref)
which were chemically synthesized by 20 h crystallization in methyl
tert-butyl ether (MTBE).
36
2.5.1. Proton Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (
1
H NMR). Crystals
were analyzed in
1
H NMR in order to qualitatively assess their
chemical composition and compare their spectrum with that of
chemically produced reference crystals and quantitatively via the use
of an internal standard, namely, N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF),
allowing measurement of their purity (in %), thereby attesting the
validity of the whole process in the aim of API crystal production.
More precisely, the FMBA:DPPA content of the crystals (x
FMBA
) was
determined by semiquantitative
1
H NMR analyses by comparing the
peak contributions of FMBA:DPPA (doublet 3H, at 1.57 ppm) and
ISO:DPPA (doublet 6H, at 1.25 ppm) with each other (eq 4). DMF
was used as a standard for quantification during the
1
H NMR
analyses. Experimental details about
1
H NMR analyses are provided
in the first section of the ESI.
=
[ ]
 [ ] + [ ]
×
i
 k
j
j
j
 j
y
 {
z
z
z
 z
x (%)
FMBA:DPPA
 FMBA:DPPA ISO:DPPA
100
FMBA
(4)
2.5.2. Powder X-ray Diffraction (pXRD). The solid samples were
analyzed via pXRD to assess their crystalline phases and characterize
the solid composition of the donor salt and/or product salt. Crystals
were sprinkled on a sample holder coated with Nivea cream, which is
then inserted in a Bruker-D8 Advance diffractometer with a Bragg−
Brentano geometry. A copper anode under 40 kV and 30 mA
produces X-ray radiation with a Cu Kα wavelength (λ) of 1.54 Å. The
Bruker detector was using a LynxEye XE-T technology and was
recording intensities obtained with a 2θ value between 5° and 80°
with 2θ increments of 0.015° and 0.15 s per step. The diffractograms
obtained were analyzed with DIFFRAC.EVA software (Bruker).
2.5.3. Chiral High Performance Liquid Chromatography (Chiral-
HPLC). Enantiomeric excess (ee) of FMBA was determined using
chiral high performance liquid chromatography (Chiral-HPLC) and
through chiral gas chromatography (cGC) analysis by dissolving the
obtained product crystals (FMBA:DPPA) in the mobile phases (see
details in Section 1 of the ESI).
2.5.4. Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA). Crystals were analyzed
by TGA to assess their specific composition (e.g., water content) and
thermal stability. Analyses were performed on a Mettler Toledo TGA-
STDA 851e, from 25 to 400 °C, at a scanning rate of 10 °C·min
−1
.
The solid samples (5 to 10 mg) were placed in aluminum oxide
crucibles. The purge gas was nitrogen, with a continuous flow rate of
50 mL·min
−1
. Data were processed with STARe 12.12 software.
3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
3.1. Catalytic Performance of Free and Immobilized
TAs (without Product Crystallization). Two TA-loaded PP
membranes (TA_PP and TA_PP_SS) were employed to run
the asymmetric synthesis of (R)-2-fluoro-α-methylbenzylamine
((R)-FMBA). While TA_PP is obtained by immobilizing
TsRTA on the functionalized PP membrane,
45
TA_PP_SS
results from a simultaneous immobilization of TsRTA and
PLP. This strategy was used in an attempt to develop a “self-
sufficient” catalyst (i.e., no need for external addition of PLP
during reaction
47
).
Owing to the configuration and dimensions of the batch
reactors considered in this work, the amount of membrane
employed per catalytic test was limited (i.e., 7 cm
2
, which
corresponds to ca. 35 mg of flat-sheet membrane), resulting in
very low TA loading in the reactor. Poor reaction rates were
thus expected, given the low enzyme loading. The specific
activities of both PP-immobilized TAs were evaluated and
compared to those of the soluble enzyme (free TsRTA) at
identical enzyme loadings/contents (Figure 2, black triangles).
We also compared their specific activities to those of other
immobilized TAs, i.e., TsRTA immobilized on commercially
available epoxy resins (TA_RelizymeEP) and amino-epoxy
resins (TA_RelizymeHFA), used as conventional supports. In
order to compare the catalytic performance of the different
heterogeneous biocatalysts, the TA immobilizations (and
subsequent transaminations) were run with identical masses
of supports (i.e., 35 mg of functionalized PP membrane or
Relizyme beads). It was observed that TA_RelizymeEP and
TA_RelizymeHFA recovered 69% and 84% of specific activity
(estimated using the first data point of the activity profiles
shown in Figure S2 (i.e., 20 h)), respectively, with respect to
free TA. Such levels of specific activity recoveries match with
other reports on TAs immobilized on polymeric resins.
48,49
However, high TA loadings were observed on the Relizyme
carriers (Figure 2, black triangles). These high TA immobiliza-
tion yields recorded on the Relizyme carriers can easily be
explained by the fact that resins display significantly higher
surface area available to immobilize TAs, due to their smaller
average pore diameters (i.e., 20 nm range),
26
with respect to
the considered PP flat-sheet membranes (i.e., around 200
nm).
50
However, the narrower pore diameter of the Relizymes
may also bring additional restrictions (e.g., mass transport
limitations or highly constrained enzyme), which may partly
explain the incomplete (<100%) specific activity recoveries of
those resin-immobilized biocatalysts. This aspect is even more
pronounced at high enzyme loading since at some point, the
increase of substrate consumption rate eventually surpasses the
supply rate of substrate toward the immobilized enzyme.
51
On the other side, the specific activities exhibited by both
PP-immobilized TAs were by far superior to those of the other
biocatalysts tested herein (Figure 2). Normalized activities (in
[U·g
cat
−1
]) and specific activities (in [U·mg
TA
−1
]) observed in
this study compared well with the values obtained on other
asymmetric syntheses (employing ISO as amine donor), as
shown in Table S1.
49,52
For example, the specific activities
reported by Heckmann and Paradisi (toward the asymmetric
Figure 2. Immobilized TsRTA loading on solid biocatalysts (i.e.,
amount of enzymes immobilized on the carrier) or soluble enzyme
concentration (triangles; two experiments designed as to have the
same amount of enzyme as in TA_PP and TA_PP_SS), and specific
activity (histograms) displayed by the different biocatalysts. TA_PP
has been tested in triplicate. The error bar for the specific activity of
Free TA is a combined standard deviation for the two experiments
performed in triplicate for the free enzyme at different enzyme
concentrations. Reaction conditions: 25 mM FAP, 250 mM ISO, 0
mM DPPA, 10% v/v MeOH, 1 mM PLP (or 0 mM PLP for
TA_PP_SS) in 0.1 M HEPES buffer pH 8, 35 °C.
Chem & Bio Engineering pubs.acs.org/ChemBioEng Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/cbe.4c00186
Chem Bio Eng. 2025, 2, 272−282
275
synthesis of 2-aminobutane)
49
for two soluble cell-free extract
TAs (*RTA-43 and HeWT_F84W) are similar to the values
obtained in this work (see Table S1, lower part). Notably, the
specific activities displayed by TA_PP and TA_PP_SS
catalysts correspond to specific activity recoveries of ca.
340% and 225% with respect to free TA, respectively. These
results notably highlight the robustness of the self-sufficient
TA_PP_SS biocatalyst, which was able to efficiently catalyze
such asymmetric synthesis of (R)-FMBA in absence of
externally added cofactor. Expectedly (as observed in our
previous work), its specific activity was lower than that of the
“classical” immobilized transaminase (TA_PP), potentially due
to the higher enzyme loading present on TA_PP_SS, which is
likely to cause the molecular crowding effect.
27,53
The high specific activities of the PP-immobilized TAs and
Free TA were also verified at an earlier stage of the reaction (6
h) to avoid artifacts due to putative deactivation; this
confirmed the superiority of the immobilized enzymes (Figure
S3). Such high activity recoveries observed for TA_PP and
TA_PP_SS may be attributed to the hydrophilic coating layers
(PDA, and predominantly PEI) on the PP membranes, which
stabilize the immobilized TAs by providing a suitable hydrated
microenvironment.
54,55
In terms of overall activity (i.e.,
reaction rate, in [U]), the transamination reaction was faster
when employing the membrane immobilized TAs (Table S1,
upper part), despite the significantly higher TA loadings
obtained on both TA_Relizymes.
The activity dependence on the FAP keto-substrate
concentration was assessed for both soluble TA and TA_PP
(Figure 3). First, 10 % v/v MeOH was used as cosolvent to
ensure a proper dissolution of the substrate in the reaction
medium. As expected, higher specific activities were observed
when pure enzymes (pTAs; immobilized or soluble; see empty
points in Figure 3) were employed. Noteworthily, for the free
enzyme and TA_PP, the optimum FAP concentration was
found to be around 10 and 25 mM, respectively, while enzyme
inhibition by this keto substrate seemed to occur at higher
concentrations. Such inhibition was particularly marked
around 50 mM FAP, at which both the free and immobilized
TA specific activities dropped by ca. 50% (with respect to their
maximal values). It should be noted that TsRTA has previously
been reported to run the asymmetric synthesis of the same
(R)-FMBA up to 100 mM; yet this was measured at high
enzyme concentration (i.e., 5 mg/mL) and with D -alanine as
the amino-donor.
42
The long-term stability of the pTA_PP was investigated and
compared to the one of soluble TA (at identical enzyme
concentration/loading) by running the reaction and monitor-
ing the activity over time during extended durations. To this
aim, 25 mM FAP with 10 mol equiv of ISO (250 mM) were
selected as standard reaction conditions. pTA_PP displayed
remarkable activity and stability over time, whereas the soluble
TAs were rapidly deactivated (Figure 4, full curves). Such
result is not surprising as it is often observed that the TA
immobilization enhances the operational stability of the
enzyme with respect to their free form.
48
When the FAP
conversion began to stabilize (i.e., after 300 h of reaction), the
membrane (pTA_PP) was separated from the liquid reaction
mixture, washed with HEPES 0.1 M, PLP 1 mM pH 8 buffer
(three times), and immersed into a new reaction medium
(prepared in identical conditions, i.e., 250 mM ISO, 25 mM
FAP). Very similar specific activity was observed in such
recyclability experiments, which allowed to ensure that the
“activity plateau” observed in Figure 4a for pTA_PP was
exclusively due to thermodynamic limitations (and not to
enzyme deactivation; see Figure S4).
The observed plateauing of FAP conversion leads to
estimation of the equilibrium conversion (X
FAP eq
) to be
∼44%. From this value, the transamination equilibrium
constant was estimated to be K
eq
≈ 3.9 × 10
−2
(Figure S5),
very close to the theoretical value computed using Gibbs free
energies calculations (K
eq
= 4.7 × 10
−2
, approximated by the
MolCalc tool
56
), and with other studies estimating the K
eq
value of model asymmetric syntheses (using ISO as the amino-
donor).
57
All in all, these experiments confirmed that TA can
be effectively immobilized on a PP membrane and that the
resulting biocatalyst is active, stable, and recyclable. The
specific activity is higher than that of the free enzyme, and
yields close to the theoretical thermodynamic equilibrium can
be achieved. Experiments have been carried out on small
membrane disks featuring a low absolute amount of enzyme,
which explains why long reaction times are needed. Yet, it is
known that membranes can be packed in dense modules,
which would solve the kinetic issue. Nevertheless, it appears
pertinent to develop strategies to push the reaction toward
completion by displacing the position of the thermodynamic
equilibrium.
3.2. Crystallization-Assisted Transamination Using
Membrane-Immobilized TAs. pTA_PP was tested for the
asymmetric synthesis of (R)-FMBA in the presence of
crystallizing agent DPPA, with the idea to push the
transamination toward completion and to facilitate product
separation and recovery. In order to maximize the product
crystallization driving force, we performed the reaction in the
presence of an excess of DPPA (introduced above the
solubility limit of the donor ISO:DPPA salt), in a suspension-
to-suspension approach. This enables to keep the DPPA (and
ISO) concentration constant over time (by progressive
dissolution of the donor ISO:DPPA salt).
36
Figure 3. Specific activities obtained at different FAP initial
concentrations, employing TA (TsRTA) cell-free extracts either
soluble (blue squares) or immobilized as TA_PP (red dots) or
purified TAs (pTAs) either soluble (empty squares) or immobilized
as pTA_PP (red empty dots). Reaction conditions were [6−48] mM
FAP, 250 mM ISO, 0 mM DPPA, 10% v/v MeOH, 1 mM PLP in 0.1
M HEPES buffer pH 8, 35 °C. All reactions were run at equal nominal
enzyme concentration, i.e., 0.2 mg/mL TA. For (p)TA_PP, this
corresponds to an enzyme loading of ca. L ≈ 1.5 mg (p)TA on the
membrane carrier.
Chem & Bio Engineering pubs.acs.org/ChemBioEng Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/cbe.4c00186
Chem Bio Eng. 2025, 2, 272−282
276
The transamination−crystallization was run by modifying
the standard conditions (25 mM FAP, 250 mM ISO) with the
addition of 50 mM DPPA. In these precise conditions, the ISO
and DPPA maximal soluble concentrations (i.e., dictated by
the solubility product of the ISO:DPPA salt (K
sp 1
= 0.0036))
were estimated to 215 and 15 mM, respectively. By considering
the FMBA solubility limit in the present system (s
FMBA
) and by
considering the estimated value of K
eq
, it was possible to
compute a new expected FAP conversion at the equilibrium
obtained in the presence of DPPA (green dotted line in Figure
4b). This corresponds to an expected equilibrium conversion
of ∼83% (much higher than the 44% limit in the case of the
nonassisted reaction). However, under such conditions, the
activity of free TA was dramatically affected (Figure 4b, dotted
blue curve). Conversion was even lower than in the standard
conditions (without DPPA). We tentatively ascribe such free
enzyme deactivation to an undesired precipitation or
immobilization of the soluble TsRTA on the ISO:DPPA
crystals. Indeed, when running the reaction in the presence of
only 15 mM of DPPA (i.e., below the solubility limit, and thus
in the absence of solid crystals), the enzyme was barely affected
(Figure S6). Further increasing the soluble enzyme concen-
tration (from 0.2 to 1 mg/mL pure TsRTA) did not change
the activity profile obtained, as pronounced enzyme
deactivation was also observed (Figure S7). Interestingly,
such free enzyme deactivation or precipitation induced by the
presence of DPPA crystals was not observed when employing
other TAs, such as HeWT (employing acetophenone as
substrate, see Figure S7) or SpATA (employing 3-methoxy-
acetophenone as substrate),
36
and appears thus to be an
enzyme-dependent phenomenon.
On the contrary, running the crystallization-assisted reaction
with the membrane immobilized TA (pTA_PP) allowed
overcoming the initial equilibrium conversion (∼44%),
reaching as high as 77.4% conversion (Figure 4b, dotted red
curve), approaching the theoretical limit of the crystallization-
assisted process (∼83%). Thus, immobilization is clearly
identified as being the key to the success of this strategy. The
impact of such FMBA:DPPA crystallization on pTA_PP
specific activity, on final transamination yield, and on the
obtained crystals purity was investigated. By comparing the
1
H
NMR spectra of the obtained crystals with those of chemically
synthesized donor (i.e., ISO:DPPA ref., Figure S8) and
product (i.e., rac-FMBA:DPPA ref., Figure S9) crystal salts,
Figure 4. Catalytic performance (i.e., (a) reaction profiles and (b) specific activity) obtained with (50 mM) or without DPPA, employing pTAs
either free (blue) or immobilized as pTA_PP (red). Reaction conditions were as follows: 25 mM FAP, 250 mM ISO, 0 or 50 mM DPPA, 10% v/v
MeOH, 1 mM PLP in 0.1 M HEPES buffer pH 8, 35 °C. The reactions were run at equal nominal enzyme concentration, i.e., 0.2 mg/mL pTA. For
pTA_PP, this corresponds to an enzyme loading of ca. L ≈ 1.5 mg of TA on the membrane carrier.
Table 1. pTA_PP Catalytic Performance and Crystallization Metrics Obtained When Performing the Transamination in the
Presence of Different DPPA and FAP Contents
a
crystal name
C
0
FAP
[mM]
initial
reaction
medium
C DPPA
[mM]
sp. activity
[U·mg
TA
−1
] ([U·m
−2
])
X
FAP eq
(%)
b
X
FAP obs
(%)
c
x
FMBA:DPPA
crystals(mol %)
d
Y
recov
FMBA:DPPA
(%)
e
Y
overall
FMBA:DPPA
(%)
f
1 / 12.5 solution 0 0.0067 (16.9) 56.1 55.2 / / /
2 FMBA:DPPA
(12.5:15)
12.5 solution 15 0.0065 (16.5) 80.7 62.5 95 74
d1
44
3 FMBA:DPPA
(12.5:50)
12.5 suspension 50 0.0064 (16.3) 83.6 84.1 62 93
d2
48
4 / 25 solution 0 0.0079 (21.7) 44.6 43.9 / / /
5 FMBA:DPPA
(25:50)
25 suspension 50 0.0075 (21.2) 81.9 77.5 97 ± 2
g
95 ± 3.2
g
72
a
Reaction conditions were [12.5−25] mM FAP, 250 mM ISO, [0−50] mM DPPA, 10% v/v MeOH, 1 mM PLP in 0.1 M HEPES buffer pH 8, 35
°C. The enzyme loading was ca. L ≈ 1.5 mg pTA on the membrane carrier. The final FAP conversion was determined after 390 h of reaction.
b
Expected FAP conversion at the transamination equilibrium (X
FAP eq
, see eqs S4 and S5 in the Supporting Informations Chapter IV).
c
Observed
FAP conversion after 390 h of reaction.
d
FMBA:DPPA content in the produced crystals (x
FMBA:DPPA
, see eq 4).
e
FMBA:DPPA crystals recovery
yield (Y
recov
, see eq 3); the detailed calculation of d1 and d2 are reported in the ESI.
f
FMBA:DPPA crystals overall yield, denoted Y
overall
= (Y
recov
×
x
FMBA:DPPA
× X
FAP obs
) × 100%.
g
This experiment was reproduced three times (triplicate); mean values ± standard deviations are reported.
Chem & Bio Engineering pubs.acs.org/ChemBioEng Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/cbe.4c00186
Chem Bio Eng. 2025, 2, 272−282
277
we can estimate the relative amounts of FMBA:DPPA phase in
the obtained crystals as well as the FMBA:DPPA crystal
recovery yield (Table 1). In the absence of product
crystallization (i.e., without DPPA), the transamination is
limited by its unfavorable thermodynamic equilibrium, and
only moderated yields can be obtained (Table 1, entries 1 and
4). Adding DPPA at the solubility limit (e.g., 15 mM) enabled
the formation of the poorly soluble FMBA:DPPA crystal salt
(Figure S10), which drove the transamination reaction toward
higher FAP conversion as compared to the nonassisted
reaction (Table 1, compare entry 2 to entry 1). Further
increasing the total DPPA content from 15 to 50 mM
(suspension containing ISO:DPPA donor crystal salt) enabled
to achieve an even higher final substrate conversion, owing to
the higher crystallization driving force (i.e., constant DPPA
concentration over time). Noteworthily, performing the
heterogeneous transamination in such suspension-to-suspen-
sion approach did not alter the specific activity of the
membrane biocatalyst (i.e., the initial activity was unchanged).
When employing low FAP substrate concentration (12.5 mM)
with respect to the ISO:DPPA salt, the resulting crystals were
not pure (i.e., contained only 62% of FMBA:DPPA phase (and
consequently, 38% of ISO:DPPA) see Figure S11 and Table 1,
entry 3). Despite this aspect, high product crystal salt recovery
was still obtained, resulting in 93% overall FMBA:DPPA
crystal recovery yield. Expectedly, doubling the FAP substrate
concentration (to 25 mM) allowed the proportion of
FMBA:DPPA crystals in the collected solid to be increased
(compare Table 1, entries 5 to 3), resulting in 97% purity for
the desired crystal phase (Figure S12) and 95% crystal
recovery yield. These values correspond to an overall FMBA
crystallization yield (Y
overall
, i.e., the proportion of FAP
substrate ending up in the form of crystallized FMBA salt)
of 72%. We argue that such metrics are encouraging in the
perspective of implementation for API production at the
industrial scale.
40
It is noteworthy that the strategy can also be
applied in the absence of externally added PLP. Using the “self-
sufficient” membrane biocatalyst (TA_PP_SS), we reached
similar yields of FMBA:DPPA crystals (Table S2).
Additionally,
1
H NMR performed on the FMBA:DPPA
(25:50) crystals (recovered from the experiment described in
Table 1, entry 5) confirmed that the relative amounts of FMBA
and DPPA species were 49:51. Thus, the crystal partners
arrange in a 1:1 ratio to form the target FMBA:DPPA crystal
structure. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) (Figure S13)
further revealed only two distinct weight losses corresponding
to FMBA (37.3 wt % (or 48.6 mol %), from c.a. 90 to 210 °C)
and to DPPA (59.7 wt % (or 48.4 mol %), from ca. 210 to 325
°C). The absence of minor low temperature weight losses
shows that the crystals are not hydrates.
pXRD analyses revealed that crystals obtained via the
transamination−crystallization approach displayed similar
pXRD patterns to the chemically synthesized rac-FMBA:DPPA
ref crystals (Figure S14). However, when zoomed in, several
shifts in their pXRD peak positions were noticed (Figure S15).
Given the high purity of the produced FMBA:DPPA (25:50)
crystals (i.e., 99 mol % according to
1
H NMR), such
dissimilarity is probably induced by the fact that the crystals
formed during the crystallization-assisted reaction should be
enantiopure while those in rac-FMBA:DPPA ref are racemic
(as suggested by chiral GC (Figure S16) and chiral HPLC
(Figure S17) analyses). This phenomenon was previously
observed with other chiral organic crystals (e.g., 3-chlor-
omandelic acid).
58,59
Here, it can be interpreted that the
racemic salt does not form a conglomerate, as the pXRD
patterns of the rac-FMBA:DPPA ref. do not perfectly match
those from the enantiopure sample (FMBA:DPPA (25:50)).
We tentatively ascribe the differences in pXRD patterns to the
presence of a solid solution or a racemic compound crystal.
60,61
It is noteworthy that even though chiral HPLC and GC
provide convincing evidence that the product crystal is
enantiopure, there is no unambiguous evidence about its
stereochemistry. As the free TsRTA enzyme has shown perfect
enantioselectivity toward the (R)-FMBA enantiomer in
previous studies,
42,44
we assume that the product was the
(R)-enantiomer. In order to confirm this, we attempted to
produce single crystals of (R)-FMBA:DPPA (using the
biocatalytically produced crystals), but the results remained
ambiguous. For future studies, we advise choosing a model
substrate (other than acetophenone, which is not accepted by
the TsRTA enzyme) leading to a well-characterized crystal salt,
as it would enable overcoming this problem.
The reusability of membrane-immobilized TA in this
crystallization-assisted transamination process was investigated.
To this aim, the pTA_PP catalyst was employed to run three
successive catalytic cycles in the presence of 50 mM DPPA.
Each catalytic cycle was stopped when the FAP conversion
approached the conversion plateau. After each cycle, the
Figure 5. Recyclability tests (i.e., (a) reaction profiles and (b) specific activity) obtained when employing the pTA_PP catalyst. Reaction
conditions were 10 mM FAP, 250 mM ISO, 50 mM DPPA, 10% v/v MeOH, 1 mM PLP in 0.1 M HEPES buffer pH 8, 35 °C. The enzyme loading
was ca. L ≈ 1.5 mg pTA on the membrane carrier.
Chem & Bio Engineering pubs.acs.org/ChemBioEng Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/cbe.4c00186
Chem Bio Eng. 2025, 2, 272−282
278
membrane was removed from the resulting reaction mixture,
rinsed three times with HEPES 0.1 M buffer pH 8, and then
reimmersed into a fresh reaction medium. As observed in
Figure 5, pTA_PP was able to perform high-yield successive
(R)-FMBA asymmetric syntheses: final FAP conversions
tending toward the expected conversion dictated by the
transamination equilibrium in the presence of FMBA:DPPA
crystallization (i.e., X
FAP eq
′ ≈ 87% in these conditions) were
always observed. Of course, possible deactivation should be
quantitatively assessed far away from the thermodynamic
equilibrium.
62
pTA_PP was shown to retain 77% of its initial
specific activity after three transamination cycles (i.e., 1200 h
of operation). These results underline the robustness and
reusability of such membrane-immobilized TA.
Note that attempts to further enhance the process by using
cosolvents (i.e., short-chain alcohols, DMF and ACN) that
could potentially increase the solubility gap between the donor
and product crystal salts (s
1
vs s
2
) were unsuccessfull (see
Figures S18−S21 and discussion therein).
On the contrary, ommitting methanol was found to be
beneficial. Indeed, it should be noted that MeOH was initially
employed as a way to ensure complete solubility of the FAP
substrate in the reaction medium. However, the ketone
substrate is known to provoke enzyme inhibition. With 50
mM of FAP fully solubilized in the presence of MeOH, the
specific activity dropped significantly as compared to 25 mM
(Figure 6a). A possible strategy to maintain good productivity
levels in batch mode is to take advantage of the low FAP
solubility in aqueous media, as proposed by von Langermann
et al.
36
FAP solubility in the aqueous reaction medium
(without cosolvent) was estimated to s
FAP
≈ 25 mM (Figure
S21a). Thus, in absence of MeOH, if we introduce 50 mM of
FAP, the actual concentration in the aqueous phase remains
∼25 mM (and the excess is present as a separate liquid phase,
i.e., FAP emulsions, acting as external substrate reservoir). In
such case, the TA_PP specific activity was fully maintained,
and in fact slightly higher than that observed in the presence of
25 mM of FAP (Figure 6a). Here, the FAP concentration (∼25
mM, at which the enzyme is not inhibited) is maintained
constant during the reaction as long as the converted FAP is
compensated by solubilization from the FAP reservoir. This
strategy allowed us to enhance the reaction kinetics by
avoiding enzyme inhibition by FAP substrate and feeding the
process with constant substrate concentration. In principle, this
configuration should allow operation of the crystallization-
assisted transamination with any FAP sustrate concentration.
For the proof-of-concenpt, the reaction was run in the
presence of 125 mM of FAP (Figure 6a): expectedly, the
specific activity was maintained at the same level, which
validated our hypothesis. It should be noted that the FMBA
production profile showed a more pronounced linear trend
(Figure 6b). The latter probably highlights a degenerescence of
the kinetics (“pseudo zero-order” reaction), in which the
reaction rate is constant over time due to the steady FAP
substrate concentration present in the aqueous phase (s
FAP
).
Once the biocatalytic consumption overcomes the s
FAP
, the
biocatalytic reaction bounces back to a standard kinetic profile.
Figure 6. (a) Specific activity obtained (obtained at 20 h) when employing TA_PP, using 25 mM (green), 50 mM (black), or 125 mM (orange)
FAP substrate, in the presence (full bars) or in absence (dashed bars) of MeOH (as cosolvent) in the reaction medium. Reaction conditions were
[25−125] mM FAP, 250 mM ISO, 50 mM DPPA, [0 or 10] % v/v MeOH (or [0 or 20] % v/v when 125 mM FAP was employed), 1 mM PLP in
0.1 M HEPES buffer pH 8, 35 °C. The enzyme loading was ca. L ≈ 1.5 mg TA on the membrane carrier. (b) Corresponding kinetic profiles
obtained with 50 mM FAP in the presence (soluble) or absence (emulsion) of MeOH.
Table 2. Comparison of Environmental Performance (E-Factor) of the Optimized Crystallization-Assisted Asymmetric
Biocatalytic Route (D) with Different Benchmark Chemocatalytic Routes (A, B, and C) to Chiral Amines
a
method A B C D
ref. 64 65 66 this work
description imine asymmetric hydrogenation ketone reductive amination chiral resolution + crystallization transamination + crystallization
precursors imine, H
2
ketone, H
2
, NH
4
OAc racemic amine + resolv. agent
b
ketone, ISO + DPPA
catalyst [Rh(COD)Cl]
2
-(ligand) Ru(OAc)
2
-(ligand) / TA_PP, PLP
ee (%) 90 95 69 99.9
c
E-factor 58 18 19 5 (or 2.6*)
d
a
S-Methylbenzylamine (S-MBA) was the target amine in A and C, while (R)-FMBA was targeted in B and D.
b
N-Tosyl-(S)-phenylalanine (S-TPA)
was used as resolving agent.
c
Only one peak was detected in the chiral GC and HPLC analyses.
d
Reaction conditions were 50 mM FAP, 250 mM
ISO, 50 mM DPPA, 1 mM PLP in 0.1 M (or 0.05 M*) HEPES buffer pH 8, 35 °C.
Chem & Bio Engineering pubs.acs.org/ChemBioEng Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/cbe.4c00186
Chem Bio Eng. 2025, 2, 272−282
279
3.3. Sustainability Evaluation. To assess the sustain-
ability of the studied crystallization-assisted transamination
process, the E-factor of the lab-scale process was roughly
estimated and compared with three chemocatalytic benchmark
processes (Table 2). These benchmark methods A, B, and C
for the synthesis of enantiopure α-methylbenzylamine
derivatives are described in details in the ESI (Figures S22−
S24).
63
The transamination process proposed in this work was
found to feature significantly lower E-factors as compared to
the benchmark chemocatalytic processes. Additionally, it must
be emphasized that the biocatalytic strategy should produce an
enantiopure (F)MBA product (99.9% ee, as suggested by
chiral HPLC and GC analyses), which is not the case of the
other chemocatalytic methods. In the latter, the presence of
significant fractions of the other enantiomer imposes further
purifications (e.g., preferential crystallizations), which is known
to markedly impact the overall environmental and economic
performance of such processes.
6,15
This underlines the superior
performance of the crystallization-assisted biocatalytic route
proposed herein.
4. CONCLUSION
In this work, we present the immobilization of an R-selective
TA (TsRTA) onto a porous polypropylene membrane (PP)
and its application to catalyze an industrially relevant
transamination: the asymmetric synthesis of (R)-2-fluoro-α-
methylbenzylamine ((R)-FMBA). To boost the reaction and
reach high product yields, product separation was achieved by
in situ crystallization.
PP was coated with polydopamine to provide amine
functions at its surface, which were further functionalized
with epoxy groups to covalently graft the TA. The immobilized
TA showed enhanced specific activity and stability toward the
studied transamination compared to their soluble counterparts.
It also exhibited superior catalytic performance than widely
employed heterogeneous TAs (i.e., Relizyme-immobilized
TAs). Crystallization of (R)-FMBA with 3,3-diphenylpropionic
acid (DPPA) was shown to displace the transamination
equilibrium toward the product side. Also, the targeted
enantiopure amine was recovered by simple filtration (in the
form of a high-purity salt). The overall yield reached 72% of
the substrate FAP recovered in the form of (R)-FMBA:DPPA
crystals (which has to be compared to ∼40% conversion in
soluble form for the nonassisted process). The PP-immobilized
TA was shown to be easily recoverable and reusable, being able
to perform successive high-yield asymmetric syntheses with
minor deactivation. Also, working in the absence of cosolvent
resulted in the formation of an FAP emulsion and in a low (ca.
25 mM) but constant concentration of soluble FAP (the
emulsion playing the role of an FAP reservoir). This
configuration allowed engagement of higher amounts of the
keto-substrate concentrations while minimizing enzyme
inhibition and boosting productivity. Overall, the method
presented herein could pave the way to the use of membrane-
supported enzymes in hybrid processes, i.e., concatenated with
membrane-assisted purification strategies.
■
ASSOCIATED CONTENT
*
sı
Supporting Information
The Supporting Information is available free of charge at
https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/cbe.4c00186.
Experimental details on protocols and analytical
methods (PP membrane functionalization, soluble
enzyme quantification, GC, chiral GC and chiral
HPLC analysis methodologies, and
1
H NMR analysis
methodologies) and supplementary figures and dis-
cussion points (theoretical calculations on the crystal-
lization yields and conversion at the equilibrium,
attempts to further push the crystallization-assisted
transamination reaction by adding cosolvents, and
sustainability metrics (E-factor) evaluation) (PDF)
■
AUTHOR INFORMATION
Corresponding Author
Damien P. Debecker − Institute of Condensed Matter and
Nanosciences (IMCN), Université Catholique de Louvain
(UCLouvain), 1348 Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium;
orcid.org/0000-0001-6500-2996;
Email: damien.debecker@uclouvain.be
Authors
Hippolyte Meersseman Arango − Institute of Condensed
Matter and Nanosciences (IMCN), Université Catholique de
Louvain (UCLouvain), 1348 Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium
Neal Bachus − Institute of Condensed Matter and
Nanosciences (IMCN), Université Catholique de Louvain
(UCLouvain), 1348 Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium
Xuan Dieu Linh Nguyen − Institute of Condensed Matter and
Nanosciences (IMCN), Université Catholique de Louvain
(UCLouvain), 1348 Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium
Basile Bredun − Institute of Condensed Matter and
Nanosciences (IMCN), Université Catholique de Louvain
(UCLouvain), 1348 Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium
Patricia Luis − Materials & Process Engineering (iMMC-
IMAP), Université Catholique de Louvain, 1348 Louvain-la-
Neuve, Belgium
Tom Leyssens − Institute of Condensed Matter and
Nanosciences (IMCN), Université Catholique de Louvain
(UCLouvain), 1348 Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium;
orcid.org/0000-0001-7916-1373
David Roura Padrosa − Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, University of Bern, 3012 Bern, Switzerland
Francesca Paradisi − Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry, University of Bern, 3012 Bern, Switzerland;
orcid.org/0000-0003-1704-0642
Complete contact information is available at:
https://pubs.acs.org/10.1021/cbe.4c00186
Notes
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
■
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was funded by Actions de Recherche Concertée
(ARC) under Project ≪ PURE ≫ (20/25-108) and by the
Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique (FNRS) under Project
CDR J.0044.20. The chiral HPLC analyses were performed by
Laurent Collard. We thank Dr. Cédric Gastaldi and Ir. Aurélien
Doutry for having performed
1
H NMR analyses. Dr. François
Devred is thanked for the logistic support.
Chem & Bio Engineering pubs.acs.org/ChemBioEng Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/cbe.4c00186
Chem Bio Eng. 2025, 2, 272−282
280
■
REFERENCES
(1) D. Patil, M.; Grogan, G.; Bommarius, A.; Yun, H. Recent
Advances in ω-Transaminase-Mediated Biocatalysis for the Enantio-
selective Synthesis of Chiral Amines. Catalysts 2018, 8 (7), 254.
(2) Ghislieri, D.; Turner, N. J. Biocatalytic Approaches to the
Synthesis of Enantiomerically Pure Chiral Amines. Top. Catal. 2014,
57 (5), 284−300.
(3) Meersseman Arango, H.; van den Biggelaar, L.; Soumillion, P.;
Luis, P.; Leyssens, T.; Paradisi, F.; Debecker, D. P. Continuous Flow-
Mode Synthesis of (Chiral) Amines with Transaminase: A Strategic
Biocatalytic Approach to Essential Building Blocks. React. Chem. Eng.
2023, 8 (7), 1505−1544.
(4) Anastas, P. T.; Warner, J. C. Green Chemistry: Theory and
Practice; Oxford University Press: New York, 1998; Vol. 2.
(5) Debecker, D. P.; Kuok (Mimi) Hii, K.; Moores, A.; Rossi, L. M.;
Sels, B.; Allen, D. T.; Subramaniam, B. Shaping Effective Practices for
Incorporating Sustainability Assessment in Manuscripts Submitted to
ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering: Catalysis and Catalytic
Processes. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2021, 9 (14), 4936−4940.
(6) Savile, C. K.; Janey, J. M.; Mundorff, E. C.; Moore, J. C.; Tam,
S.; Jarvis, W. R.; Colbeck, J. C.; Krebber, A.; Fleitz, F. J.; Brands, J.;
Devine, P. N.; Huisman, G. W.; Hughes, G. J. Biocatalytic
Asymmetric Synthesis of Chiral Amines from Ketones Applied to
Sitagliptin Manufacture. Science 2010, 329 (5989), 305−309.
(7) Slabu, I.; Galman, J. L.; Lloyd, R. C.; Turner, N. J. Discovery,
Engineering, and Synthetic Application of Transaminase Biocatalysts.
ACS Catal. 2017, 7 (12), 8263−8284.
(8) Guo, F.; Berglund, P. Transaminase Biocatalysis: Optimization
and Application. Green Chem. 2017, 19 (2), 333−360.
(9) Ferrandi, E. E.; Monti, D. Amine Transaminases in Chiral
Amines Synthesis: Recent Advances and Challenges. World J.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2018, 34 (1), 13.
(10) Wallace, D. J.; Mangion, I.; Coleman, P. Discovery and
Chemical Development of Suvorexant - A Dual Orexin Antagonist for
Sleep Disorder. In Comprehensive Accounts of Pharmaceutical Research
and Development: From Discovery to Late-Stage Process Development,
Vol. 1; ACS Symposium Series; American Chemical Society, 2016; pp
1−36.
(11) Girardin, M.; Ouellet, S. G.; Gauvreau, D.; Moore, J. C.;
Hughes, G.; Devine, P. N.; O’Shea, P. D.; Campeau, L.-C. Convergent
Kilogram-Scale Synthesis of Dual Orexin Receptor Antagonist. Org.
Process Res. Dev. 2013, 17 (1), 61−68.
(12) Novick, S. J.; Dellas, N.; Garcia, R.; Ching, C.; Bautista, A.;
Homan, D.; Alvizo, O.; Entwistle, D.; Kleinbeck, F.; Schlama, T.;
Ruch, T. Engineering an Amine Transaminase for the Efficient
Production of a Chiral Sacubitril Precursor. ACS Catal. 2021, 11 (6),
3762−3770.
(13) Chung, C. K.; Bulger, P. G.; Kosjek, B.; Belyk, K. M.; Rivera,
N.; Scott, M. E.; Humphrey, G. R.; Limanto, J.; Bachert, D. C.;
Emerson, K. M. Process Development of C−N Cross-Coupling and
Enantioselective Biocatalytic Reactions for the Asymmetric Synthesis
of Niraparib. Org. Process Res. Dev. 2014, 18 (1), 215−227.
(14) Burns, M.; Martinez, C. A.; Vanderplas, B.; Wisdom, R.; Yu, S.;
Singer, R. A. A Chemoenzymatic Route to Chiral Intermediates Used
in the Multikilogram Synthesis of a Gamma Secretase Inhibitor. Org.
Process Res. Dev. 2017, 21 (6), 871−877.
(15) Yang, J.; Buekenhoudt, A.; Dael, M. V.; Luis, P.; Satyawali, Y.;
Malina, R.; Lizin, S. A Techno-Economic Assessment of a Biocatalytic
Chiral Amine Production Process Integrated with In Situ Membrane
Extraction. Org. Process Res. Dev. 2022, 26 (7), 2052−2066.
(16) Gomm, A.; O’Reilly, E. Transaminases for Chiral Amine
Synthesis. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2018, 43, 106−112.
(17) Tamborini, L.; Fernandes, P.; Paradisi, F.; Molinari, F. Flow
Bioreactors as Complementary Tools for Biocatalytic Process
Intensification. Trends Biotechnol. 2018, 36 (1), 73−88.
(18) Benitez-Mateos, A. I.; Contente, M. L.; Roura Padrosa, D.;
Paradisi, F. Flow Biocatalysis 101: Design, Development and
Applications. React. Chem. Eng. 2021, 6 (4), 599−611.
(19) Romero-Fernández, M.; Paradisi, F. Protein Immobilization
Technology for Flow Biocatalysis. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2020, 55,
1−8.
(20) Gérardy, R.; Debecker, D. P.; Estager, J.; Luis, P.; Monbaliu, J.-
C. M. Continuous Flow Upgrading of Selected C2−C6 Platform
Chemicals Derived from Biomass. Chem. Rev. 2020, 120 (15), 7219−
7347.
(21) Newman, S. G.; Jensen, K. F. The Role of Flow in Green
Chemistry and Engineering. Green Chem. 2013, 15 (6), 1456−1472.
(22) van den Biggelaar, L.; Soumillion, P.; Debecker, D. P.
Biocatalytic Transamination in a Monolithic Flow Reactor: Improving
Enzyme Grafting for Enhanced Performance. RSC Adv. 2019, 9 (32),
18538−18546.
(23) Noriega-Hevia, G.; Serralta, J.; Seco, A.; Ferrer, J. Economic
Analysis of the Scale-up and Implantation of a Hollow Fibre
Membrane Contactor Plant for Nitrogen Recovery in a Full-Scale
Wastewater Treatment Plant. Sep. Purif. Technol. 2021, 275,
No. 119128.
(24) Verrecht, B.; Maere, T.; Nopens, I.; Brepols, C.; Judd, S. The
Cost of a Large-Scale Hollow Fibre MBR. Water Res. 2010, 44 (18),
5274−5283.
(25) Kahar, U. M.; Sani, M. H.; Chan, K.-G.; Goh, K. M.
Immobilization of α-Amylase from Anoxybacillus Sp. SK3−4 on
ReliZyme and Immobead Supports. Molecules 2016, 21 (9), 1196.
(26) Resindion srl. https://www.resindion.com/relizyme.
php?content=technical-information (accessed 2024-01-03).
(27) Jochems, P.; Satyawali, Y.; Diels, L.; Dejonghe, W. Enzyme
Immobilization on/in Polymeric Membranes: Status, Challenges and
Perspectives in Biocatalytic Membrane Reactors (BMRs). Green
Chem. 2011, 13 (7), 1609−1623.
(28) Montanari, U.; Cocchi, D.; Brugo, T. M.; Pollicino, A.; Taresco,
V.; Romero Fernandez, M.; Moore, J. C.; Sagnelli, D.; Paradisi, F.;
Zucchelli, A.; Howdle, S. M.; Gualandi, C. Functionalisable Epoxy-
Rich Electrospun Fibres Based on Renewable Terpene for Multi-
Purpose Applications. Polymers 2021, 13 (11), 1804.
(29) Shin, J. S.; Kim, B. G.; Liese, A.; Wandrey, C. Kinetic
Resolution of Chiral Amines with Omega-Transaminase Using an
Enzyme-Membrane Reactor. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2001, 73 (3), 179−
187.
(30) Shin, J.-S.; Kim, B.-G. Kinetic Resolution of α-Methylbenzyl-
amine with o-Transaminase Screened from Soil Microorganisms:
Application of a Biphasic System to Overcome Product Inhibition.
Biotechnol. Bioeng. 1997, 55 (2), 348−358.
(31) Rehn, G.; Adlercreutz, P.; Grey, C. Supported Liquid
Membrane as a Novel Tool for Driving the Equilibrium of ω-
Transaminase Catalyzed Asymmetric Synthesis. J. Biotechnol. 2014,
179, 50−55.
(32) Satyawali, Y.; Del Pozo, D. F.; Vandezande, P.; Nopens, I.;
Dejonghe, W. Investigating Pervaporation for In Situ Acetone
Removal as Process Intensification Tool in ω-Transaminase Catalyzed
Chiral Amine Synthesis. Biotechnol. Prog. 2019, 35 (1), No. e2731.
(33) Hu ̈ lsewede, D.; Temmel, E.; Kumm, P.; von Langermann, J.
Concept Study for an Integrated Reactor-Crystallizer Process for the
Continuous Biocatalytic Synthesis of (S)-1-(3-Methoxyphenyl)-
Ethylamine. Crystals 2020, 10 (5), 345.
(34) Hu ̈ lsewede, D.; Tänzler, M.; Su ̈ ss, P.; Mildner, A.; Menyes, U.;
von Langermann, J. Development of an in Situ-Product Crystal-
lization (ISPC)-Concept to Shift the Reaction Equilibria of Selected
Amine Transaminase-Catalyzed Reactions. Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2018,
2018 (18), 2130−2133.
(35) Frodsham, L.; Golden, M.; Hard, S.; Kenworthy, M. N.;
Klauber, D. J.; Leslie, K.; Macleod, C.; Meadows, R. E.; Mulholland,
K. R.; Reilly, J.; Squire, C.; Tomasi, S.; Watt, D.; Wells, A. S. Use of
ω-Transaminase Enzyme Chemistry in the Synthesis of a JAK2 Kinase
Inhibitor. Org. Process Res. Dev. 2013, 17 (9), 1123−1130.
(36) Neuburger, J.; Helmholz, F.; Tiedemann, S.; Lehmann, P.; Su ̈ ss,
P.; Menyes, U.; von Langermann, J. Implementation and Scale-up of a
Semi-Continuous Transaminase-Catalyzed Reactive Crystallization
Chem & Bio Engineering pubs.acs.org/ChemBioEng Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/cbe.4c00186
Chem Bio Eng. 2025, 2, 272−282
281
for the Preparation of (S)-(3-Methoxyphenyl)Ethylamine. Chem. Eng.
Process. - Process Intensif. 2021, 168, No. 108578.
(37) Doeker, M.; Grabowski, L.; Rother, D.; Jupke, A. In Situ
Reactive Extraction with Oleic Acid for Process Intensification in
Amine Transaminase Catalyzed Reactions. Green Chem. 2022, 24 (1),
295−304.
(38) Harmsen, B.; Leyssens, T. Enabling Enantiopurity: Combining
Racemization and Dual-Drug Co-Crystal Resolution. Cryst. Growth
Des. 2018, 18 (6), 3654−3660.
(39) Dunn, A. S.; Svoboda, V.; Sefcik, J.; ter Horst, J. H. Resolution
Control in a Continuous Preferential Crystallization Process. Org.
Process Res. Dev. 2019, 23 (9), 2031−2041.
(40) Brown, C.; McGlone, T.; Florence, A. Continuous Crystal-
lisation. In Continuous Manufacturing of Pharmaceuticals; John Wiley
& Sons, Ltd., 2017; pp 169−226. DOI: 10.1002/9781119001348.ch5.
(41) Tiedemann, S.; Neuburger, J. E.; Gazizova, A.; von
Langermann, J. Continuous Preparative Application of Amine
Transaminase-Catalyzed Reactions with Integrated Crystallization.
Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2024, 27 (13), No. e202400068.
(42) Heckmann, C. M.; Paradisi, F. GPhos Ligand Enables
Production of Chiral N-Arylamines in a Telescoped Transaminase-
Buchwald-Hartwig Amination Cascade in the Presence of Excess
Amine Donor. Chem. − Eur. J. 2021, 27 (67), 16616−16620.
(43) Cerioli, L.; Planchestainer, M.; Cassidy, J.; Tessaro, D.;
Paradisi, F. Characterization of a Novel Amine Transaminase from
Halomonas Elongata. J. Mol. Catal. B Enzym. 2015, 120, 141−150.
(44) Heckmann, C. M.; Gourlay, L. J.; Dominguez, B.; Paradisi, F.
An (R)-Selective Transaminase From Thermomyces Stellatus:
Stabilizing the Tetrameric Form. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2020, 8,
707.
(45) Meersseman Arango, H.; Nguyen, X. D. L.; Luis, P.; Leyssens,
T.; Roura Padrosa, D.; Paradisi, F.; Debecker, D. P. Membrane-
Immobilized Transaminases for the Synthesis of Enantiopure Amines.
RSC Sustain. 2024, 2 (10), 3139−3152.
(46) Benítez-Mateos, A. I.; Contente, M. L.; Velasco-Lozano, S.;
Paradisi, F.; López-Gallego, F. Self-Sufficient Flow-Biocatalysis by
Coimmobilization of Pyridoxal 5′-Phosphate and ω-Transaminases
onto Porous Carriers. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2018, 6 (10), 13151−
13159.
(47) Reus, B.; Damian, M.; Mutti, F. G. Advances in Cofactor
Immobilization for Enhanced Continuous-Flow Biocatalysis. J. Flow
Chem. 2024, 14, 219.
(48) Planchestainer, M.; Contente, M. L.; Cassidy, J.; Molinari, F.;
Tamborini, L.; Paradisi, F. Continuous Flow Biocatalysis: Production
and in-Line Purification of Amines by Immobilised Transaminase
from Halomonas Elongata. Green Chem. 2017, 19 (2), 372−375.
(49) Heckmann, C. M.; Dominguez, B.; Paradisi, F. Enantio-
Complementary Continuous-Flow Synthesis of 2-Aminobutane Using
Covalently Immobilized Transaminases. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng.
2021, 9 (11), 4122−4129.
(50) Chergaoui, S.; Lauzer, J.; Debecker, D. P.; Leyssens, T.; Luis, P.
Tuning Membrane Properties to Control Supersaturation of
Antisolvent Crystallization. J. Membr. Sci. 2024, 694, No. 122415.
(51) Liese, A.; Hilterhaus, L. Evaluation of Immobilized Enzymes for
Industrial Applications. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2013, 42 (15), 6236−6249.
(52) Wang, X.; Xie, Y.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, K.; Wang, H.; Wei, D.
Efficient Synthesis of (S)-1-Boc-3-Aminopiperidine in a Continuous
Flow System Using ω-Transaminase-Immobilized Amino-Ethylenedi-
amine-Modified Epoxide Supports. Org. Process Res. Dev. 2022, 26
(5), 1351−1359.
(53) Bhattacharyya, D. Activity Studies of Immobilized Subtilisin on
Functionalized Pure Cellulose-Based Membranes. Biotechnol. Prog.
2001, 17 (5), 866−871.
(54) Vander Straeten, A.; Lefe ̀vre, D.; Demoustier-Champagne, S.;
Dupont-Gillain, C. Protein-Based Polyelectrolyte Multilayers. Adv.
Colloid Interface Sci. 2020, 280, No. 102161.
(55) Velasco-Lozano, S.; Jackson, E.; Ripoll, M.; López-Gallego, F.;
Betancor, L. Stabilization of ω-Transaminase from Pseudomonas
Fluorescens by Immobilization Techniques. Int. J. Biol. Macromol.
2020, 164, 4318−4328.
(56) MolCalc. http://molcalc.org/ (accessed 2024-03-29).
(57) Tufvesson, P.; Jensen, J. S.; Kroutil, W.; Woodley, J. M.
Experimental Determination of Thermodynamic Equilibrium in
Biocatalytic Transamination. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2012, 109 (8),
2159−2162.
(58) Le Minh, T.; Von Langermann, J.; Lorenz, H.; Seidel-
Morgenstern, A. Enantiomeric 3-Chloromandelic Acid System: Binary
Melting Point Phase Diagram, Ternary Solubility Phase Diagrams and
Polymorphism. J. Pharm. Sci. 2010, 99 (9), 4084−4095.
(59) Hylton, R. K.; Tizzard, G. J.; Threlfall, T. L.; Ellis, A. L.; Coles,
S. J.; Seaton, C. C.; Schulze, E.; Lorenz, H.; Seidel-Morgenstern, A.;
Stein, M.; Price, S. L. Are the Crystal Structures of Enantiopure and
Racemic Mandelic Acids Determined by Kinetics or Thermody-
namics? J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137 (34), 11095−11104.
(60) Datta, S.; Grant, D. J. W. Crystal Structures of Drugs: Advances
in Determination, Prediction and Engineering. Nat. Rev. Drug
Discovery 2004, 3 (1), 42−57.
(61) Diniz, L. F.; Carvalho, P. S., Jr.; da Nova Mussel, W.; Yoshida,
M. I.; Diniz, R.; Fernandes, C. Racemic Salts and Solid Solutions of
Enantiomers of the Antihypertensive Drug Carvedilol. Cryst. Growth
Des. 2019, 19 (8), 4498−4509.
(62) Schu ̈ th, F.; Ward, M. D.; Buriak, J. M. Common Pitfalls of
Catalysis Manuscripts Submitted to Chemistry of Materials. Chem.
Mater. 2018, 30 (11), 3599−3600.
(63) Yin, Q.; Shi, Y.; Wang, J.; Zhang, X. Direct Catalytic
Asymmetric Synthesis of α-Chiral Primary Amines. Chem. Soc. Rev.
2020, 49 (17), 6141−6153.
(64) Zhao, Q.; Wen, J.; Tan, R.; Huang, K.; Metola, P.; Wang, R.;
Anslyn, E. V.; Zhang, X. Rhodium Catalyzed Asymmetric Hydro-
genation of Unprotected N-H Imines Assisted by Thiourea. Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed. Engl. 2014, 53 (32), 8467−8470.
(65) Tan, X.; Gao, S.; Zeng, W.; Xin, S.; Yin, Q.; Zhang, X.
Asymmetric Synthesis of Chiral Primary Amines by Ruthenium-
Catalyzed Direct Reductive Amination of Alkyl Aryl Ketones with
Ammonium Salts and Molecular H2. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140 (6),
2024−2027.
(66) Hirose, T.; Begum, M.; Sadequl Islam, Md.; Taniguchi, K.;
Yasutake, M. Resolution of α-Methylbenzylamine via Diastereomeric
Salt Formation Using the Naturally Based Reagent N-Tosyl-(S)-
Phenylalanine Together with a Solvent Switch Technique. Tetrahe-
dron Asymmetry 2008, 19 (14), 1641−1646.
Chem & Bio Engineering pubs.acs.org/ChemBioEng Article
https://doi.org/10.1021/cbe.4c00186
Chem Bio Eng. 2025, 2, 272−282
282