001-16479B    
April 2021
Instructions For Use
Echo 650 Series Liquid Handler
Models: 650, 655, 650T, 655T
Beckman Coulter, Inc.
250 S. Kraemer Blvd.
Brea, CA  92821  U.S.A.
Echo 650 Series Liquid Handler 
Models: 650, 655, 650T, 655T 
Instructions For Use
PN 001-16479 v. 2 (February  2021)
© 2021 Beckman Coulter, Inc. 
All rights reserved.
Beckman Coulter, the stylized logo, and the Beckman 
Coulter product and service marks mentioned herein are 
trademarks or registered trademarks of Beckman Coulter, 
Inc. in the United States and other countries.
Windows 7, Windows 8, and Windows 10 are registered 
trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the 
United States and/or other countries.
All other trademarks are the property of their respective 
owners.
Contact Us
If you have any questions, contact our Customer Support 
Center.
 • Worldwide, find us via our website at
www.beckman.com/support/technical
 • In the USA and Canada, call us at 1-800-369-0333.
 • Outside of the USA and Canada, contact your local 
Beckman Coulter Representative.
Glossary of Symbols is available at 
beckman.com/techdocs (PN C24689).
Beckman Coulter Eurocenter S.A.
22, rue Juste-Olivier
Case Postale 1044
CH - 1260 Nyon 1, Switzerland
Tel: +41 (0) 22 365 36 11
May be covered by one or more pat. - see 
www.beckman.com/patents
Original Instructions
001-16479B    iii
Revision Status
Version 2, Initial Issue April 2021
This document applies to the latest software listed and higher versions. When a subsequent software 
version affects the information in this document, a new issue will be released to the Beckman Coulter Web 
site. For labeling updates, go to www.beckman.com/techdocs and download the latest version of the 
manual for your instrument.
001-16479B     iv
Revision Status
  
001-16479B    v
Safety Notice
Read all product manuals and consult with Beckman Coulter-trained personnel before attempting 
to operate instrument. Do not attempt to perform any procedure before carefully reading all 
instructions. Always follow product labeling and manufacturer’s recommendations. If in doubt as 
to how to proceed in any situation, contact us.
Beckman Coulter, Inc. urges its customers and employees to comply with all national health and 
safety standards such as the use of barrier protection. This may include, but is not limited to, 
protective eyewear, gloves, and suitable laboratory attire when operating or maintaining this or 
any other automated laboratory analyzer.
Alerts for Warning and Caution
WARNING
WARNING indicates a potentially hazardous situation which, if not avoided, could 
result in death or serious injury. May be used to indicate the possibility of 
erroneous data that could result in an incorrect diagnosis.
CAUTION
CAUTION indicates a potentially hazardous situation, which, if not avoided, may 
result in minor or moderate injury. It may also be used to alert against unsafe 
practices. May be used to indicate the possibility of erroneous data that could 
result in an incorrect diagnosis.
001-16479B     vi
Safety Notice
Safety Precautions  
Safety Precautions
WARNING
Risk of operator injury if:
 • All doors, covers, and panels are not cl osed and secured in place prior to and 
during instrument operation.
 • The integrity of interlocks  and sensors is compromised.
 • Instrument alarms and error message s are not acknowledged and acted upon.
 •Y o u  c o n t a c t  m o v i n g  p a r t s .
 • You mishandle broken parts.
 • Doors, covers, and panels are not open ed, closed, removed, and/or replaced 
with care.
 • Improper tools are used for troubleshooting.
To avoid injury:
 • Keep doors, covers, and panels closed and secured in place while the 
instrument is in use.
 • Take full advantage of the safety features of the instrument. Do not defeat  
interlocks and sensors.
 • Acknowledge and act upon inst rument alarms and error messages.
 • Keep away from moving parts.
 • Report any broken parts to your  Beckman Coulter Representative.
 • Open/remove and close/replace door s, covers, and panels with care.
 • Use the proper tools when troubleshooting.
CAUTION
System integrity could be compromised and operational failures could occur if:
 • This equipment is used in a mann er other than specified. Operate the 
instrument as instructed in the Product Manuals.
 • You introduce software that is not au thorized by Beckman Coulter into your 
computer. Only operate your system’s computer with software authorized by 
Beckman Coulter.
 • You install software that  is not an original copyrighted version. Only use 
software that is an original copyrighted version to prevent virus 
contamination.
 • You connect external devices such as thumb drives, external hard drives, and 
CD/DVDs. Ensure that all external devices are free from viruses before 
connecting.
001-16479B    vii
Safety Notice
About This Guide  
CAUTION
If you purchased this product from anyone other than Beckman Coulter or an 
authorized Beckman Coulter distributor, and, it is not presently under a Beckman 
Coulter service maintenance agreement, Beckman Coulter cannot guarantee that 
the product is fitted with the most current mandatory engineering revisions or 
that you will receive the most current information bulletins concerning the 
product. If you purchased this product from a third party and would like further 
information concerning this topic, 
contact us.
CAUTION
Risk of inaccurate time and date stamp on results if you enable daylight savings 
time. Daylight savings time has been disabled to ensure that time changes do not 
affect the time and date stamp of results. It is recommended that you keep 
daylight savings time disabled.
CAUTION
The instrument Workstation is vulnerable to malware, viruses, data corruption, 
and unauthorized instrument setting changes, or privacy breaches if 
unauthorized access is gained by malicious personnel. To reduce the risk of such 
events, only allow authorized laboratory personnel access to the instrument 
Workstation. Contact your institutional security department for assistance.
CAUTION
The instrument Workstation is vulnerable to malware and viruses from physical 
media such as CDs, DVDs, or USB drives. To reduce the risk of data corruption or 
unauthorized setting changes, only use physical media such as CDs, DVDs, or USB 
drives that are known to be free from viruses or malware. Contact your IT 
professional for assistance.
CAUTION
Risk of instrument damage. This device is intended for indoor use only. To avoid 
device damage, do not install the instrument outdoors.
WARNING
Risk of personal injury. Safety protection can be impaired if used in a manner not 
specified by the manufacturer. To avoid personal injury, use the instrument 
according to the manufacturer's instructions only.
About This Guide
001-16479B     viii
Safety Notice
Intended Audience  
The Echo 650, 655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler User Guide contains important information regarding 
the safe use of an Echo Liquid Handler. The Echo 650 Series includes the Echo 650, 655, 650T and 
655T Liquid Handlers. Read and understand the safety information thoroughly before you begin 
operating the Echo Liquid Handler.
The Echo 650, 655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler(s) are referred to as the Echo Liquid Handler 
throughout this guide. For other Echo Liquid Handler models, please refer to the appropriate guide.
Intended Audience
The intended audience for this guide is laboratory personnel. Researchers can use the Echo Liquid 
Handler to transfer samples and reagents to conduct a wide range of laboratory experiments or 
assays.
Safety Warnings and Precautions
The Echo Liquid Handler has been designed for safe operation.
The safety warnings and precautions in this section and throughout the guide must be observed 
during maintenance, repair, and normal operation of an Echo Liquid Handler.
Failure to comply with these warnings and precautions, or with specific cautions and warnings 
found elsewhere in this guide, violates the safety standards of design, manufacture, and intended 
use of an Echo Liquid Handler. This can result in hazardous exposure to laser light, high voltage, or 
moving parts. Exposure to these hazards can cause severe injury.
Safety Notation Marks
This manual uses the following symbols in the left margin to draw your attention to the specified 
type of information.
Symbol
WARNING
Warning- Warnings alert all users to the following:
 • Potentially hazardous conditions
 • Actions that may result in personal injury or death
CAUTION
Caution - Cautions alert the user to actions that may result in the 
following:
 • Damage to the equipment
 • Lost or corrupted data
 • Unrecoverable interruption of the operation being performed
NOTE  Note - Notes emphasize or expand upon the surrounding information.
001-16479B    ix
Safety Notice
Safety Warnings and Precautions  
Electrical Safety Warnings
Always observe the following electrical safety warnings:
WARNING
Plug the Echo Liquid Handler into a grounded circuit (Class 1). The minimum 
circuit requirement is:
 • 10 A for AC 100-120V, 50/60 Hz power source
 • 5 A for AC 200-240V, 50/60 Hz power source
If you are unable to insert an AC plug into your AC receptacle, contact an 
electrician to correct the situation.
WARNING
The Echo Liquid Handler operates with voltages and currents that can be lethal. 
Pushing objects of any kind into the Echo Liquid Handler, through slots or holes in 
its covers, may cause serious electrical shock or may short out electrical circuits 
or parts. Do not spill any liquid inside or on the Echo Liquid Handler.
WARNING
The Echo Liquid Handler contains AC power fuses. If a fuse requires replacement, 
see CHAPTER 4, Replacing the Fuse.
WARNING
Do not use AC power cords if the following conditions exist:
 • The power cords are frayed or damaged.
 • Other attached cords, cables, or receptacles are frayed or damaged.
Use of damaged power cords can cause an electrical shock hazard and result in 
severe injury.
WARNING
Do not operate and disconnect (unplug) AC power cords if the following conditions 
exist:
 • The Echo Liquid Handler, or attached equipment, has been exposed to 
excessive moisture, or to liquids that have been spilled on it.
 • The Echo Liquid Handler, or any of its subassemblies or components, has been 
dropped or damaged.
 • You suspect service or repair is required.
001-16479B     x
Safety Notice
Safety Warnings and Precautions  
 • The Echo Liquid Handler is being cleaned, handled during a maintenance 
procedure, or repaired—except as directed in the applicable written 
procedure.
These conditions can cause an electrical shock hazard and result in severe injury.
The power cord set attaching to the instrument appliance coupler is considered 
the mains disconnect device. Ensure this is accessible after installation
Electromagnetic Compatibility
This device complies with the emissions and immunity requirements as specified in the 
EN/IEC 61326 series of Product Family Standards for a "basic electromagnetic environment." Such 
equipment is supplied directly at low voltage from public mains network. This equipment is not 
intended for residential use.
This device generates, uses, and can radiate unintentional radio-frequency (RF) energy. If this 
device is not installed and operated correctly, this RF energy can cause interference with other 
equipment. It is the responsibility of the end user to be sure that a compatible electromagnetic 
environment for the device can be maintained so that the device operates as intended.
In addition, other equipment can radiate RF energy to which this device is sensitive. If one suspects 
interference between this device and other equipment, Beckman Coulter recommends the 
following actions to correct the interference:
 • Evaluate the electromagnetic environment before installation and operation of this devicee
 • Do not operate this device close to sources of strong electromagnetic radiation (for example: 
unshielded intentional RF sources), as these can interfere with proper operation. Examples of 
unshielded intentional radiators are handheld radio transmitters, cordless phones, and cellular 
phones.
 • Do not place this device near medical electrical equipment that can be susceptible to 
malfunctions caused by close-proximity to electromagnetic fields.
 • This device has been designed and tested to CISPR 11, Class A emission limits.  In a domestic 
environment, this device can cause radio interference, in which case, you need to take 
measures to mitigate the interference.
001-16479B    xi
Safety Notice
Safety Warnings and Precautions  
Additional Safety Warnings
WARNING
The Echo Liquid Handler has not been certified for use with flammable liquids. Do 
not load plates containing flammable liquids into the Echo or otherwise operate 
the instrument with flammable liquids in the interior.
WARNING
Do not try to gain access to the interior of the Echo Liquid Handler. Do not remove 
the Echo Liquid Handler exterior covers. Exposure to laser light, high voltage, or 
moving parts inside the Echo Liquid Handler can cause severe injury.
WARNING
Keep your hands, fingers, and clothing clear of the door and microplate 
assemblies, except when loading or unloading a plate. Be aware of the possibility 
that either the source or the destination plate gripper stages may move.
WARNING
Use good laboratory practices and follow the manufacturer’s precautions when 
working with chemicals. Beckman Coulter is not responsible or liable for any 
damages as a result of, or as a consequence of, the use of hazardous chemicals.
WARNING
The Echo Liquid Handler weighs approximately 142 kg (313 lbs). Moving or lifting 
the Echo Liquid Handler incorrectly can cause severe injury. Never attempt to 
move or lift the Echo Liquid Handler without using proper equipment and proper 
safety techniques. Contact the safety coordinator at your company for 
information.
Safety Cautions
To protect the Echo Liquid Handler from damage, follow these precautions:
001-16479B     xii
Safety Notice
Safety Warnings and Precautions  
CAUTION
Use Ultrapure* Water. Use of improper fluids may contaminate fluidics, adversely 
impact performance and invalidate warranty.
CAUTION
Always use the normal shutoff routine or the Stop button to turn off the Echo 
instrument. Turning off the instrument by other methods (for example, 
unplugging the power cord), can potentially result in damage to the electronics or 
corrupt the software.
CAUTION
Do not attempt to service or repair the internal Echo Liquid Handler mechanisms 
yourself. The electrical, laser, and mechanical systems must be maintained by 
Beckman Coulter field engineers. If you have any questions regarding what may 
be serviced by an Echo Liquid Handler user, please contact us.
CAUTION
Do not make modifications to the Echo Liquid Handler.
CAUTION
Use labware that is ANSI/SLAS-compliant† or approved by Beckman Coulter.
CAUTION
Do not obstruct the air vents. Keep all air vents free of dirt or dust. For information 
on the recommended Echo Liquid Handler working envelope specifications, see 
CHAPTER 5, Physical.
CAUTION
Handle the Echo Liquid Handler coupling fluid and waste water carefully. Avoid all 
spills. Immediately wipe spills to avoid corrosion on the instrument.
* Type 1 Ultrapure Water must meet the specifications of ASTM standard D-1193. Most commercial laboratory water 
purification systems such as Millipore Milli-Q, ElgaPURELY and others conform to this. Before using water from such a 
source, confirm that it is rated to produce Type 1 Ultrapure Water and properly maintained according to 
manufacturer’s recommendations.
† Society for Laboratory Automation Systems. See Labware.
001-16479B    xiii
Safety Notice
Safety Warnings and Precautions  
CAUTION
Keep corrosive agents, or otherwise damaging material, away from the Echo 
Liquid Handler and its attached devices.
CAUTION
Do not expose the Echo Liquid Handler to excessive moisture (>80% relative 
humidity). Moisture, or condensation, can damage electrical components.
CAUTION
Do not expose the Echo Liquid Handler to temperatures outside of the storage 
range: 5°C – 45°C (41°F–113°F). Temperatures outside of this range can damage 
the instrument.
CAUTION
Do not run the Echo Liquid Handler without the chiller. Ensure that the chiller is 
correctly connected to the Echo instrument and is running at the recommended 
temperature. Incorrect coupling fluid temperature can reduce the precision and 
accuracy of the fluid that is transferred. Extreme fluid temperatures can 
potentially damage the acoustic transducer.
CAUTION
Do not allow the acoustic transducer to dry out. The Echo Liquid Handler is 
designed to run continuously to keep the acoustic transducer wet. Allowing the 
transducer to dry out may result in instrument damage and may invalidate 
instrument warranty. If there is a need to power down the Echo Liquid Handler for 
more than four days, see 
CHAPTER 4, Extended Non-Use and Storage.
CAUTION
Do not run the pump if the chiller tubing is not connected. Running the pump 
without the chiller tubing may damage other system components.
Laser Safety Warnings
The Echo Liquid Handler is a Class I laser instrument that can house up to three laser-based barcode 
scanners.
When operated as specified in this User Guide, the Echo Liquid Handler does not expose the 
operator to laser light. Nevertheless, during a barcode scan, the Class II diode lasers (with maximum 
power up to 1.5 mW at 650nm or 660 nm) can be visible from the interior of the unit. The barcode 
scanners are not interlocked; therefore, if the Echo Liquid Handler is operated with the covers off, 
001-16479B     xiv
Safety Notice
Safety Warnings and Precautions  
the operator may be exposed to a Class II laser light hazard. Do not operate the Echo Liquid Handler 
if its covers have been removed.
Toxic Fumes
If the user is working with volatile solvents or toxic substances, an efficient laboratory ventilation 
system is required to remove any vapors that may be produced.
Flammable Fluids
The Echo systems have not been evaluated for use with flammable liquids, and should not be used 
with flammable liquids.
Intellectual Property Label
The intellectual property label cites United States patents and other applicable legal protection. 
This information is found on the Product Label.
Symbols Glossary
Glossary Symbols Table 
Symbol/
Regulatory Mark
Meaning of Symbol from Standard
CE Markings
A "CE" mark indicates that a product has been assessed before being placed on the 
market, and has been found to meet European Union safety, health, and/or 
environmental protection requirements.
Country of Origin Symbol
This symbol indicates the country that the product was manufactured in.
Warning; Crushing of hands
This symbol indicates a warning of closing motion of mechanical parts of equipment.
ISO 7010. Graphical Symbols-Safety colors and safety signs. #W024
Supplemental Product-Specific Manufacturer Information
Use caution to avoid injury to hands when close to equipment with moving 
mechanical parts..

001-16479B    xv
Safety Notice
Safety Warnings and Precautions  
Recycling Symbol
The symbol of a crossed-out wheeled bin on the product is required in accordance 
with the Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) Directive of the 
European Union. The presence of this marking on the product indicates:
1. that the device was put on the European Market after August 13, 2005 and 
2. that the device is not to be disposed via the municipal waste collection system 
of any member state of the European Union.
For products under the requirement of WEEE directive, please contact your dealer 
or local Beckman Coulter office for the proper decontamination information and 
take-back program which will facilitate the proper collection, treatment, recovery, 
recycling, and safe disposal of device.
For the Japan market:
This system is considered an industrial waste, subject to special controls for 
infectious waste. Before disposal of the system, refer to the Waste Disposal and 
Public Cleaning Law for compliance procedures.
“ON” (power)
This symbol indicates connection to the mains, at least for mains switches or their 
positions, and all those cases where safety is involved.
Stop
This symbol identifes the control or the indicator to stop the active function.
IEC 60417: Graphical Symbols for use on equipment-Overview and application, 
#5110
Supplemental Product-Specific Manufacturer Information
This symbol indicates a stop button.
“OFF” (power)
This symbol indicates disconnection from the mains, at least for mains switches or 
their positions, and all those cases where safety is involved.
IEC 60417: Graphical Symbols for use on equipment-Overview and application, 
#5008
Supplemental Product-Specific Manufacturer Information
This symbol indicates the off position.
Fuse
This symbol indicates fuse boxes or their location.
IEC 60417: Graphical Symbols for use on equipment-Overview and application, 
#5016
Supplemental Product-Specific Manufacturer Information
This symbol can also indicate a fuse location and rating.
Glossary Symbols Table (Continued)
Symbol/
Regulatory Mark
Meaning of Symbol from Standard

001-16479B     xvi
Safety Notice
Safety Warnings and Precautions  
Dangerous voltage
This symbol indicates hazards arising from dangerous voltages.
IEC 60417: Graphical Symbols for use on equipment-Overview and application, 
#5036
Supplemental Product-Specific Manufacturer Information
This symbol can also indicate an area of the system to not access under any 
circumstances, due to possibility of high voltages and the risk of electrical shock.
Protective earth; protective ground
This symbol indicates a terminal which is intended for connection to an external 
conductor for protection against electric shock in case of a fault, or the terminal of 
a protective earth (ground) electrode.
IEC 60417: Graphical Symbols for use on equipment-Overview and application, 
#5019
Laser Compliance
This symbol indicates that the product is a Class 1 Laser Product and is in 
compliance with international standards and US requirements.
21 CFR 1040
Warning; Laser Beam
This symbol indicates a warning of a laser beam.
ISO 7010. Graphical Symbols-Safety colors and safety signs. #W004
Supplemental Product-Specific Manufacturer Information
This symbol indicates that there can be laser light radiation in the area. Take 
precautions to  prevent exposure.
Warning; Hot Surface
This symbol indicates a warning of a hot surface.
ISO 7010. Graphical Symbols-Safety colors and safety signs. #W017
Water System Maintenance
The water system maintenance label is provided by Beckman Coulter to remind the 
user to follow recommended maintenance procedures. It emphasizes the use of 
Type 1 Ultrapure Water.
Safety Certification
The TÜV mark indicates conformance to the recognized NRTL/SCC standards 
(UL/CSA 61010-1 series) by TÜV Rheinland for the US and Canada. The TÜV mark 
image is found on the Product Label.
Manufacturer 
This symbol indicates the medical device manufacturer.
ISO 15223-1 Medical Devices – Symbols to be used with medical device labels, 
labeling, and information to be supplied-Part 1: General Requirements. #5.1.1
Supplemental Product-Specific Manufacturer Information
This symbol indicates who the legal manufacturer of the product is.
Glossary Symbols Table (Continued)
Symbol/
Regulatory Mark
Meaning of Symbol from Standard

001-16479B    xvii
Safety Notice
Safety Warnings and Precautions  
Stop Switch
The Stop label identifies the Stop switch, which is used in an emergency to shut down all 
mechanical activity in the Echo Liquid Handler.
There are two Stop switches and one remote input for a satellite Stop switch:
 • One Stop switch on the front panel of the Echo Liquid Handler
 • One Stop switch on the rear panel of the Echo Liquid Handler
Authorized representative in the European Community
This symbol indicates the Authorized representative in the European Community.
ISO 15223-1 Medical Devices – Symbols to be used with medical device labels, 
labeling, and information to be supplied-Part 1: General Requirements. #5.1.2
Catalog Number
Indicates the manufacturer's catalog number so that the medical device can be 
identified.
ISO 15223-1 Medical Devices – Symbols to be used with medical device labels, 
labeling, and information to be supplied-Part 1: General Requirements. #5.1.6
Caution
This symbol indicates the need for the user to consult the instructions for use for 
important cautionary information such as warnings and precautions that cannot, for 
a variety of reasons, be presented on the medical device itself. 
ISO 15223-1 Medical Devices – Symbols to be used with medical device labels, 
labeling, and information to be supplied-Part 1: General Requirements. #5.4.4
Consult instructions for use
This symbol indicates the need for the user to consult the instructions for use. 
ISO 15223-1 Medical Devices – Symbols to be used with medical device labels, 
labeling, and information to be supplied-Part 1: General Requirements. #5.4.3
Date of Manufacture
This symbol indicates the date when the medical device was manufactured.
ISO 15223-1 Medical Devices – Symbols to be used with medical device labels, 
labeling, and information to be supplied-Part 1: General Requirements. #5.1.3
California Proposition 65
This product can expose you to chemicals known to the State of California to cause 
Cancer and Reproductive Harm. For more information go to 
https://www.P65Warnings.ca.gov.
Serial number
This symbol indicates the manufacturer’s serial number so that specific medical 
device can be identified.
ISO 15223-1 Medical Devices – Symbols to be used with medical device labels, 
labeling, and information to be supplied-Part 1: General Requirements. #5.1.7
Glossary Symbols Table (Continued)
Symbol/
Regulatory Mark
Meaning of Symbol from Standard

001-16479B     xviii
Safety Notice
Safety Warnings and Precautions  
 • One remote input for a satellite Stop switch
NOTE  Beckman Coulter AccessTM Workstations or Systems include a cable and connector that can be 
used to connect the remote input for a satellite Stop switch. In cases where and Echo is not 
integrated on an Access, ensure the remote input connector is in place, otherwise the remote input 
behaves as if it has been pressed.
Related Documentation
Echo documentation consists of the following publications:
 • Echo Dose-Response User Guide
 • Echo Plate Reformat User Guide
 • Echo Cherry Pick User Guide
 • Echo Plate Audit User Guide
 • Echo Array Maker User Guide
 • Echo Combination Screen User Guide
 • Echo 21CFR11 Compliance Manager User Guide
 • Echo 21CFR11 Compliance Manager Admin User Guide
 • Echo Software Applications Integration Guide
 • Echo Liquid Handler Software Integration Guide
 • Tempo Automation Control Software User Guide
 • Access Dual Robot System User Guide
Documentation Conventions
Some of the text in this manual uses special formatting to help indicate emphasis or keystrokes. The 
text conventions are as follows:
Style Purpose
blue italicized text (PDF, Web only) Cross references, link, Web addresses
courier std Commands, filenames, directories, paths, user input
bold text Interactive interface objects, keys, buttons
italicized text Book titles, glossary terms
    xix
Contents
Revision Status, iii
Safety Notice, v
Alerts for Warning and Caution, v
Safety Precautions, vi
About This Guide, vii
Intended Audience, viii
Safety Warnings and Precautions, viii
Safety Notation Marks, viii
Electrical Safety Warnings, ix
Electromagnetic Compatibility, x
Additional Safety Warnings, xi
Safety Cautions, xi
Laser Safety Warnings, xiii
Toxic Fumes, xiv
Flammable Fluids, xiv
Intellectual Property Label, xiv
Symbols Glossary, xiv
Stop Switch, xvii
Related Documentation, xviii
Documentation Conventions, xviii
Introduction, xxix
Overview, xxix
What are the Echo Liquid Handler features?, xxx
Non-contact Fluid Transfers, xxx
Reliability, xxx
Ease of Use, xxxi
System Integration Friendly, xxxi
Low Maintenance Requirements, xxxii
Cost Savings, xxxii
High Accuracy, Precision, and Speed, xxxiii
Value-added Quality Control, xxxiii
What system configurations are supported?, xxxiv
Standalone Mode, xxxv
Modular Workstation Mode, xxxvi
Small Cell Operation, xxxvi
Multi-cell Mode, xxxvii
Multi-Client Considerations, xxxviii
     xx
Contents
  
CHAPTER 1: General Description, 1-1
System Overview, 1-1
Front Panel, 1-1
Back Panel, 1-2
Component Description, 1-3
Door, 1-4
Source Plate Gripper Stage, 1-4
Destination Plate Gripper Stage, 1-5
Status Indicator Lights, 1-6
Power Status Light, 1-7
Warning Status Light, 1-8
Fault Status Light, 1-9
LCD Screen, 1-10
Stop Switches and Stop Functions, 1-10
Anti-Static Bars, 1-12
Barcode Scanner, 1-13
AC Power and Fuse Compartment, 1-15
Ethernet Connection, 1-16
Vacuum Pump (Optional and sold separately by Beckman 
Coulter), 1-17
Surge Tank, 1-18
Coupling Fluid, 1-19
Fluid Chiller, 1-19
Chiller, 1-19
Coupling Fluid Bottle, 1-22
Compressed Air, 1-23
Junair Compressor (Optional and sold separately by Beckman 
Coulter), 1-23
Connector Panel, 1-24
Client PC (Sold separately by Beckman Coulter), 1-27
Client PC specifications:, 1-27
Customer Responsibilities, 1-28
CHAPTER 2: Installation and Relocation, 2-1
Pre-Installation Requirements, 2-1
Site Requirements, 2-1
User Supplied Equipment Requirements, 2-1
Echo Liquid Handler Components, 2-1
Installation Overview, 2-2
Echo Client Utility Installation, 2-3
Install the Echo Client Utility, 2-4
Uninstall the Echo Client Utility, 2-4
Upgrade the Echo Client Utility, 2-5
Instrument Relocation, 2-5
    xxi
Contents
  
CHAPTER 3: Software, 3-1
What types of liquid transfers are supported?, 3-1
Startup/Shutdown, 3-1
Turn on Echo Power, 3-1
Echo Initialization, 3-2
Echo Liquid Handler Warm-Up, 3-2
Launch Echo Client Utility, 3-2
Turn Off Echo Power, 3-3
Short Term Storage, 3-5
Extended Storage, 3-6
Long Term Storage, 3-16
Echo Client Utility, 3-16
Main Window, 3-17
Source Plate In/Out and Presence, 3-18
Destination Plate In/Out and Presence, 3-20
Door Open/Close, 3-22
Status Indicators, 3-23
Echo Log, 3-26
Echo Client Utility Menu, 3-27
Controls Tab, 3-30
Stages, 3-31
Coupling Fluid Pump, 3-31
Plate Dryer, 3-32
Anti-Static Bars, 3-33
Instrument Control, 3-33
Focus Tab, 3-34
Focus Calibration Check, 3-35
Labware Tab, 3-40
Plate Name Convention, 3-42
Plate Type Editor, 3-43
Survey Tab, 3-46
Fluid Replacement Tab, 3-49
Service Tab, 3-55
Plate Registration Calibration, 3-56
Power Calibration, 3-57
System Gain, 3-59
Plate Sensors, 3-60
CHAPTER 4:   Maintenance and Service, 4-1
Daily Maintenance, 4-1
Scheduled Maintenance, 4-1
Every Week, 4-1
Once Per Month, 4-2
One Year Preventive Maintenance, 4-2
Maintenance Procedures, 4-3
Echo Coupling Fluid Maintenance, 4-3
Coupling Fluid Replacement Materials Required, 4-4
     xxii
Contents
  
Replace Echo Coupling Fluid, 4-4
Water Filter Maintenance, 4-5
Clean the Anti-Static Bars, 4-8
Clean the Destination Plate Gripper Grid, 4-10
Cycle Fluid Through Echo System, 4-10
Extended Non-Use and Storage, 4-11
Echo Maintenance Alerts, 4-11
Setup Problems, 4-13
Replacing the Fuse, 4-14
CHAPTER 5: Instrument Specifications, 5-1
Communications, 5-1
Fluid Transfer, 5-1
Labware, 5-2
Electrical, 5-3
Installation Category, 5-4
Ratings, 5-4
Noise Ratings, 5-4
Power Ratings, 5-4
Physical, 5-4
Environmental, 5-5
Pollution Degree, 5-5
Altitude, 5-5
Site Requirements, 5-5
User Supplied Equipment Requirements, 5-6
Client PC (minimum requirements), 5-7
Optional Hardware, 5-8
APPENDIX A: Appendix, A-1
Consumables, A-1
Calibrations, A-2
System Throughput, A-3
Critical Micelle Concentrations, A-3
Chiller Setup, A-5
Index
Beckman Coulter, Inc. 
Customer End User License Agreement
    xxiii
Illustrations
  
Illustrations
1 Echo 655T Liquid Handler , xxix
2 Access Workstation Load ing a Source Microplate, xxxii
3 Example of Aqueous Fluid Thickness Data Imported Into a 
Spreadsheet for Analysis, xxxiv
4 Standalone mode using the Echo Client Utility , xxxv
5 Modular Workstation Mode , xxxvi
6 Small Cell Mode Operation , xxxvii
7M u l t i - c e l l  M o d e , xxxviii
8 An Example of Multiple Clients Talking to an Echo Liquid 
Handler, xxxix
1.1 Echo 650, 655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler front panel , 1-1
1.2 Echo 655T Liquid Handler back panel , 1-2
1.3 Door (closed) , 1-4
1.4 Extended source plate gripper stage , 1-5
1.5 Source plate gripper stage (entire assembly), 1-5
1.6 Extended destination plate gr ipper stage (Pointing to A1 
location), 1-6
1.7 Inverting the destination plate, 1-6
1.8 Echo Liquid Handler front panel , 1-7
1.9 Power Light Illuminated , 1-7
1.10 Warning Light Illuminated , 1-8
1.11 Fault Light Illuminated , 1-9
1.12 Location of Stop switches , 1-11
1.13 Anti-static bars , 1-13
1.14 Barcode Scanner locations , 1-14
1.15 Barcode label locations , 1-15
1.16 AC power and fuse compartment , 1-16
1.17 External connections: power and data , 1-17
1.18 Vacuubrand MZ 2S-NT vacuum system , 1-18
1.19 Surge Tank , 1-19
1.20 SMC Chiller , 1-20
1.21 Coupling fluid bottle, 1-22
1.22 Coupling flui d bottle and sensor connections, 1-23
1.23 Junair OF302-4B oil-less compressor , 1-24
     xxiv
Illustrations
  
1.24 Connector panel (Left - With out tubing) and (Right - With 
tubing), 1-25
1.25 Accessory Kit , 1-26
2.1 Installed system , 2-3
3.1 Starting the Echo Client Utility from the Windows Desktop , 3-3
3.2 Echo Client Utility Connect  to Instrument dialog box, 3-3
3.3 Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box , 3-4
3.4 Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box , 3-5
3.5 Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box , 3-7
3.6 Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box , 3-8
3.7 Turning Valve on the Air Supply , 3-8
3.8 Nose Cone Assembly , 3-9
3.9 Echo Liquid Handler with Stop cap , 3-10
3.10 Nose cone with red plug inserted , 3-10
3.11 Transducer assembly , 3-11
3.12 Echo Liquid Handler Storag e Mode Recovery dialog box, 3-13
3.13 Echo Liquid Handler Storag e Mode Recovery dialog box, 3-14
3.14 Echo Liquid Handler Storag e Mode Recovery dialog box, 3-14
3.15 Echo Liquid Handler Storag e Mode Recovery dialog box, 3-15
3.16 Home Stages dialog box , 3-15
3.17 Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box , 3-16
3.18 Echo Client Utility - Main Window , 3-17
3.19 Load Source Plate dialog box, 3-19
3.20 Load Destination Plate dialog box , 3-21
3.21 , 3-22
3.22 Door Control Error dialog box , 3-23
3.23 System Status section , 3-23
3.24 Echo Log section , 3-27
3.25 Connect to Inst rument dialog box, 3-27
3.26 Preferences dialog box , 3-28
3.27 Download System State dialog box , 3-29
3.28 Controls Tab , 3-30
3.29 Homing Stages dialog box , 3-31
3.30 Coupling Fluid Pump section , 3-32
3.31 Plate Dryer section , 3-32
3.32 Anti-Static Bars section , 3-33
3.33 Instrument Control section , 3-34
3.34 Focus Tab , 3-35
    xxv
Illustrations
  
3.35 System Status section , 3-36
3.36 Focus Tab , 3-37
3.37 Focus tab before calibration , 3-38
3.38 Focus tab after calibration , 3-39
3.39 Focus tab outside of normal range , 3-40
3.40 Confirm Focus ToF dialog box , 3-40
3.41 Labware tab , 3-41
3.42 Plate Type Editor , 3-43
3.43 Survey Tab , 3-47
3.44 Survey Data , 3-48
3.45 Fluid Replacement tab , 3-50
3.46 Fluid Replacement Workflow displayed , 3-51
3.47 Fluid Replacement Workflow Step 1 , 3-52
3.48 Fluid Replacement Workflow Step 2 , 3-53
3.49 Canceling Fluid Replacement dialog box , 3-53
3.50 Canceling Fluid Replacement dialog box , 3-54
3.51 Canceling Fluid Replacement dialog box , 3-54
3.52 Fluid Replacement Complete , 3-55
3.53 Service Tab , 3-56
3.54 Plate registration section , 3-57
3.55 Power section after clicking Measure button , 3-58
3.56 System Gain section after clicking Override button , 3-59
3.57 System Gain section after clicking Apply button , 3-60
3.58 Plate Sensors section , 3-61
4.1 Diagnostic tab showing coupling fluid level , 4-3
4.2 LCD Panel with power, warn ing, and fault indicator lights, 4-4
4.3 Water filter in good condition (left) versus water filter that 
needs cleaning (right), 4-5
4.4 Water filter disassembled , 4-6
4.5 Anti-static bar location , 4-9
4.6 Anti-static bar areas requiring cleaning , 4-9
4.7 System Status section , 4-12
4.8 Connection failure message , 4-13
4.9 AC power and fuse compartment , 4-15
A.1 Front and rear view for SMC Chiller , A-5
A.2 Tubing connections on the chiller , A-6
     xxvi
Tables
  
Tables
 •G l o s s a r y  S y m b o l s  T a b l e , 1-xiv
1.1 Callout table for Echo 655T Front Panel , 1-1
1.2 Callout table for Echo Liquid Handler back panel , 1-3
1.3 Callout table for Sour ce Plate Gripper Stage, 1-5
1.4 Callout table for Status Indicator Lights , 1-7
1.5 Callout table for Power Status Indicator Light , 1-8
1.6 Callout table for Warning Status Indicator Light , 1-9
1.7 Callout table for Faul t Status Indicator Light, 1-10
1.8 Callout table for Stop switches , 1-11
1.9 Callout table for Anti-static bars , 1-13
1.10 Callout table for Barcode scanner locations , 1-14
1.11 Callout table for Barcode label locations , 1-15
1.12 Callout table for AC power and fuse compartment , 1-16
1.13 Callout table for Coupling fluid bottle and sensor , 1-23
1.14 Callout table for Connector Panel , 1-25
1.15 Callout table for Accessory Kit , 1-26
2.1 Callout table for Installed System , 2-3
3.1 Callout table for Nose Cone Assembly, 3-9
3.2 Callout table for Transducer Assembly , 3-11
3.3 Callout table for the Echo  Client Utility Main Window, 3-18
3.4 Callout table for Source  Plate Presence Indicator, 3-20
3.5 Callout table for Destination Plate Presence Indicator , 3-22
3.6 Callout table for Stop Indicator , 3-24
3.7 Callout table for Fluid Leak Indicator , 3-24
3.8 Callout table for Compre ssed Air Pressure Indicator, 3-24
3.9 Callout table for Vacuum Supply Pressure Indicator, 3-24
3.10 Callout table for Coupli ng Fluid Level Indicator, 3-25
3.11 Callout table for Coup ling Fluid Age Indicator, 3-25
3.12 Callout table for Focus Calibration Indicator , 3-25
3.13 Callout table for Coupling  Fluid Temperature Indicator, 3-26
3.14 Callout table for Syst em Temperature Indicator, 3-26
3.15 Callout table for Labware tab , 3-41
3.16 Callout table for Plate Type Editor , 3-44
    xxvii
Tables
  
4.1 Callout table for Anti-static bar , 4-9
4.2 Echo Maintenance Alerts and Procedures , 4-12
5.1 Fluid Transfer Ranges by Plate Table , 5-1
5.2 Compatible Source Plates Specifications for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 
655T Liquid Handler(s) for DMSO fluids, 5-2
5.3 Compatible Source Plates Specifications for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 
655T Liquid Handler(s) for Buffer fluids, 5-2
5.4 Compatible Source Plates Specifications for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 
655T Liquid Handler(s) for Buffer/Protein fluids, 5-2
5.5 Electrical Configurations for the Echo Liquid Handler, 5-3
5.6 Barcode Reader(s) , 5-8
A.1 Compatible Source Plates Specific ations for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 
655T Liquid Handler(s) for DMSO fluids, A-1
A.2 Compatible Source Plates Specific ations for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 
655T Liquid Handler(s) for Buffer fluids, A-1
A.3 Compatible Source Plates Specific ations for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 
655T Liquid Handler(s) for Buffer/Protein fluids, A-2
A.4 Standard Calibrations for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 655T Liquid 
Handler(s), A-2
A.5 System Throughput (100nL Disp ense Per Destination Well) for 
Echo 655 and 655T, A-3
A.6 Callout table for front an d rear view for SMC Chiller, A-5
     xxviii
Tables
  
001-16479B    xxix
Introduction
Overview
The Echo 650 Series includes the Echo 650, 655, 650T and 655T Liquid Handlers.
Throughout this guide, the descriptions, illustrations, and procedures apply to all Echo 650 Series 
Liquid Handlers unless the information is specifically stated for one model.
Figure 1  Echo 655T Liquid Handler
All models utilize ADE (acoustic droplet ejection) technology patented by Labcyte Inc. Ultrasound-
based ADE precisely transfers nanoliter volumes of liquids, including DMSO, buffers with or without 
proteins or nucleic acids, surfactants, cell culture media and serum between Echo Qualified source 
microplates and most ANSI/SLAS-compliant destination microplates.
Enabling the Echo 650 Series Liquid Handlers to adjust transfer parameters on the fly, without the 
need for user recalibration, the instruments utilize Dynamic Fluid Analysis Technology, a patented 
process unique to the Echo Product line. This results in the transfer of highly reproducible and 
accurate nanoliter volumes.
A direct benefit of Echo Liquid Handler performance is the elimination of intermediate plates and 
multiple dilutions steps through the direct transfer of compounds. This produces more accurate 
results in less time.
Echo Qualified source plates are specifically designed for use with the Echo Liquid Handler enabling 
the user to take full advantage of acoustic transfer technology and improve liquid transfer 
performance.

001-16479B     xxx
Introduction
What are the Echo Liquid Handler features?  
Nanoliter dispensing also makes an Echo Liquid Handler an excellent fit for many challenging life 
science applications in drug discovery, genomics, proteomics, and protein crystallography. The 
Echo 550, Echo 555, Echo 650, Echo 655, Echo 650T, and 655T Liquid Handlers can all be used for drug 
discovery. The Echo 525, Echo 550, Echo 555, Echo 650, Echo 655, Echo 650T, and Echo 655T Liquid 
Handler can be used for genomics and proteomics. And the Echo 550, Echo 555, Echo 650, and Echo 
655 Liquid Handlers can be used for protein cystallography.
What are the Echo Liquid Handler features?
Echo Liquid Handlers are well suited to transferring low-nanoliter volumes of aqueous and DMSO-
based solutions for a wide variety of applications.
Echo Liquid Handler features that will be important to any organization include:
 • Non-contact Fluid Transfers
 • Reliability
 • Ease of Use
 • System Integration Friendly
 • Low Maintenance Requirements
 • Cost Savings
 • High Accuracy, Precision, and Speed
 • Value-added Quality Control
Non-contact Fluid Transfers
Echo technology uses non-contact fluid transfer. Nothing physically touches the fluid in the wells or 
the interior walls of the microplate. Droplets are ejected using an ultrasound wave transmitted 
from below the source microplate. The ejected droplet is directly transferred upward from the 
supply plate to the destination (typically an inverted microplate).
Non-contact fluid transfer provides the following benefits:
 • No physical contact eliminates potential for tip or pin-based cross-contamination
 • Improved reliability
 • Lower maintenance requirements
 • Lower transfer costs
 • Reduced waste
Reliability
The Echo Liquid Handler has been designed for heavy duty-cycles and reliable operation. Compared 
to operating and maintaining other liquid handling equipment, Echo technology offers the 
customer a simpler, trouble-free device.
001-16479B    xxxi
Introduction
What are the Echo Liquid Handler features?  
Proactive control and monitoring of the systems reduce lost operational time or material if an error 
occurs:
 • Multiple sensors monitor the coupling fluid system.
 • Compressed air and vacuum systems are monitored for correct supply and operation.
 • Each of the moving mechanisms includes multiple sensors that define home positions and 
absolute limits, reducing the possibility of mechanical interference or misalignment.
When a problem is detected, any or all of the following actions may occur:
 • The coupling fluid pump immediately turns off.
 • Front and rear panel fault lamps and LCD messages notify the operator that a problem has 
occurred.
 • ActiveX events notify remote systems that are connected to the Echo Liquid Handler.
Ease of Use
An Echo Liquid Handler is quickly ready for use.
 • Minimal operator training is required.
 • User calibration or recalibration are not required.
 • Preparation for liquid transfers requires little more than defining a transfer protocol and 
selecting the source and destination plates being used. Protocols or destination plates can be 
quickly defined by the operator. Source plates are predefined by Beckman Coulter.
 • Liquid transfer requires only a few clicks by the operator, using one of the six available Echo 
Applications.
 • The Echo Liquid Handler can be operated manually by a researcher or as part of a fully 
automated lab.
The simple, two-step process includes creating a protocol and then running the fluid transfer 
protocol using the appropriate Echo Application software.
System Integration Friendly
The Echo Liquid Handler excels in its ease of integration into automated systems.
 • The main body of the Echo Liquid Handler has a very small footprint: 53.8 cm wide and 74.6 cm 
deep (21.2 in x 29.3 in).
 • Facilities requirements (power, temperature, ventilation, compressed air, vacuum, 
communications) are straight forward and easily accommodated in most lab settings.
 • Source and destination microplates are loaded onto stages presented at a fixed location outside 
the instrument for easy access by a robotic arm (see the following figure).
 • Eight barcode standards are supported. Barcodes can be located on the short or long side (with 
optional long side barcode reader) of a microplate.
 • Customers choosing to develop their own Echo software applications are supported by a fully 
implemented ActiveX control library.
001-16479B     xxxii
Introduction
What are the Echo Liquid Handler features?  
Figure 2  Access Workstation Loading a Source Microplate
For more information, see What system configurations are supported?
Low Maintenance Requirements
Echo instrument up-time is high, not only because it is reliable, but also because very little 
maintenance is required.
 • Routine operator maintenance takes only minutes each week— primarily limited to coupling 
fluid maintenance.
 • Field service maintenance is scheduled once per year for customers with service contracts.
 • Echo technology means there are no tips, pins, or washing involved.
 • The acoustic transducer itself has no moving parts to wear out. It simply converts RF (radio 
frequency) energy to ultrasound energy. The mechanisms that move it into position are 
designed for a long and serviceable life.
Cost Savings
The Echo Liquid Handler reduces operating costs.
 • Enable the routine use of higher density, lower volume assays. Move to smaller assay volumes 
reduces the costs of compounds, reagents and solvents.
 • Use of higher density microplates dramatically increases the number of assays that can be 
performed with a limited amount of test compound.
 • Minimize the use of expendable supplies (for example, intermediate microplates, tips, pins, and 
wash solutions).
 • Eliminate washing stations and their complex procedures and fluids.
 • Eliminate the requirement to calibrate reduces upkeep time or delays in adopting new liquid 
handling procedures.

001-16479B    xxxiii
Introduction
What are the Echo Liquid Handler features?  
High Accuracy, Precision, and Speed
High throughput capabilities are maintained without degrading fluid transfer accuracy and 
precision.
 • Droplet-to-droplet volumetric precision exhibits a low CV (coefficient of variation) for all fluid 
types tested to date. This is attributed to the elimination of sample contact with the ejection 
mechanism.
 • The use of a single transfer mechanism within the Echo Liquid Handler reduces the chance of 
imprecise transfer due to intraplate sample variability, as compared to tip-based and other 
instruments that transfer samples in parallel.
Value-added Quality Control
In addition to precise and accurate transfer of fluids, the Echo Liquid Handler has an auditing 
function that can provide quality control of fluid samples. The Echo Liquid Handler applies a low-
energy sound pulse to the fluid sample in each well, and the reflected signal is used to calculate the 
following:
 • Aqueous solutions: approximate fluid volume in the well based on the measured fluid height.
 • DMSO-based solutions: fill height and DMSO/water concentration.
 • Glycerol-based solutions: fill height and percentage of glycerol concentration (up to 50%).
 • Protein crystallography fluids: fill height and impedance measurement in megaRayls (unit of 
acoustic impedance).
The data can then be uploaded to a LIMS (Laboratory Information Management System) for post 
transfer processing and analysis.
For example, the following figure shows part of the plate survey of samples in the buffer. The plate 
survey was saved to CSV (comma separated values) file format and opened in Microsoft Excel.
001-16479B     xxxiv
Introduction
What are the Echo Liquid Handler features?  
Figure 3  Example of Aqueous Fluid Thickness Data Imported Into a Spreadsheet for Analysis
What system configurations are supported?
The Echo Liquid Handler can be used in a manual configuration or in several levels of automated, 
system integrated configurations. This section explores the following operating modes:
 • Standalone mode
 • Modular workstation mode
 • Small cell mode
 • Multi-cell mode
The client/server architecture allows multiple client computers/programs to connect to an Echo 
Liquid Handler at the same time. Read Multi-Client Considerations for a discussion of the 
advantages and disadvantages of multiple-client operation.
NOTE  When installing the Echo Client Utility, select the IP Address or host name for the Echo Liquid 
Handler you would like to connect to initially. To connect to another Echo Liquid Handler on the 
network, simply enter the IP Address for the other Echo Liquid Handler when launching the Echo 
Client Utility.

001-16479B    xxxv
Introduction
What are the Echo Liquid Handler features?  
Standalone Mode
Standalone mode using the Echo Client Utility and your choice of Echo Application leaves control 
of every step to the operator:
 • Defining new fluid transfer protocols or new destination microplates
 • Loading and unloading both source and destination microplates
 • Monitoring status
 • Performing periodic maintenance and focus calibration
Figure 4  Standalone mode using the Echo Client Utility
Beckman Coulter provides the following Echo Applications that extend the Echo Client Utility to 
enable the operator to easily run transfer protocols. Beckman Coulter currently offers the following 
software applications:
 • Echo Dose-Response: Prepares IC50, EC50 or any type of dose-response curves using the unique 
ability of the Echo Liquid Handler to perform direct dilution. The intuitive graphical user 
interface enables the sample distribution, back-filling and control transfer required for each 
curve to be incorporated into a single protocol.
 • Echo Cherry Pick: Guides file-driven transfers of samples from any source well to any 
destination well. Echo Cherry Pick software supports pick lists and produces output files in a 
CSV file format-typically required by LIMS or other workflow management software.
 • Echo Plate Reformat: Enables a broad range of plate transfer functions from plate replication to 
library compression/reformatting and custom mapping. A drag-and-drop interface, combined 
with color-coded plate previews, simplifies setting up even the most complex cross-pooling 
protocols.
 • Echo Plate Audit: Analyzes and compares sample composition and volume. Echo Plate Audit 
utilizes the ability of the Echo Liquid Handler to acoustically analyze sample properties for pre-
run validation and tracking.
 • Echo Combination Screen: Provides a variety of plate transfer functions to the Echo Liquid 
Handler and works with all Echo Liquid Handlers. When creating a new transfer protocol in 
Echo Combination Screen application, you will create the dilution curves and destination plate 
layout first. You must also define the source wells in a user-generated pick list based on a 
template that matches the protocol you are creating.
 • Echo Array Maker: Provides a variety of plate transfer functions using an interactive graphical 
editor that allows researchers to design custom spotting patterns to build custom arrays. 

001-16479B     xxxvi
Introduction
What are the Echo Liquid Handler features?  
Researchers can create and edit protocols that map the transfer of fluids from microplates to 
the custom arrays using the Echo Liquid Handler. A multitude of spotting patterns can be 
created for microarrays, MALDI-chips, and more.
Modular Workstation Mode
Modular workstation mode differs from standalone mode with the addition of a robot to automate 
the loading and unloading of source and destination plates. Typically, a custom program is written 
that controls and synchronizes the Echo Liquid Handler and robot interactions.
An operator is still involved and performs the following functions:
 • Deliver master source microplates from the reagent library.
 • Maintain a supply of empty destination microplates.
 • Select and execute the fluid transfer protocol.
 • Deliver the filled assay microplates to the next step in the process.
 • Monitor the status of the Echo Liquid Handler and the robot, possibly with the assistance of a 
custom software program.
Figure 5  Modular Workstation Mode
For customers requiring additional customization, Beckman Coulter provides Echo application 
programming interfaces and code examples via the Echo SDK (software development kit) to 
integrate the Echo system into their own laboratory automation system. The Echo Application 
Integration User Guide describes the Echo programming interfaces that are designed to be used by 
administrators, software programmers, system integrators, or any person who will be involved in 
custom programming for Echo applications.
Contact us for information on the Echo applications or Echo SDK.
Small Cell Operation
Small cell operation includes the automation of HTS processes other than liquid transfer. Those 
processes might include several of the following:
 • Lidding and delidding

001-16479B    xxxvii
Introduction
What are the Echo Liquid Handler features?  
 • Microplate labeling
 • Microplate sealing
 • Incubation
 • Reaction detection
 • Temperature or humidity control
 • Reagent addition
 • Wash station (used with other instruments)
Figure 6  Small Cell Mode Operation
Multi-cell Mode
The multi-cell mode expands on the small cell concept and may incorporate a larger range of 
processes and operations.
Larger, fully automated labs might include the following:
 • A larger combination of the processes and stations listed in the discussion of a small cell mode 
operation. Fore more information, see Small Cell Operation.
 • One or more supervisory workstations.
 • A conveyor system to move microplates and other material not only between stations, but into 
and out of the lab.
 • Multiple robots, individually chosen and programmed to support a specific function or 
machine.
 • Multiple Echo Liquid Handlers.
NOTE  Echo Client Utility allows the operator to change the IP address on the Echo instrument to match the 
integrator's IP address. This is included with the Echo Server 3.1 disk.

001-16479B     xxxviii
Introduction
What are the Echo Liquid Handler features?  
Figure 7  Multi-cell Mode
Multi-Client Considerations
Larger research labs may have many computers, instruments, controllers, and other devices 
interconnected on an Ethernet LAN (local area network). Please review the following information 
and take appropriate measures to avoid conflicts caused by multiple workstations controlling an 
Echo Liquid Handler inappropriately.
The Echo Liquid Handler can be connected to a network or to more than one workstation. This 
configuration enables one or more users to control the Echo remotely, to download liquid transfer 
information directly to the network, or to connect more than one Echo Liquid Handler to an 
automated filling operation.

001-16479B    xxxix
Introduction
What are the Echo Liquid Handler features?  
Figure 8  An Example of Multiple Clients Talking to an Echo Liquid Handler
For example, a local workstation might be used to do the following:
 • Monitor instrument status.
 • Perform user maintenance.
 • Execute troubleshooting procedures.
At the same time, a central system may be used to control the complete day-to-day work flow 
involving the Echo instruments in the lab. In relation to an Echo Liquid Handler, it might be 
involved in the following:
 • Define fluid transfer protocols.
 • Define destination microplates.
 • Deliver source and destination microplates to the Echo Liquid Handler via conveyor belt and 
robot.
 • Remove source and destination microplates.
 • Execute fluid transfer protocols.
 • Handle all of the data.
The Echo Liquid Handler is a client/server system. The client is the external workstation that 
contains the user interface software to define plate and protocol information. The server is the 
controller that runs the instrument motors and sensors. Each subsystem is independent, with its 
own system checks. This architecture enables the Echo Liquid Handler to be commanded by 
multiple clients to run concurrent operations, yet ensure that each operation is safe with respect to 
each other.
For example, one user might command the Echo Liquid Handler to do a microplate survey, then a 
liquid transfer protocol. During the source microplate survey, another user might command the 
Echo Liquid Handler to extend the source plate. The microplate survey that is in progress will 
continue to completion, then extend the source microplate. Thus, while the Echo Liquid Handler 
guarantees safe operation, it cannot prevent the commands of one user interfering with those of a 
second user. Therefore, it is the responsibility of the users to coordinate their actions to ensure the 
proper fulfillment of a transfer protocol.
Also, if more than one user creates, edits, or deletes fluid transfer protocol definitions or 
destination microplate definitions, then there must be communication between users to ensure 
that the definitions are consistent with the protocols.

001-16479B     xl
Introduction
What are the Echo Liquid Handler features?  
Users should be aware of the following considerations with the client/server architecture:
 • An Echo Liquid Handler is not limited to a single client. One or more clients can either monitor 
its status or command it to execute its functions.
 • Uncoordinated clients can cause out-of-order execution that interferes with other users' 
protocols. For example, client A can delete or edit a protocol or destination microplate 
definition created by client B. An edited protocol definition can only be detected if the original 
definition is stored on client B and compared to the definition in the database.
001-16479B    1
CHAPTER 1
General Description
System Overview
Front Panel
This topic provides a brief description of the components located on the front panel of the Echo 650, 
655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler.
Figure 1.1  Echo 650, 655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler front panel
The table below describes the callouts for the Echo 655T front panel.
Table 1.1  Callout table for Echo 655T Front Panel
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Door The door protects the operator from the moving mechanisms and blocks 
stray light emitted by the barcode scanner lasers. For more information, see 
the Door topic.
2 Status indicator 
lights
There are three status indicator lights on the front of the Echo Liquid 
Handler:
 •P o w e r (green): The Echo Liquid Handler is on and ready.
 • Warning  (yellow): A component is out of position or a parameter is out 
of range and may require attention.
 • Fault  (red): A problem has occurred that stops the current task and 
requires immediate attention.
These status indicator lights are also provided on the back panel. For more 
information, see the Status Indicator Lights topic.

001-16479B     2
General Description
System Overview  
Back Panel
This topic provides a brief description of the components located on the back panel of the Echo 650, 
655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler.
Figure 1.2  Echo 655T Liquid Handler back panel
NOTE  The back panel for the Echo 650, Echo 655, Echo 650T, and Echo 655T are the same as the Echo 655T 
shown above.
The table below describes the different areas of the Echo Liquid Handler back panel.
3 LCD screen The LCD screen on the front of the Echo Liquid Handler reports what the 
Echo Liquid Handler is doing or what operator action is required. This display 
is also provided on the back panel. For more information, see the LCD 
Screen topic.
4 Stop switch The Stop switch shuts down all mechanical Echo Liquid Handler activity. This 
switch is also available on the rear panel. For more information, see Stop 
Switches and Stop Functions.
5 Air Intake Vent The Echo uses fans to cool its internal components, therefore the air intake 
vent should be unobstructed.
Table 1.1  Callout table for Echo 655T Front Panel
Callout 
Number
Name Description

001-16479B    3
General Description
Component Description  1
Component Description
Each of the components that the user may interact with are described in detail in the topics below.
Table 1.2  Callout table for Echo Liquid Handler back panel
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Exhaust vent Do not block the exhaust vents.
2 AC power and 
fuse 
compartment
The AC power and fuse compartment (also called the power input module) 
contains the main Echo Liquid Handler power on/ off switch, AC power outlet, 
and fuse compartment. For more information, see 
AC Power and Fuse 
Compartment.
3 Coupling fluid 
bottle and 
holder
The 1000 mL coupling fluid bottle provides the coupling fluid (Type 1 Ultrapure 
Water) that is pumped through the acoustic transducer to maintain constant 
temperature and transfer acoustic energy to the well. The coupling fluid bottle 
holder contains a sensor that monitors the fluid level and issues a warning 
when the fluid level is less than 250 mL. For more information, see 
Coupling 
Fluid Bottle.
4 Status light 
indicators
Same as the components on the front panel.
5 LCD screen Same as the components on the front panel.
6 Remote Stop 
switch
Remote Stop switch cable enables the customer to set up a remote Stop 
button more accessible to the operator.
7 Stop switch Same as the components on the front panel.
8 Ethernet 
connection
RJ-45 Ethernet network port connects the Echo Liquid Handler to a PC or to a 
network. For more information, see 
Ethernet Connection.
9 Coupling Fluid 
connector
Coupling fluid coming in from chiller.
10 Coupling Fluid 
connector
Coupling fluid going to the chiller.
11 Clean dry air 
connector
Clean dry air input (80-120PSI).
12 Vacuum 
connector
Standalone vacuum with surge tank (10 L)  
100 Torr (133 mbar, 26 inches Hg Vac), minimum pumping speed 2.0 m3/hr.
13 Peristaltic 
pump
Pumps coupling fluid to/from the transducer and chiller.
14 Fluidics Power 
switch cover
Fluidics power switch cover (Service Access only: cover removed in image 
above).
15 PC connections 
cover
PC connections cover (Service Access only: cover removed in image above).
16 Echo rear light 
shield
Used to minimize algae growth. Used to cover internal components.
001-16479B     4
General Description
Component Description  
Door
The door is normally closed to protect the operator from moving mechanisms in the Echo Liquid 
Handler and from any stray light emitted by the barcode scanner lasers. When a fluid transfer 
protocol is executed, the door will be opened automatically, allowing easy human or robotic loading 
or unloading of microplates. For a complete picture of the door in the front panel, see the Front 
Panel topic.
Figure 1.3  Door (closed)
WARNING
Any time the door is open, whether or not one of the microplate assemblies has 
been extended outside of the Echo Liquid Handler, there is a pinch hazard. The 
pinch point label is visible on both microplate assemblies and reminds you to keep 
your hands and fingers clear of the mechanisms. For more information, see Pinch 
Point label in the Symbols Glossary.
Source Plate Gripper Stage
The source plate gripper stage is the lower plate stage that extends from the Echo Liquid Handler. 
The plate gripper holds the microplate containing the liquid that will be transferred.
NOTE  In the figure below, the source plate gripper stage extends out of the bottom of the door.

001-16479B    5
General Description
Component Description  1
Figure 1.4  Extended source plate gripper stage
Figure 1.5  Source plate gripper stage (entire assembly)
The table below describes the parts of the source plate gripper stage.
Destination Plate Gripper Stage
The destination plate gripper stage is the upper plate stage that extends from the Echo Liquid 
Handler. The plate gripper holds the microplate that will receive the liquid being transferred.
Table 1.3  Callout table for Source Plate Gripper Stage
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Plate positioner Used to load and unload the plate.
2 Plate gripper Used to push and hold the plate in the A1 position.
3 Blocking plate Removed if a front (long side) barcode reader is installed.
4 A1 position Indicates the A1 position reference point to be used when inserting plates.

001-16479B     6
General Description
Component Description  
When you load the plate onto the plate gripper, well A1 goes into the upper left corner (nearest the 
Echo model number).
Figure 1.6  Extended destination plate gripper stage (Pointing to A1 location)
When the destination plate gripper stage is commanded to retract into the Echo Liquid Handler, the 
microplate is gripped and simultaneously rotated down. It is in this inverted position that the 
microplate will be able to receive the fluid droplets ejected upwards from the source plate wells.
Figure 1.7  Inverting the destination plate
As the destination plate gripper stage retracts into the Echo Liquid Handler, a sensor detects 
whether a plate is or is not present. Normally, a transfer will not be executed if a destination plate 
is not detected. The human operator, or a controlling program, can override the plate presence 
check, if necessary.
When the destination plate gripper stage extends out of the Echo Liquid Handler, the plate is 
rotated back to its upright position.
Status Indicator Lights
There are three status indicator lights on the front of the Echo Liquid Handler and a duplicate set 
on the rear panel. These status lights allow a user to quickly confirm if the Echo Liquid Handler is 
operating normally or if it needs operator attention.

001-16479B    7
General Description
Component Description  1
Figure 1.8  Echo Liquid Handler front panel
The table below describes the Status Indicator Lights on the front and back panel of the Echo Liquid 
Handler.
Power Status Light
The different states for the Power Status Light are described in the table below.
Figure 1.9  Power Light Illuminated
Table 1.4  Callout table for Status Indicator Lights
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Power When the Power light is green, it indicates the instrument is on and initialized. For 
more information, see 
Power Status Light.
2 Warning If the Warning light is yellow, it indicates a condition is outside of normal limits, but 
the instrument can continue to operate. For more information, see 
Warning Status 
Light.
3 Fault If the Fault light turns red, it indicates a condition has exceeded warning conditions 
and the instrument can no longer operate. For more information, see Fault Status 
Light.

001-16479B     8
General Description
Component Description  
Warning Status Light
The different states for the Warning Status Light are described in the table below.
Figure 1.10  Warning Light Illuminated
Table 1.5  Callout table for Power Status Indicator Light
Status Conditions
Off Indicates the Echo Liquid Handler is not ready:
 • The Echo Liquid Handler is not powered on.
 • The Echo Liquid Handler internal controller is not running.
 • The Echo Liquid Handler is still initializing after being powered on and is not yet ready for use.
Green Indicates the Echo Liquid Handler is on and that the internal controller has completed 
initialization. The system is ready for use.

001-16479B    9
General Description
Component Description  1
If a warning light is displayed, check the client log in the Echo Client Utility. If you can find the 
source of the problem, check the error log instructions.
Fault Status Light
The different states for the Fault Status Light are described in the table below.
Figure 1.11  Fault Light Illuminated
Table 1.6  Callout table for Warning Status Indicator Light
Status Conditions
Off Indicates Echo Liquid Handler is functioning correctly.
Yellow Indicates Echo Liquid Handler is not operating normally:
 • The Echo Liquid Handler stages are not homed or are in the process of being homed. For more 
information, see Stages.
 • The coupling fluid bottle level is low. For more information, see Coupling Fluid Indicator.
NOTE  When the coupling fluid falls below its recommended minimum level, air bubbles 
may be introduced into the coupling fluid, which reduces the accuracy or precision of 
source plate surveys and fluid transfers. Beckman Coulter recommends that you refill 
the coupling fluid bottle as soon as possible after the Warning light has been turned on. 
For more information, see Echo Coupling Fluid Maintenance.
 • The coupling fluid temperature is outside of the normal range and within the warning range. 
The normal range is 22.1°C ± 0.9°C. The warning range is 20.2°C – 21.2°C or 23.0°C – 24.0°C.
 • The focus calibration check should be performed. For more information, see Focus Calibration 
Check.
 • The door is neither fully open nor fully closed.
 • The upper anti-static bar is neither fully up nor fully down.
 • The source plate dryer nozzle is neither fully up nor fully down.
 • The coupling fluid needs to be replaced.
 • The Echo Liquid Handler is in Storage Mode.

001-16479B     10
General Description
Component Description  
If a fault light is displayed, check the client log in the Echo Client Utility. If you can find the source 
of the problem, check the error log instructions.
LCD Screen
There is a four-row LCD screen on the front of the Echo Liquid Handler and a duplicate on the rear 
panel. They display messages that report what the Echo Liquid Handler is doing or what operator 
action is required. Types of messages displayed include the following:
 • Operating states
 • Procedure progress
 • Status
 • Requests for operator assistance
Stop Switches and Stop Functions
The Stop switch can be used in an emergency to shut down all mechanical activity in the Echo 
Liquid Handler. There are two Stop switches, one on the front panel and one on the rear panel of 
the Echo Liquid Handler.
Table 1.7  Callout table for Fault Status Indicator Light
Status Conditions
Off Indicates Echo Liquid Handler is functioning correctly.
Red Indicates Echo Liquid Handler is not operating normally:
 • The user-supplied compressed air supply is low < 552 kPa ( <80 psi) or nonexistent. For more 
information, see Compressed Air Pressure Indicator.
 • The user-supplied vacuum pressure is weak > 56 kPa ( >15 in Hg Vac) or nonexistent. For 
more information, see Vacuum Supply Pressure Indicator.
 • The coupling fluid temperature is outside of the warning range: 22.1°C ± 1.9°C. If the 
temperature is less than 20.2°C or greater than 24.0°C, a fault is generated. For more 
information, see Coupling Fluid Temperature and Indicator.
 • A coupling fluid leak has been detected. For more information, see Fluid Leak Indicator.
 • The Stop switch has been activated. For more information, see Stop Indicator.
001-16479B    11
General Description
Component Description  1
Figure 1.12  Location of Stop switches
The table below describes the locations for the Stop switches.
When to use the Stop switch:
 • Any time the safety of the operator is in question.
 • Any time strange, loud, or potentially damaging noises are coming out of the Echo Liquid 
Handler.
 • When the instrument door will not open, and the source or destination plate gripper stages 
collide with the door.
 • If water is leaking from the Echo Liquid Handler.
 • In any other situation that suggests immediate shutdown of the Echo Liquid Handler is 
appropriate.
When the Stop switch is used, the following actions are performed:
 • All motors are disabled.
 • The coupling fluid pump is turned off.
 • All pneumatic actuators are sent to their default positions.
 • The anti-static bars are turned off.
 • All RF devices (RF power supply, RF amplifier, RF switch, and so on) are turned off.
 • The HV grid is turned off.
 • The Echo Liquid Handler aborts all processes in progress, returns an error to the system 
invoking the aborted process, designates the three stages as not calibrated, and goes into a 
halted state.
Table 1.8  Callout table for Stop switches
Callout Number Name Description
1 Stop Switches see below
2 Remote Stop Switch Enables the customer to set up remote Stop access 
from an Access system.

001-16479B     12
General Description
Component Description  
 • Power is interrupted to the Echo Liquid Handler.
Activating the Stop switch does not turn off the following:
 • Echo Liquid Handler
 • AC power inside the Echo Liquid Handler power distribution panel
 • Internal 24 VDC power supply
 • External communications (Ethernet, USB)
 • Coupling fluid chiller
Recovering from an Stop shutdown:
If the Stop switch has been used to disable the Echo Liquid Handler, use the following procedure to 
start up again:
1. Determine and resolve the original problem.
2. To reset the Stop switch and enable the Echo Liquid Handler, twist the Stop switch clockwise. 
It will pop out to its normal operating position.
When the Stop switch is returned to its normal position, power is then supplied to most internal 
systems and most internal mechanisms are enabled. The Echo Liquid Handler stage motors are not 
automatically enabled. The operator must explicitly command a stage homing procedure. For more 
information, see Stages.
NOTE  If the Stop switch is activated while running a protocol, the protocol will be interrupted and will need 
to be restarted. In addition, after using the Stop switch, the stage gripper must be homed. For more 
information on homing, see Stages.
NOTE  If you cannot determine the original problem, or you cannot correct the problem, contact us.
Anti-Static Bars
The upper and lower anti-static bars (also called ionizer bars) remove any electrostatic charge from 
the source and destination microplates. Electrostatic charge can affect the placement of the 
transferred drop during liquid transfer.
001-16479B    13
General Description
Component Description  1
Figure 1.13  Anti-static bars
The table below describes the locations for the Anti-static bars.
Barcode Scanner
The Echo Liquid Handler includes left and right barcode scanners. The front barcode scanner is 
optional. The location of each scanner depends on the location of your barcode labels on the 
microplates.
You can only specify one location at-a-time for a plate. That is, you can specify that a barcode is on 
the West, South, or East side. If the Echo has been configured for West-side reads, then both source 
and destination plates must have West-side barcodes. If the Echo has been configured to East-side 
reads, then both source and destination plates must have East-side barcodes. If a Southside reader 
is present, you can mix and match plates with South-side barcodes and either West or East side 
reads.
Table 1.9  Callout table for Anti-static bars
Callout Number Name Description
1 Upper anti-static bar During destination plate load, anti-static bar reduces plate 
electrostatic build-up
2 Lower anti-static bar During source plate load, anti-static bar reduces plate 
electrostatic build-up

001-16479B     14
General Description
Component Description  
Figure 1.14  Barcode Scanner locations
The table below describes the locations for the barcode scanners.
The location of each scanner depends on the location of your barcode labels on the microplates. You 
can use either the front scanner or the side scanner, but not both at the same time.
NOTE  Several terms are used to specify barcode locations on a microplate. Standing in front of an Echo 
Liquid Handler, the two readable barcode locations are identified as follows:
Table 1.10  Callout table for Barcode scanner locations
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Left Barcode 
Scanner
Left barcode scanner reads one dimensional barcodes located on the west side 
of a source or east side of a destination plate (dependent upon configuration)
2 Right Barcode 
Scanner
Right barcode scanner reads one dimensional barcodes locate on the east side 
of a source plate or west side of a destination plate (dependent upon 
configuration)
3 Front Barcode 
Scanner
Front barcode scanner reads one dimensional barcodes located on the south 
side of a source plate

001-16479B    15
General Description
Component Description  1
Figure 1.15  Barcode label locations
The table below describes the locations for the barcode labels.
NOTE  The default configuration is to place side barcode labels on the left side of both source and destination 
microplates. The Echo Liquid Handler uses the barcode scanner on the left side to read the barcode on 
the source plate, but uses the barcode scanner on the right side to read the barcode on the destination 
plate-after it is inverted. A third barcode scanner can be added in the front to support reads on both 
source and destination plates.
NOTE  The readable bar width expresses the range in which the width of thin barcode bars (narrow bar width) 
is readable.
The Echo Liquid Handler can be configured to read four different barcode formats. By default, 
Beckman Coulter installs the CODE 128 and CODE 93 barcode reader formats. For a list of barcode 
readers formats that are supported by the Echo Liquid Handler, see Optional Hardware.
Contact us to install or move the barcode scanners.
AC Power and Fuse Compartment
The AC power and fuse compartment, also known as the power input module, is located on the rear 
panel, to the left of the Stop button. It contains the main Echo Liquid Handler power on/off switch, 
AC power outlet, and fuse compartment.
Table 1.11  Callout table for Barcode label locations
Callout Number Name Description
1 West position The west position will be located on the left side of the plate as loaded 
in the source stage gripper.
2 South position The south position will be located on the front long side of the plate as 
loaded in the source stage gripper.
3 East position The east position will be located on the right side of the plate as loaded 
in the source stage gripper.

001-16479B     16
General Description
Component Description  
Refer to Table 5.5, Electrical Configurations for the Echo Liquid Handler that describes the AC 
Power and Fuse requirements for the Echo Liquid Handler.
NOTE  The power cord may need to be replaced with one conforming to local AC power receptacles. To 
determine which AC power configuration you have, see the Power and Fuse Rating Label on the back 
panel of the Echo Liquid Handler.
The fuse compartment for the Echo Liquid Handler contains two AC power fuses. If a fuse requires 
replacement, refer to CHAPTER 4, Replacing the Fuse.
Figure 1.16  AC power and fuse compartment
The table below describes the parts of the AC power and fuse compartment and their functionality.
Ethernet Connection
The Echo Liquid Handler includes several communication connections to the right of the Stop 
button. The RJ-45 Ethernet port is the only data connection required for normal Echo Liquid 
Handler operation. The Ethernet cable connects the Echo Liquid Handler directly to the client PC or 
to a network. This connection allows you to monitor and control the Echo Liquid Handler. If the 
Echo Liquid Handler is connected directly to a client PC, the Ethernet cable must be a “cross-over” 
cable.
NOTE  PC connections are uncovered in the photo below. PC connection ports are used by Beckman Coulter 
authorized personnel and should remain covered during normal use.
Table 1.12  Callout table for AC power and fuse compartment
Callout Number Name Description
1 Fuse Compartment Fuse compartment contains two AC power fuses.
2 Power Switch O = off 
I = on
3 AC Power AC power receptacle for Echo Liquid Handler.

001-16479B    17
General Description
Component Description  1
Figure 1.17  External connections: power and data
Vacuum Pump (Optional and sold separately by Beckman Coulter)
The Echo Liquid Handler requires a vacuum source. The vacuum dries source plates before they are 
unloaded. This requirement can be met through a house vacuum or a vacuum pump.
The vacuum source should have the following specifications:
Customers must provide a fitting that connects the vacuum source and the Echo Liquid Handler 
vacuum line. The supplied vacuum line is HercoBraid, 9.5 mm (3/8 in) ID, 9.5 mm (5/8 in) OD 
(RyanHerco P/N 0512-072).
A standalone Vacuubrand MZ 2S-NT vacuum system can be purchased from Beckman Coulter 
(Part #001-8104). This vacuum is a dual voltage/cycle compatible system.
The table below lists the specifications for the Vacuubrand MZ 2S-NT vacuum system:
House supply Minimum 200 Torr (266 mbar, 22 in Hg Vac) minimum 
pumping speed 8.0 m3/hr
Standalone vacuum with surge tank (10 L) 100 Torr (133 mbar, 26 in Hg Vac), minimum pumping speed 
2.0 m3/hr
Permissible ambient temperature 
storage/operation
14 to 140/50 - 104 F°  
-10 to +60/ +10 - +40 C°
Permissible relative atmospheric moisture 
during operation (no condensation)
30 to 85%
No-load speed 50/60 hZ 1500/1800 rpm
Device fuse Slow blow fuse 6.3 A
Maximum pumping speed 50/60 Hz 1.3/1.4 cfm  
2.2/2.4 m3/h
Ultimate vacuum (absolute) 5.2 Torr  
7 mbar
001-16479B     18
General Description
Component Description  
Figure 1.18  Vacuubrand MZ 2S-NT vacuum system
Surge Tank
A 10 L surge tank is standard with the Echo Liquid Handler system. When vacuum demand is at its 
highest, the surge tank ensures a continuous source of vacuum. It prevents system errors resulting 
from low vacuum in laboratories where house vacuum barely meets the minimum vacuum 
requirement or is inconsistent due to other laboratory demands. Surge tanks can be purchased 
separately (Part# 001-5150). For more information, contact Contact Information.
Maximum permissible outlet pressure 
(absolute)
29 psi  
2 bar
Maximum permissible different between 
inlet and outlet
29 psi  
2 bar
Rated motor power 0.24 hp  
0.18 kW
Maximum permissible range of supply 
voltage (+10%)
100-115 V ~50/60 Hz  
120 V ~ 60 Hz  
230 V ~50/60 Hz
Dual voltage motor 100-115 V ~50/60 Hz  
120 V ~ 60 Hz  
200- 230 V ~50/60 Hz
Maximum rated current at:  
100-115 V ~50/60 Hz, 120 V ~ 60 Hz  
200- 230 V ~50/60 Hz, 230 V ~50/60 Hz
 
3 A  
1.8 A
Inlet Hose nozzle for tubing I.D. 3/8 in Hose nozzle DN 10 mm
Outlet Silencer / G1/4 in
Dimensions L X W X H (approximate) 9.6 X 9.4 X 7.8 in  
243 X 239 X 198 mm
Weight (approximate) 24.2 lbs  
11 kg

001-16479B    19
General Description
Component Description  1
Figure 1.19  Surge Tank
Coupling Fluid
Fluid Chiller
The Echo Liquid Handler's peristaltic pump pushes the coupling fluid through the chiller to 
maintain the coupling fluid temperature.
Coupling fluid temperature control
The recommended Echo Liquid Handler coupling fluid temperature operating window is 22.1°C 
± 0.9°C. This temperature can be viewed in the System Status section of the Echo Client Utility. For 
more information, see Coupling Fluid Temperature and Indicator.
The nominal fluid chiller set point is 22.1°C. The chiller set point should be chosen so that the 
coupling fluid temperature is kept within the required operating window. Warmer or colder 
environmental conditions may require adjustment of this set point.
CAUTION
Incorrect fluid temperature can reduce the precision and accuracy of the fluid that 
is transferred, and potentially damage the acoustic transducer. Ensure that the 
chiller is correctly connected to the Echo instrument and is running at 
recommended temperature.
Chiller
The SMC chiller (P/N 001-11149) is included with your Echo system. The SMC chiller utilizes a 
stainless steel thermoelectric (Peltier) heat exchanger that regulates fluid temperature. The SMC 
chiller ships configured for operation with Echo Liquid Handlers:

001-16479B     20
General Description
Component Description  
Figure 1.20  SMC Chiller
 • Weight: 14 kg (31 lbs)
 • Dimensions:
— Width: 30 cm (11.8 in) plus fittings
— Depth: 34 cm (13.4 in)
— Height: 18 cm (36.4 in)
NOTE  The SMC chiller power is not connected to the Echo Stop circuit.
NOTE  The chiller tubing provided in the Accessory kit accommodates placing the SMC chiller up to 121.9 cm 
(48 in) from the Echo Liquid Handler.
A Beckman Coulter service representative will set up the chiller with the Echo System. Refer to the 
following sections for safety information, operation, and troubleshooting.
Power Supply The SMC chiller uses an auto switching power supply capable of running 
any single-phase AC voltage in the range 100-240V, 50-60 Hz
A power cord suitable for the install location is provided
Maximum power is 500W
Temperature Control The SMC chiller controls the temperature to +/- 0.02 °C by cooling and 
heating as appropriate
The SMC chiller is air cooled
Ambient Operating Conditions Temperature: 10-35 °C
Relative Humidity: 35-80%

001-16479B    21
General Description
Component Description  1
Safety Warnings and Precautions
The SMC chiller has been designed for safe operation. Observe all safety warnings and precautions 
in this section during maintenance, and normal operation of a chiller.
NOTE  If it is required to relocate the Echo Liquid Handler, contact us.
WARNING
 • Do not disassemble the chiller:
 • Do not disassemble the chiller:
— Access to internal componen ts can cause a shock hazard.
— Improper servicing can damage th e chiller unit and void the warranty.
 • Avoid strikes to the housing, vibrat ions, damage to the control panel , and 
contamination.
CAUTION
 • Do not operate the chiller above 35°C.
 • Do not store the chiller above 70°C.
 • Do not obstruct the rear air outlet an d cooling fans; restriction of air flow will 
impair performance. Maintain a minimum of 3 inch clearance around the rear 
air outlet and cooling fans.
Powering Down the Chiller
To power down the chiller, toggle the power switch to the O position. Wait a minimum of 3 seconds 
before turning the power back on.
NOTE  If the chiller will remain powered down for an extended period of time, drain the fluid from the interior. 
Store the chiller with the power cord and fluid lines disconnected.
Chiller Maintenance
It is recommended to inspect the chiller periodically to ensure there are no leaks.
It is also recommended to periodically inspect the air inlet/outlet and cooling fins to make sure they 
are not obstructed by dust. Remove an accumulated dust using a vacuum cleaner.
NOTE  Do not use liquid cleaners in the air inlet/outlet and cooling fins.
Chiller Troubleshooting
The SMC chiller utilizes a stainless steel thermoelectric (Peltier) heat exchanger to regulate 
coupling fluid temperature. If the coupling fluid temperature at the Echo Liquid Handler is poorly 
controlled, and there are no errors at the chiller, check for any flow obstructions, such as a kink in 
the tubing or a blocked filter.
In case a power cord replacement is required, order the correct Echo Liquid Handler power cord for 
your region since the chiller power cord is the same as the Echo Liquid Handler power cord.
In cases where a chiller error occurs, the chiller control panel displays an error code. See the table 
below for details on error codes, descriptions, and corresponding user actions.
001-16479B     22
General Description
Component Description  
For additional information on the SMC chiller maintenance procedures, refer to the SMC chiller 
manual.
Coupling Fluid Bottle
The Echo system comes with a 1000 mL coupling fluid bottle.
Figure 1.21  Coupling fluid bottle
Error 
Code
Description User Action
WRN Temperature Limit Warning Check that the heat load from the Echo Liquid Handler is normal 
and ambient temperatures are in specified range.
ERR01 System Error Toggle the chiller power using the switch on the front panel. If the 
unit does not recover, contact us.
ERR02 System Error Toggle the chiller power using the switch on the front panel. If the 
unit does not recover, contact us.
ERR03 System Error Toggle the chiller power using the switch on the front panel. If the 
unit does not recover, contact us.
ERR11 DC Power Supply Failure Check the input voltage to the chiller.  
Check for obstruction of the cooling fan (visible through the air 
inlet).
ERR12 Internal overheat temperature 
sensor has tripped
Check that the ambient conditions are in range and there is good 
airflow around the chiller.
ERR13 Internal low temperature 
sensor has tripped
Check that the ambient conditions are in range and there is good 
airflow around the chiller.
ERR14 Thermostat Alarm Contact us.
ERR15 Thermal Overload This can occur even if the warning limits are not reached when the 
chiller cannot change the temperature to the setpoint at 100% 
heating/cooling output. 
 
Check that the heat load from the Echo Liquid Handler is normal 
and ambient temperatures are in specified range.

001-16479B    23
General Description
Component Description  1
The Echo Liquid Handler detects if the coupling fluid bottle falls below a specific level. If the sensor 
indicates that the fluid has fallen below the minimum level, a low fluid volume alert warning is sent 
to the Echo server. For information on how to refill coupling fluid, see Echo Coupling Fluid 
Maintenance.
Figure 1.22  Coupling fluid bottle and sensor connections
The table below describes the callouts for the coupling fluid sensor in the bottle holder.
NOTE  Coupling fluid bottle should be pressed against the sensor located in the adjustable metal bracket to 
ensure that it works correctly.
Compressed Air
Junair Compressor (Optional and sold separately by Beckman Coulter)
The Echo Liquid Handler requires a compressed air source that provides clean, filtered, oil-free, dry 
air at 552 kPa (80 PSI) minimum and 1034 kPa (150 PSI) maximum. The Junair OF302-4B oil-less 
compressor can be purchased from Beckman Coulter (Part # varies dependent on geography.)
The user must also provide a fitting between the compressed air supply and the Echo Liquid 
Handler. Beckman Coulter provides the compressed air line and fitting with the Echo Liquid 
Handler, but the customer must provide a source compatible with 170 in ID/.250 in OD tubing.
The table below lists the specifications for the Junair OF302-4B compressor:
Table 1.13  Callout table for Coupling fluid bottle and sensor
Callout Number Name Description
1 Coupling fluid sensor The coupling fluid sensor monitors the level of the fluid in the 
coupling fluid bottle and sends a warning to the Echo server if 
the level falls below a certain threshold.
2 Coupling fluid bottle 1000 mL coupling fluid bottle
Voltage V 100 100 120 200 200 230 230 3x400 3x440
Frequency Hz 50 60 60 50 60 50 60 50 60
001-16479B     24
General Description
Component Description  
Figure 1.23  Junair OF302-4B oil-less compressor
Connector Panel
The Connector panel contains tubing and hose connections to the following components:
Motor HP 0.60 0.60 0.60 0.60 0.60 0.60 0.60 0.60 0.60
kW 0.44 0.44 0.44 0.44 0.44 0.44 0.44 0.44 0.44
Displacement I/min 108 138 138 108 138 108 138 108 138
CFM 3.81 4.87 4.87 3.81 4.87 3.81 4.87 3.81 4.87
FAD @ 8 bar l/min 38 44 44 38 44 38 44 38 44
CFM 1.34 1.55 1.55 1.34 1.55 1.34 1.55 1.34 1.55
Maximum 
pressure
bar 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8
psi 120 120 120 120 120 120 120 120 120
Maximum current A 7.5 8.7 6.6 4.1 4.6 3.4 4.1 1.4 1.4
Tank size liters 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4
gallon 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1 1.1
Weight kg 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 22 22
lbs 49 49 49 49 49 49 49 49 49
Noise level dB (A)/lm 65 66 66 65 66 65 66 65 66
Thermal 
protection
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
Duty cycle 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%

001-16479B    25
General Description
Component Description  1
Figure 1.24  Connector panel (Left - Without tubing) and (Right - With tubing)
The table below describes the callouts for the Connector Panel.
NOTE  Beckman Coulter provides the 001-15272 accessory kit with all the necessary connectors and tubing.
Table 1.14  Callout table for Connector Panel
Callout Number Name Description
1 Vacuum line See Vacuum Pump (Optional and sold separately by Beckman 
Coulter)
2 Water out to Chiller See Chiller
3 Water in from Chiller See Chiller
4 Compressed air line in See Junair Compressor (Optional and sold separately by 
Beckman Coulter)

001-16479B     26
General Description
Component Description  
Figure 1.25  Accessory Kit
The table below describes the components included in the Accessory Kit and their descriptions.
Table 1.15  Callout table for Accessory Kit
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Chiller tubing The chiller tubing provides the coupling fluid circulation path between the 
Echo Liquid Handler and the chiller.
The tubing is sufficiently long to enable the chiller to be placed on the floor 
below the Echo Liquid Handler (for reduced vibration and good ventilation).
2 Compressed air 
connector
The compressed air connector connects an external air supply to the Echo 
Liquid Handler. (Coupling, LC Series, Part # 001-3061)
Use clean, dry air. Air pressure must be between 80 to 150 psi.
3 Compressed air 
tubing
4.6 meters (15 ft) of Polyurethane tubing, 6.35 mm (0.25 in) OD, 4.24 mm 
(0.170 in) ID (Part # 001-2430)
4 Vacuum tubing Tubing, Wire Reinforced, 3/8" x 5/8" (Part # 001-5025)
5 Vacuum 
connector
The vacuum connector shown below connects the Echo Liquid Handler to a 
user supplied vacuum source. Coupling, HFC Series (Part # 001-3060)
6 Surge tank 
connector
The surge tank connector is used to connect to a 10 L surge tank which comes 
standard with the Echo Liquid Handler. When vacuum demand is at its 
highest, the surge tank ensures the Echo Liquid Handler receives a continuous 
source of vacuum. It prevents system errors resulting from low vacuum in 
laboratories where house vacuum barely meets the minimum vacuum 
requirement or is inconsistent due to other laboratory demands.
7 1 Liter coupling 
fluid bottle
The bottle is used to store the coupling fluid that will circulate through the 
acoustic transducer to maintain constant temperature and transfer acoustic 
energy to the well.
8 Nose cone 
assembly
The nose cone assembly includes the Stop cap and the nose cone plug on an 
orange lanyard. This is used during the storage mode procedure when the 
Echo Liquid Handler is shut down for an extended time.

001-16479B    27
General Description
Component Description  1
Client PC (Sold separately by Beckman Coulter)
Client PC specifications:
 • Software license key from Beckman Coulter Inc.
 • Computer system meeting the following requirements:
— Operating system: Microsoft Windows 10 64-bit, (must be run in Windows 7 Compatibility 
Mode); Microsoft .Net Framework 4.6
— CPU: Intel® Core™ i5 or later
— Memory: 4 GB or greater
— Network connection: 2 x 10/100/1000 BaseT
— Network protocol: TCP/IP
— Hard drive: 4 GB Free Space Available
— Video: Minimum 1600 x 1200 resolution
Included Accessories:
 • Microsoft Office 2016
 • Monitor, 22 in, DVI-D/DP/VGA
 • USB Keyboard, Black
 • USB Optical Mouse
 • Beckman Coulter Mousepad
Software specifications:
Optionally, the following Echo software applications are available for purchase:
 • Echo Plate Reformat
 • Echo Dose-Response
 • Echo Cherry Pick
 • Echo Array Maker
 • Echo Plate Audit
 • Echo Combination Screen
NOTE  Echo 650 Series Liquid Handlers require Echo software applications version 1.8 or higher.
9 Valve Valve used to shut off air supply to the Echo Liquid Handler during the storage 
mode procedure.
10 Graduated 
squeeze bottle
Graduated squeeze bottle used to add Ultrapure water to the basin of the 
transducer assembly during the storage mode procedure.
Table 1.15  Callout table for Accessory Kit
Callout 
Number
Name Description
001-16479B     28
General Description
Component Description  
Customer Responsibilities
The customer is responsible for installing, configuring, and securing the Windows 10 operating 
system on their computer, including the creation of any user accounts and password complexity 
rules that may apply, and the application of any software patches and security updates that are 
necessary to keep the system secure. The customer is also responsible for installing anti-virus and 
anti-malware software and keeping the virus definitions from the vendor up to date so as to keep 
the computer safe.
The Echo application software accepts certain inputs, such as Sample ID and Sample Name, which 
the user might populate with personally identifiable information.  Furthermore, the Echo 
application software uses those inputs to generate reports that are stored unencrypted on the disk.  
Accordingly, it is the responsibility of the customer to ensure that the information provided to the 
Echo application, and subsequent reports that are stored on the disk, do not contain any personally 
identifiable information, or that the information is obfuscated or encrypted when stored on the 
disk to comply with any applicable regulations related to data privacy and security.
001-16479B    2-1
CHAPTER 2
Installation and Relocation
Beckman Coulter installs the Echo Liquid Handler and Echo Client Utility for the customer. 
However, site preparation and additional software installation are the customer’s responsibility.
This chapter covers pre-installation requirements, additional software installation, and instrument 
relocation.
It also provides a brief overview of the shipment contents and installation steps performed by 
Beckman Coulter field engineers.
Pre-Installation Requirements
Site Requirements
Refer to CHAPTER 5, Site Requirements.
User Supplied Equipment Requirements
Refer to CHAPTER 5, User Supplied Equipment Requirements.
Echo Liquid Handler Components
The following components are included with the Echo Liquid Handler:
Vacuum line HercoBraid, 9.5 mm (3/8 in) ID, 9.5 mm (5/8 in) OD (RyanHerco P/N 0512-072)
HFCD 17612 coupling body (Colder Products)
Vacuum Surge Tank 
Assembly
(Optional) Usage dependent on configuration, but included with the Echo (P/N 
001-5150)
Compressed air line 4.6 meters (15 ft) of polyurethane tubing; 6.35 mm (0.25 in) OD, 4.24 mm 
(0.170 in) ID (SMC Pneumatics P/N TIUB07-BU)
LCD 13004 coupling body (Colder Products).
Coupling fluid bottle 1 L (P/N 001-5438)
Accessory kit Includes tubing and power cord for connecting the chiller (P/N 001-15272)
SMC chiller P/N 001-11149
Ethernet cable Crossover, 3 meters (10 ft)
Software Echo Client Utility installer provided on CD or USB drive
001-16479B     2-2
Installation and Relocation
Installation Overview  
Installation Overview
The Beckman Coulter Echo Liquid Handler is installed by Beckman Coulter field engineers. The 
following is a brief overview of the hardware and software installation steps they perform:
1 Unpack the Echo Liquid Handler and place it in the area that meets the minimum operating 
space requirement.
2 Connect the Echo Liquid Handler to AC power, air pressure, vacuum pressure, surge tank, 
coupling fluid bottle, and the coupling fluid chiller.
3 Fill the coupling fluid bottle and prime the coupling fluid circuit.
4 Perform a basic functional check of the Echo Liquid Handler.
5 Perform the Site Acceptance Test (SAT) process (optional).
6 Change the Echo IP address if a different IP address is required by your system administrator.
7 Install the Echo Client Utility onto the customer-supplied PC (client workstation).
8 Connect the client PC to the Echo Liquid Handler and verify communications.
001-16479B    2-3
Installation and Relocation
Echo Client Utility Installation  2
Figure 2.1  Installed system
The table below describes the installed system.
Echo Client Utility Installation
Beckman Coulter installs the Echo Client Utility onto the client PC that is connected to the Echo 
Liquid Handler. If you need to install the software onto additional computers, such as network PCs, 
Table 2.1  Callout table for Installed System
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Echo Liquid 
Handler
Echo 650 Series Liquid Handler
2 Surge Tank The surge tank is included with the Echo but not required. The surge tank should 
be used when the house vacuum does not support the volumetric flow required 
by the Echo.
3 Chiller Chiller fluid lines are at the back of the chiller used to connect to Echo Liquid 
Handler.
4 Client PC Client PC used to run client applications to connect to the Echo Liquid Handler.

001-16479B     2-4
Installation and Relocation
Echo Client Utility Installation  
use the instructions provided in this section. See Multi-Client Considerations for advantages and 
disadvantages of connecting more than one workstation.
NOTE  If you are connecting the Echo Liquid Handler to a LAN via a hub, switch, or router, use a standard 
ethernet cable. If you are connecting the Echo Liquid Handler directly to a workstation, use the included 
“cross-over” Ethernet cable.
Install the Echo Client Utility
To install Echo Client Utility:
1 Locate the Echo Client Utility installer file, EchoClientUtilitySetup.exe.
2 Double-click the installer to start the installation.
3 Click Next.
4 Select I accept the terms in the license agreement and click Next.
5 Click Install to complete the installation.
6 Click Finish to close the installer.
Uninstall the Echo Client Utility
If you need to uninstall the Echo Client Utility, use the following procedure:
1 Click the Start button on the Windows Taskbar.
2 Point to Settings and select Control Panel.
3 Double-click Add Or Remove Programs.
4 Select Echo Client Utility and click Remove.
001-16479B    2-5
Installation and Relocation
Instrument Relocation  2
Upgrade the Echo Client Utility
Contact us for the most current version of the Echo Client Utility.
Instrument Relocation
Beckman Coulter recommends contacting Service and Support if you need to move the Echo Liquid 
Handler. If the customer moves the Echo Liquid Handler without contacting Beckman Coulter 
Service and Support first, any resulting damage to the instrument is the customer’s responsibility.
001-16479B     2-6
Installation and Relocation
Instrument Relocation  
001-16479B    3-1
CHAPTER 3
Software
What types of liquid transfers are supported?
The Echo Liquid Handler supports a variety of simple to complex microplate liquid transfer 
protocols. Fluid transfer protocols can be defined with the Echo Applications software packages 
(Echo Plate Reformat, Echo Cherry Pick, Echo Dose-Response, Echo Plate Audit, Echo Array Maker, 
and Echo Combination Screen), as well as with the extensive ActiveX control library defined in the 
Echo Software Development Kit (Echo SDK). These protocols can specify virtually any combination 
of transfers from source microplate wells to destination wells and slides. Refer to the Echo 
Application Guides and the Echo Integration Guide for more information.
The bundled Echo Client Utility is used to execute maintenance functionalities, define labware and 
control basic Echo Liquid Handler functions.
Startup/Shutdown
Before proceeding, ensure the hardware and client PC software installations are complete. All fluid, 
air, and electrical connections should be complete and functioning. Your Beckman Coulter field 
engineer performs a set of function tests to ensure that the system is operating correctly.
Turn on Echo Power
Turn on the Echo Liquid Handler by pressing the AC power switch located on the back panel.
NOTE  It is recommended to wait 60 seconds for the Echo Server to boot before using the Echo Client Utility 
to connect to the Echo Liquid Handler. Or please wait 10 seconds after the system has initialized before 
trying to connect with the Echo Client Utility.
Possible causes for connection failure include:
 • The Echo Liquid Handler has not completed its initialization.
— Check the LCD Screen. It will read SYSTEM READY if initialization completed. If the Echo 
Liquid Handler is initialized under Storage Mode, The LCD screen will read STORAGE 
MODE when initialization is complete.
 • The Ethernet cable is not connected between the client PC and the Echo Liquid Handler.
 • The Echo Client Utility is not configured to connect to the instrument (IP address or hostname 
is missing or incorrect).
Check for the cause, attempt to resolve the problem, and try to launch the software again. If the 
message persists, contact us.
001-16479B     3-2
Software
Startup/Shutdown  
Echo Initialization
The Echo Liquid Handler performs a system initialization that includes the following actions:
NOTE  The initialization sequence is applicable when the Echo Liquid Handler is not in Storage Mode. If the 
Echo Liquid Handler is in Storage Mode, stage movement is prohibited.
 • All three stages move to their home position:
— Source stage moves front to rear on its Y axis.
— Destination stage moves left to right on its X axis, front to rear on its Y axis, up and down 
on its Z axis, and partially rotates on its theta axis.
— Acoustic transducer stage moves left to right on its X axis, front to rear on its Y axis, and 
up and down on its Z axis.
NOTE  The LCD screen reports each step of the homing sequence as it occurs. Homing synchronizes the 
mechanical stages with the controlling software.
 • Door opens.
 • Destination stage extends, rotates slightly, then retracts
 • Door closes.
 • Upper anti-static bar moves to its uppermost position, then both anti-static bars turn off.
 • Plate dryer nozzle moves to the down position.
 • Coupling fluid nozzle moves to the down position.
 • Power lamp turns on (green).
 • Warning lamp turns off (yellow to clear).
 • Fault lamp turns off (red to clear).
 • Coupling fluid pump turns on.
 • Power to the RF amplifier turns on.
If the Echo Liquid Handler is initialized in Storage Mode, see Extended Storage for more 
information.
Echo Liquid Handler Warm-Up
The Echo Liquid Handler requires a warm-up period after the power is turned on. The RF amplifier 
and the acoustic transducer must reach a stable operating temperature. If the instrument has been 
off for an extended period of time, a 60 minute warm-up period is recommended to allow all 
components to reach proper operating temperatures.
Launch Echo Client Utility
The Echo Client Utility can be launched by either of the following methods:
 • From the desktop, locate and double-click on the Echo Client Utility icon to start the 
application.
001-16479B    3-3
Software
Startup/Shutdown  3
Figure 3.1  Starting the Echo Client Utility from the Windows Desktop
 • From the start menu, go to Start > Beckman Coulter > Echo Client Utility.
Once the Echo Client Utility is launched, enter the IP address or hostname for the Echo instrument 
you want to connect to and click Connect.
Figure 3.2  Echo Client Utility Connect to Instrument dialog box
Turn Off Echo Power
WARNING
The Echo 650 Series Liquid Handler is designed to remain on all of the time as it is 
critical that the transducer lens remains wet. This is assured by enabling the 
coupling fluid pump to continually run at an idle rate while the instrument is 
inactive.
You may need to power off the Echo Liquid Handler for any of the following reasons:
 • Extended periods of non-use

001-16479B     3-4
Software
Startup/Shutdown  
 • Service or repair, performed by qualified Beckman Coulter Service and Support
 • Power interruptions, such as scheduled facility power interruptions
 • Moving it to a new location
When you need to turn the power off, use the following procedure:
1 Launch the Echo Client Utility.
2 Connect to the desired Echo Liquid Handler.
3 Verify there are no plates in the Echo Liquid Handler. If plates are found, use the Extend and 
Retract buttons in the Echo Client Utility to remove the plates.
NOTE  In the Load Plate dialog box, select Retract None. This retracts the plate gripper.
4 In the Controls tab, go to the Instrument Control section and click Power. The Echo Liquid 
Handler Shut Down dialog box is displayed.
Figure 3.3  Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box
5 In the Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box, select an option based on how long you plan 
to shut down the Echo Liquid Handler.
 • Short Term Storage: You plan to shut down the Echo Liquid Handler for less than four days.

001-16479B    3-5
Software
Startup/Shutdown  3
 • Extended Storage: You plan to shut down the Echo Liquid Handler for more than four days 
but less than fourteen days.
 • Long Term Storage: You plan to shut down the Echo Liquid Handler for more than fourteen 
days, contact us to arrange for the transducer to be fully capped.
Short Term Storage
If you plan to shut down the Echo Liquid Handler for less than four days use the Short Term 
Storage procedure.
After performing the steps indicated in Turn Off Echo Power, proceed with the steps below.
Short Term Storage Procedure
1 In the Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box, select the Short Term Storage radio 
button.
Figure 3.4  Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box
2 Click the Proceed button.
3 An Echo Shutdown dialog box is displayed. Click Yes to shut down the Echo PC and exit the 
Echo Client Utility.

001-16479B     3-6
Software
Startup/Shutdown  
4 Turn off the Echo Liquid Handler using the AC power switch on the back at the instrument.
Short Term Storage Recovery Procedure
Follow the steps in the Turn on Echo Power topic to recover the Echo Liquid Handler from short 
term storage.
Extended Storage
If you plan to shut down the Echo Liquid Handler for more than four days but less than fourteen 
days use the Extended Storage procedure.
After performing the steps indicated in Turn Off Echo Power, ensure you have the materials list 
below and then proceed with the Extended Storage procedure steps.
Required Materials (provided by Beckman Coulter)
 • Echo Server version 3.1.x
 • Echo Client Utility version 3.1.x
 • Red nose cone plug attached to an orange lanyard with red cap
 • Valve on the air supply line to the Echo 650 Series Liquid Handler
 • Graduated squeeze bottle containing at least 20 mL of Ultrapure water
Extended Storage Procedure
1 In the Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box, select the Extended Storage radio button 
to shut down the Echo Liquid Handler for more than four days but less than fourteen days.
001-16479B    3-7
Software
Startup/Shutdown  3
Figure 3.5  Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box
2 Click Proceed to begin the shut down procedure for the Echo Liquid Handler. This action 
triggers the door to the Echo Liquid Handler to close and the stages to be moved to the storage 
position. Once the stages are in the storage position, the door to the Echo Liquid Handler is 
opened.
NOTE  You can click the Cancel button at any of the prompts if needed and the Echo Liquid Handler will 
return to it's previous state. This may require stages to move again.
NOTE  If plates are detected in the Echo Liquid Handler, a Labware Detected dialog box will be 
displayed. This dialog box indicates The system has detected plate(s) inside the Echo Liquid 
Handler. Please remove all labware from the instrument prior to Extended Shut-down. Once 
you have safely removed plates, restart the Extended Storage Procedure. For information on how 
to remove the plates, see Turn Off Echo Power.
3 Carefully read the instructions in the Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box. Pay special 
attention to the steps required after the instrument has been powered down.
4 Click Finish to close and exit the Echo Client Utility and to power down the Echo Server. This 
triggers the Echo PC to shut down and the Echo Liquid Handler door to close.

001-16479B     3-8
Software
Startup/Shutdown  
Figure 3.6  Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box
5 Once the instrument LCD screen reads Storage Mode, turn off the AC Power Switch located on 
the back of the Echo Liquid Handler.
6 Once the instrument is fully powered down, locate the valve on the air supply at the back of the 
instrument.
7 Turn the valve to shut off air supply to the Echo Liquid Handler. This allows the user to open 
the door of the Echo Liquid Handler.
Figure 3.7  Turning Valve on the Air Supply

001-16479B    3-9
Software
Startup/Shutdown  3
8 Gently push the door down.
9 The nose cone should be accessible from the door through the center of the source stage. The 
nose cone plug assembly is comprised of a red plug with an orange string attached to a red cap.
Figure 3.8  Nose Cone Assembly
The table below describes the parts of the nose cone assembly.
10 Locate the cap end of the nose cone plug assembly and cap the Stop button at the front of the 
Echo Liquid Handler. The cap should slide into place without engaging the Stop.
Table 3.1  Callout table for Nose Cone Assembly
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Stop cap Red Stop cap is used to cap the Stop button during storage mode.
2 Nose cone plug Red nose cone plug is used to cap the nose cone during storage mode.
3 Lanyard Orange lanyard connects Stop cap and nose cone plug.

001-16479B     3-10
Software
Startup/Shutdown  
Figure 3.9  Echo Liquid Handler with Stop cap
11 Ensure that the cap is securely seated on the Stop button. This cap secures the plug assembly 
when the Echo Liquid Handler door closes.
12 Insert the red plug into the nose cone. Ensure the red plug is secure in the nose cone and that 
the string to the plug is not tangled.
Figure 3.10  Nose cone with red plug inserted
13 Using a graduated squeeze bottle, dispense approximately 20 mL of Ultrapure water into the 
basin of the transducer assembly (white container).

001-16479B    3-11
Software
Startup/Shutdown  3
Figure 3.11  Transducer assembly
The table below describes the parts of the transducer assembly.
NOTE  Overflow of the basin can occur if more than 20 mL of fluid is delivered into the basin. To ensure 
that the transducer assembly is not overfilled, the Ultrapure water should be filled so that it's level 
is below the overflow sensor (gold pins).
14 Turn on the valve for air to be restored to the Echo Liquid Handler. The door to the Echo Liquid 
Handler will close.
NOTE  Keep fingers away from the door as the door may close abruptly.
15 The Echo Liquid Handler can remain in this state for up to 14 days. Please contact us if long-
term storage (more than 14 days) is required.
Extended Storage Recovery Procedure
Before turning on the Echo Liquid Handler, the red plug on the nose cone must be removed to 
restore Echo operations.
Table 3.2  Callout table for Transducer Assembly
Callout Number Name Description
1 Basin Transducer basin that user will add Ultrapure water into during Storage 
Mode procedure.
2 Nose cone Nose cone that needs to be plugged with the red nose cone cap during the 
Storage Mode procedure.
3 Overflow 
sensor
The overflow sensor is the gold pins shown. When filling the Ultrapure water 
during the Storage Mode procedure, make sure that the water level is below 
the overflow sensor.

001-16479B     3-12
Software
Startup/Shutdown  
1 Before powering up the Echo Liquid Handler, locate the valve that supplies air into the Echo 
Liquid Handler.
2 Turn off the valve. This allows the door to the Echo Liquid Handler to be opened.
3 Push down the door on the Echo Liquid Handler.
4 There should be a red plug sealing the nose cone. The red plug is attached to a cap on the Stop 
button at the front of the Echo.
5 Pull out the red plug.
6 Remove the cap on the Stop button.
7 Check that the Stop is disengaged.
8 Store the nose cone plug assembly in a safe location for future use.
9 Turn on the valve to restore air to the Echo Liquid Handler.
NOTE  The door will close. Keep fingers away from the door as the door may close abruptly.
10 Turn on the Echo Liquid Handler using the AC Power switch at the back of the instrument.
11 The Echo Liquid Handler will go through an initialization phase. Upon completion, the LCD on 
the instrument will show Storage Mode.
12 Go to the client PC and launch Echo Client Utility.
13 Connect to the desired Echo Liquid Handler.
14 If the Echo Liquid Handler is in Storage Mode, a dialog box will be displayed to guide the user 
through the steps to recover from Storage Mode. Please read the instructions carefully and 
ensure that you have followed the pre-requisites listed before proceeding.
001-16479B    3-13
Software
Startup/Shutdown  3
Figure 3.12  Echo Liquid Handler Storage Mode Recovery dialog box
NOTE  Before clicking the Recover button to exit Storage Mode, please check that the nose cone plug 
has been removed.
15 Click the Recover button to begin the process to take the Echo Liquid Handler out of Storage 
Mode.
16 Select the appropriate radio button to indicate if the red nose cone plug is in the Echo Liquid 
Handler or not.
 • If nose cone plug is present in the instrument, select the A nose cone plug IS present in 
the instrument option and click Proceed. This step will trigger the Echo Liquid Handler to 
shut down and the Echo Client Utility to exit. The Echo PC will shut down. Turn off the AC 
Power Switch located on the back of the Echo Liquid Handler. Refer back to step 1 of the 
Extended Storage Recovery Procedure to remove the red nose cone plug assembly.

001-16479B     3-14
Software
Startup/Shutdown  
Figure 3.13  Echo Liquid Handler Storage Mode Recovery dialog box
 • If nose cone plug is not present in the instrument, select the A nose cone plug IS NOT 
present in the instrument option and click Proceed. This step will trigger the storage 
mode recovery process.
Figure 3.14  Echo Liquid Handler Storage Mode Recovery dialog box
1. Click Finish to exit the Echo Liquid Handler Storage Mode Recovery dialog box. This 
action triggers a prompt to request for the stages to be homed.

001-16479B    3-15
Software
Startup/Shutdown  3
Figure 3.15  Echo Liquid Handler Storage Mode Recovery dialog box
2. The Home Stages dialog box prompts the user to home the stages. Click OK to home 
the stages.
Figure 3.16  Home Stages dialog box
3. After the stages are homed, the Echo Liquid Handler can be used in regular operations.
NOTE  Beckman Coulter recommends waiting approximately 60 minutes to allow components 
to reach proper operating temperatures prior to using the Echo Liquid Handler instrument.
NOTE  If you closed the Echo Liquid Handler Storage Mode Recovery dialog box before completing the 
Storage Mode recovery process, you will observe that most Echo Client Utility functions will be 
disabled. To enable these functions, you must recover from Storage Mode. To reload the Echo Liquid 
Handler Storage Mode Recovery dialog box, on the bottom-right of the Echo Client Utility, click 
Storage Mode (Click to recover) highlighted in yellow. The Echo Liquid Handler Storage Mode 
Recovery dialog box will be loaded and you can follow Extended Storage Recovery Procedure steps to 
recover from Storage Mode.

001-16479B     3-16
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Long Term Storage
Long Term Storage Procedure
1 If you have already started the steps indicated in Turn Off Echo Power, click the Cancel button 
to exit the Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box.
Figure 3.17  Echo Liquid Handler Shut Down dialog box
2 Contact us to arrange for the transducer to be fully capped. For contact information, see 
Contact Information.
Echo Client Utility
The Echo Liquid Handler comes with the Echo Client Utility that provides a Windows-based 
graphical user interface (GUI). This application enables the user to control the Echo Liquid Handler 
and execute many functions which are listed below:
 • Main Window - Contains tabs to manage the Echo Liquid Handler, an instrument control 
section, a system status section, Echo log section, Echo Information section, and the file export 
location.
 • Controls Tab - Enables the user to home stages on the Echo Liquid Handler, and turn the coupler 
pump, plate dryer, and anti-static bars on and off.
 • Focus Tab - Enables the user to perform acoustic transducer related calibration procedures.

001-16479B    3-17
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
 • Labware Tab - Enables the user to create new destination plates, and edit or delete existing 
destination plate definitions.
 • Survey Tab - Enables the user to set and change survey transfer options.
 • Service Tab - Enables Beckman Coulter service personnel to make changes to the Echo Liquid 
Handler. This tab should not be used unless directed by Beckman Coulter service personnel.
 • Fluid Replacement Tab - Guides the user through the process to replace the coupling fluid.
Main Window
The Echo Client Utility opens in the Main window. The Main window shows tabs for each major 
function that the user can switch between. The Echo Liquid Handler instrument control section, 
System Status section, Echo Log section, and Status bar are always shown regardless of the tab 
selected.
When the Echo Client Utility is closed, the last selected tab by the user is saved. When the user starts 
the Echo Client Utility again, the last selected tab is displayed.
Figure 3.18  Echo Client Utility - Main Window
The table below describes the buttons/fields or sections in the Main Window and their 
functionality.

001-16479B     3-18
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Source Plate In/Out and Presence
The source plate gripper stage can be commanded to extend outside or to retract back inside the 
Echo Liquid Handler by clicking the eject plate and retract plate buttons. If the door is closed when 
the source plate is commanded to extend outside of the Echo Liquid Handler, the door will 
automatically be opened first.
Table 3.3  Callout table for the Echo Client Utility Main Window
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 File Menu Enables the user to connect to a different Echo Liquid Handler, set 
preferences, download the system state, view the user guide, view the 
About Echo Client Utility dialog box, and exit the Echo Client Utility.
2 Tabs Each tab enables different functions for using the Echo Liquid Handler.
 • Controls:  Enables the user to home stages on the Echo Liquid 
Handler, and turn the coupling fluid pump, plate dryer, and antistatic 
bars on and off. Also provides system functions, such as shutting 
down or restarting the instrument.
 •F o c u s : Enables the user to perform acoustic transducer related 
calibration procedures.
 •L a b w a r e : Shows a list of pre-defined types of microplates. You can 
select these microplates during the creation of a protocol. From this 
tab, you can also create additional destination microplates and edit or 
delete existing destination plate definitions.
 •S u r v e y : The Survey procedure performs an acoustic survey of the 
fluid in the loaded source plate.
 • Service:  Enables calibration procedures for microplate registration 
and power modulation. Also enables bypassing plate sensors and 
adjusting system gain.
 • Fluid Replacement:  Guides the user through the coupling fluid 
replacement process.
3 Echo Liquid Handler 
instrument control 
section
Enables the user to load a plate, flip or retract the plate gripper, and open 
or close the door.
 •S o u r c e  P l a t e : Enables user to load source plate, select plate format, 
plate type, or retract the plate gripper.
 • Destination Plate:  Enables user to load a destination plate, select 
plate type, and retract/flip the plate gripper.
 •D o o r : Enables the user to open and close the door.
4 System Status 
section
Enables the user to monitor the current overall status of the Echo Liquid 
Handler through ten status indicators and two internal Echo Liquid 
Handler temperature values.
5 Echo Log section Enables the user to view a running log of the Echo Liquid Handler and 
enables the user to copy the content in the log.
6 Status bar The status bar displays Echo Liquid Handler connection information, such 
as instrument name, serial number, and the version of the Echo Server 
software. The Export Location indicates where files will be exported from 
the Echo Client Utility.
001-16479B    3-19
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
To load a source plate:
1 In the Main Window, click the Eject Plate button in the Source Plate section to extend the 
plate gripper.
If the source plate gripper is extended, the label next to the Retract Plate button will display 
Gripper Extended.
2 When the source plate gripper stage is commanded to retract into the Echo Liquid Handler, the 
Load Source Plate dialog box opens. Select the plate format and plate type being loaded and 
click OK to load the plate.
Figure 3.19  Load Source Plate dialog box
3 If you would like to retract the source plate gripper instead of loading a plate, click Retract 
None and the gripper stage is retracted and the dialog box is closed.
There is also a Source Plate Presence Indicator light that reports the presence of a microplate 
loaded onto the plate gripper.
The table below describes the different states for the Source Plate Presence Indicator.

001-16479B     3-20
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Destination Plate In/Out and Presence
The destination plate gripper stage can be commanded to extend outside or to retract back inside 
the Echo Liquid Handler. If the door is closed when the destination plate is commanded to extend 
outside of the Echo Liquid Handler, the door will be automatically opened first. The destination 
plate gripper can also be commanded to flip so that it is either in the inverted or upright position. 
The Flip button allows the user to invert the destination plate gripper to confirm that a plate will 
be gripped, and is only available when the destination plate gripper is outside the Echo Liquid 
Handler.
To load a destination plate:
1 In the Main Window, click the Eject Plate button in the Destination Plate section to extend 
the plate gripper.
Table 3.4  Callout table for Source Plate Presence Indicator
Status Conditions Displayed
Green Indicates a plate is present. The plate type specified by 
the user matches the plate type reported by the Echo 
Liquid Handler.
Green If the source plate gripper is retracted with None, and 
the Echo Liquid Handler indicates a plate is present on 
the gripper.
NOTE  In this case, a warning dialog box is displayed 
with the following message: While you requested 
to retract 'None', an actual source plate was 
loaded in Echo!
Gray Indicates the plate type retracted by the user matches 
the plate type reported by the Echo Liquid Handler, but 
the source plate sensor does not detect a plate.
NOTE  In this case, a warning dialog box is displayed 
with the following message: Requested Source 
Plate Type ‘384PP_DMSO2' was not loaded in 
Echo!
Gray Indicates the source plate gripper is extended.
Gray Indicates source plate is not loaded. The source plate 
gripper is retracted without a plate.

001-16479B    3-21
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
If the destination plate gripper is extended, the label next to the Retract Plate button will 
display Gripper Extended.
2 When the destination plate gripper stage is commanded to retract into the Echo Liquid 
Handler, the Load Destination Plate dialog box opens. Select the plate type being loaded and 
click OK to load the plate.
Figure 3.20  Load Destination Plate dialog box
3 When the destination plate gripper stage is commanded to retract into the Echo Liquid 
Handler, the Load Destination Plate dialog box opens. Select the plate type being loaded and 
click OK to load the plate.
The Flip button can be used to invert the destination plate gripper when the gripper is outside the 
Echo Liquid Handler. When the destination plate gripper is outside the Echo Liquid Handler, click 
Flip to invert the destination plate gripper. The Flip button is only visible if the destination plate 
gripper is outside the Echo Liquid Handler.
NOTE  This action is automatic when retracting a destination plate using the Eject/Retract button.
There is also a Destination Plate Presence indicator light that reports the presence of a microplate 
loaded onto the plate gripper.
The table below describes the different states for the Destination Plate Presence Indicator.

001-16479B     3-22
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Door Open/Close
The Echo door can be manually opened and closed by selecting the Open or Close buttons.
Figure 3.21  
If either the source or destination plate gripper stage is extended outside of the Echo Liquid Handler 
when the door is commanded to close, a Door Control Error dialog box is displayed.
Table 3.5  Callout table for Destination Plate Presence Indicator
Status Conditions Displayed
Green Indicates plate is present. The plate type specified by the 
user matches the plate type reported by the Echo Liquid 
Handler.
Green If the destination plate gripper is retracted with None, 
and the Echo Liquid Handler indicates a plate is present 
on the gripper.
NOTE  In this case, a warning dialog box is displayed 
with the following message: While you requested 
to retract 'None', an actual destination plate was 
loaded in Echo!
Gray Indicates the plate type retracted by the user matches 
the plate type reported by the Echo Liquid Handler, but 
the destination plate sensor does not detect a plate.
NOTE  In this case, a warning dialog box is displayed 
with the following message: Requested 
Destination Plate Type ‘384PP_Dest' was not 
loaded in Echo!
Gray Indicates plate gripper is extended.
Gray Indicates plate is not loaded. The plate gripper is 
retracted without a plate.

001-16479B    3-23
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
Figure 3.22  Door Control Error dialog box
Status Indicators
The System Status section in the Main Window of the Echo Client Utility contains status indicators 
for the Echo Liquid Handler. The Power, Warning, and Fault indicators correspond to the similar 
indicators on the front and back panel of the Echo Liquid Handler.
Figure 3.23  System Status section
Power Status Indicator
When the Power status indicator is illuminated green, it indicates the Echo Liquid Handler is on and 
ready for use. For more information, see Power Status Light.
Warning Status Indicator
When the Warning status indicator is illuminated yellow, it indicates a condition has occurred that 
may not allow normal operation. For more information, see Warning Status Light.
Fault Status Indicator
When the Fault status indicator is illuminated red, it indicates a condition has occurred that will not 
allow normal operation. The Fault status indicator reports events or situations that must be 
responded to by the operator. Normal operation may be affected or will be shortly. For more 
information, see Fault Status Light.
Stop Indicator
There are two Stop switches; one on the front and one on the rear of the Echo Liquid Handler.
The table below describes the different states for the Stop Indicator.

001-16479B     3-24
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Fluid Leak Indicator
Sensors inside the Echo Liquid Handler check for coupling fluid in the bubbler catch basin or lower 
pan.
The table below describes the different states for the Fluid Leak Indicator.
Compressed Air Pressure Indicator
A pressure sensor inside the Echo Liquid Handler monitors the user-supplied compressed air 
supply.
The table below describes the different states for the Compressed Air Pressure Indicator.
Vacuum Supply Pressure Indicator
A pressure sensor monitors the user-supplied vacuum supply line pressure inside the Echo Liquid 
Handler.
The table below describes the different states for the Vacuum Supply Pressure Indicator.
Coupling Fluid Level Indicator
A sensor monitors the level of coupling fluid in its bottle.
The table below describes the different states for the Coupling Fluid Level Indicator.
Table 3.6  Callout table for Stop Indicator
Status Conditions
Green Indicates the Stop switches are in a normal state and not activated.
Red An EMO switch has been activated. Power has been turned off to many internal Echo electrical 
devices. For a full discussion of the Stop switch, when it should be used, and how to power on an 
Echo Liquid Handler after the Stop switch has been used, see Stop Switches and Stop Functions.
Table 3.7  Callout table for Fluid Leak Indicator
Status Conditions
Green No fluid leak has been detected.
Red Fluid has been detected in the lower pan or excess fluid has been detected in the catch basin. The 
coupling fluid pump has been turned off. The user should contact us.
Table 3.8  Callout table for Compressed Air Pressure Indicator
Status Conditions
Green Air pressure is within specifications.
Red The user-supplied compressed air is low <552 kPa (<80 psi) or nonexistent. Check for leaks, 
disconnections, or for the air pressure turned off at the source.
Table 3.9  Callout table for Vacuum Supply Pressure Indicator
Status Conditions
Green Vacuum pressure is within specifications.
Red The user-supplied vacuum pressure is weak >56 kPa ( >15 in Hg Vac) or nonexistent. Check for 
leaks, disconnections, or for the vacuum turned off at the source.
001-16479B    3-25
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
NOTE  When the coupling fluid falls below its recommended minimum level, bubbles may be introduced into 
the coupling fluid, reducing the accuracy or precision of source plate surveys and liquid transfers. 
Beckman Coulter recommends refilling the coupling fluid bottle as soon as possible. For more 
information, see Echo Coupling Fluid Maintenance.
Coupling Fluid Age Indicator
A sensor monitors when the coupling fluid was changed.
The table below describes the different states for the Coupling Fluid Age Indicator.
NOTE  When the Coupling Fluid Age indicator is yellow, Beckman Coulter recommends refilling the coupling 
fluid bottle as soon as possible. For more information, see Echo Coupling Fluid Maintenance.
Focus Calibration Indicator
The focal length of the acoustic transducer should be checked every two weeks. When this period 
of time has expired, the Focus Calibration indicator turns yellow. The user should perform a focus 
calibration as soon as possible. For more information, see Focus Calibration Check.
The table below describes the different states for the Focus Calibration Indicator.
Coupling Fluid Temperature and Indicator
The coupling fluid temperature inside the Echo Liquid Handler is reported in degrees Celsius. The 
operating range for the coupling fluid temperature is 22.1°C ± 0.9°C. The coupling fluid controls the 
temperature of the acoustic transducer. A correct and stable acoustic transducer temperature is 
required to maintain accurate and precise liquid transfers.
The table below describes the different states for the Coupling Fluid Temperature Indicator.
Table 3.10  Callout table for Coupling Fluid Level Indicator
Status Conditions
Green Coupling fluid is above the minimum required level.
Yellow The coupling fluid bottle level is low ( <250 mL).
Table 3.11  Callout table for Coupling Fluid Age Indicator
Status Conditions
Green Coupling fluid bottle was changed less than 7 days ago.
Yellow Coupling fluid bottle was changed more than 7 days ago.
Table 3.12  Callout table for Focus Calibration Indicator
Status Conditions
Green Indicates a Focus calibration has been performed recently.
Yellow Indicates a Focus calibration should be performed as soon as possible.

001-16479B     3-26
Software
Echo Client Utility  
System Temperature and Indicator
The temperature inside the Echo Liquid Handler is reported in degrees Celsius. Normal System 
Temperature is between 21.0°C –50°C. As the reported temperature exceeds 50°C, performance 
problems could occur.
The table below describes the different states for the System Temperature Indicator.
System Gain Indicator
When the System Gain status indicator is illuminated green, it indicates the power calibration for 
the Echo Liquid Handler is operating within a valid range. If the System Gain status indicator is 
yellow or red, see System Gain for more information.
Echo Log
In the Main Window of the Echo Client Utility, there is an Echo Log section that displays a running 
list of messages generated by the Echo Liquid Handler that the Echo Client Utility is connected to. 
These server log messages are stored in log files in the Echo Liquid Handler. The Echo Client Utility 
keeps a cache of these server log messages. This cache is started each time the Echo Client Utility 
connects to an Echo Liquid Handler. This cache can be filtered by the user using the Preferences 
menu and selecting specific log filters in the Log Display Filter section. For more information, see 
Preferences Menu Option.
The user can select a portion of the log section and right-click to copy the selected log data to the 
Clipboard. The options are Copy All or Copy Selected.
Table 3.13  Callout table for Coupling Fluid Temperature Indicator
Status Conditions
Green Indicates coupling fluid temperature is OK.
Yellow Indicates coupling fluid temperature is outside of the normal range: 21.2°C–23.0°C but within the 
range 20.2°C – 24.0°C.
Red Indicates coupling fluid temperature is outside of the warning range: 20.2°C – 24.0°C.
Table 3.14  Callout table for System Temperature Indicator
Status Conditions
Green Indicates system temperature is within the normal range: 21.0°C–50.0°C.
Yellow Indicates system temperature is outside of the normal range but within: 20.0°C–21.0°C or 50.0°C–
60.0°C.
Red Indicates system temperature is outside of the warning range: < 20.0°C or > 60.0°C.

001-16479B    3-27
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
Figure 3.24  Echo Log section
Echo Client Utility Menu
The Echo Client Utility menu has the following options.
 • Connect To Instrument Menu Option
 • Preferences Menu Option
 • Download System State Menu Option
 • Help Menu Option
 • About Menu Option
 • Exit Menu Option
Connect To Instrument Menu Option
From the Echo Client Utility, select the Connect to Instrument menu option to load the Connect 
to Instrument dialog box.
Figure 3.25  Connect to Instrument dialog box

001-16479B     3-28
Software
Echo Client Utility  
1 Enter the IP address or hostname for the Echo instrument you want to connect to.
2 Click Connect to connect the Echo Client Utility to the Echo instrument you specified.
Preferences Menu Option
From the Echo Client Utility, select the Preferences menu option to load the Preferences dialog 
box.
Figure 3.26  Preferences dialog box
1. To change the location for where plate transfer and plate survey reports are saved, click the …  
button and choose a new location. The default location is C:\Echo\EchoClientUtility.
2. To change the log record types that are displayed in the Echo Log section, select one or more of 
the following checkboxes.
 • Error:  Error messages are typically serious. They may be triggered by events that cause an 
operation on the Echo Liquid Handler, or the Echo Client Utility to fail.
 •W a r n i n g : Warning messages report unexpected events. These events may not cause a 
functional or operational problem since the Echo Liquid Handler can recover from most 
situations that create a warning.
 •I n f o : Info messages report the normal activity of the Echo Liquid Handler.
 •D e b u g : Debug messages are generally not useful during normal operation. However, if you 
are troubleshooting a problem, your Beckman Coulter Service representative may ask for 
this information.
3. Click Ok to apply the new Exports and Log Display Filter settings or Cancel to exit the 
Preferences dialog box before applying changes.

001-16479B    3-29
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
Download System State Menu Option
From the Echo Client Utility, select the Download System State menu option to load the 
Download System State dialog box. This option should be used when Beckman Coulter Service 
representatives need to troubleshoot the system.
This option enables the user to download the state of the Echo Liquid Handler including 
information such as Server Log Files, the SQL Database, and Event Log. All this information is 
packaged into a file that can be sent to Beckman Coulter Service representatives for diagnostic 
purposes.
Figure 3.27  Download System State dialog box
To download the system state:
1 It is recommended to select all the checkboxes for Server Log Files, SQL Database, and System 
Event Log.
2 Click Download. A Save As dialog box is displayed.
3 For the filename, it is recommended to use the default filename which is a combination of the 
date and time, connected Echo name, and .EchoState for the file extension. For example, 2018-
05-29_17-55-16_localhost.EchoState. However, the user can choose another filename 
if desired.
4 The snapshot of the system state is saved. Click Cancel to exit the dialog box.
Help Menu Option
From the Echo Client Utility, select the Help menu option to launch the application User Guide in 
PDF format.

001-16479B     3-30
Software
Echo Client Utility  
About Menu Option
From the Echo Client Utility, select the About menu option to load the About dialog box. The About 
dialog box displays the application version and copyright information.
Exit Menu Option
From the Echo Client Utility, select the Exit menu option close the Echo Client Utility.
NOTE  If the Echo Client Utility is in the process of Survey or Transfer executions, or if there is unsaved 
information in the Labware tab, an error message is displayed and the application cannot be closed.
Controls Tab
The Controls tab enables the user to control the Echo Liquid Handler. This tab enables the user to 
home stages on the Echo Liquid Handler, control the coupling fluid pump, dry plates, and turn the 
anti-static bars on and off. It provides the ability to command internal mechanism movement 
which is useful during maintenance, troubleshooting, and diagnostic procedures.
The Controls tab has five sections and each are explained in the topics below.
Figure 3.28  Controls Tab

001-16479B    3-31
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
Stages
The Stages section contains the Home Stages button which moves each Echo stage (destination 
plate gripper stage, source plate gripper stage, and acoustic transducer) to the limits of its travel (X, 
Y, Z, or theta direction, depending on the component) to establish its absolute position.
 • Destination plate gripper stage: X (left/right), Y (front/rear), Z (up/down), and theta (plate 
rotation).
 • Source plate gripper stage: Y (front/rear).
 • Acoustic transducer: X (left/right), Y (front/rear), and Z (up/down).
During the homing procedure, the destination plate gripper stage extends outside of the Echo 
Liquid Handler to rotate safely.
To run the homing procedure:
1 In the Echo Client Utility, navigate to the Controls tab.
2 Click Home Stages in the Stages section.
3 Click OK in the Home Stages dialog box.
Figure 3.29  Homing Stages dialog box
After homing its stages, the Echo Liquid Handler knows the absolute position of each stage.
Coupling Fluid Pump
In the Coupling Fluid Pump section, the user can turn the coupling fluid pump on and off and set 
the position of the coupling fluid nozzle. Each of these functions are explained below.

001-16479B     3-32
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Figure 3.30  Coupling Fluid Pump section
Coupling Pump On or Off
The Echo Liquid Handler can be commanded to turn the coupling fluid pump on or off. The 
associated indicator light reports whether the coupling fluid pump is turned on or off.
Click the On or Off button to turn the Coupling fluid pump on or off.
Coupling Nozzle Up or Down
The Echo Liquid Handler can be commanded to raise or lower its coupling fluid nozzle, also called 
the bubbler, at any time.
Select the Up or Down radiobutton to choose the position for the coupling fluid nozzle.
Coupling Pump Direction Normal or Reverse
The coupling pump direction is set to Normal for Echo operations. The coupling pump direction can 
not be changed by a user for the Echo 650, 655, 650T and 655T Liquid Handlers.
Plate Dryer
In the Plate Dryer section, the Echo Liquid Handler can be commanded to raise or lower the plate 
dryer nozzle, or to turn the vacuum supply on or off. If necessary, the Echo Liquid Handler will move 
the plate dryer beneath the source plate prior to raising it. Each of these functions are explained 
below.
Figure 3.31  Plate Dryer section
Plate Dryer On or Off
The Echo Liquid Handler can be commanded to turn the vacuum on or off. The associated indicator 
light reports whether the vacuum is turned on or off.
Click the On or Off button to turn the plate dryer on or off.
Plate Dryer Up or Down
The Echo Liquid Handler can be commanded to raise or lower the plate dryer.
Select the Up or Down radiobutton to choose the position for the plate dryer.

001-16479B    3-33
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
Dry Plate
The Dry Plate procedure vacuums the water film off the bottom of a source plate. During typical 
protocol runs, the Dry Plate procedure is automatically executed. During diagnostic operations, Dry 
Plate is a standalone procedure and must be manually executed.
If a source plate is not present, the Dry Plate procedure is aborted.
During the Dry Plate procedure, the acoustic coupling fluid nozzle is moved down and out of the 
way, and the coupling fluid pump is turned off. The plate dryer nozzle makes a pass to ensure that 
all of the moisture is removed.
Anti-Static Bars
In the Anti-Static Bars section, the Echo Liquid Handler can be commanded to raise or lower the 
upper anti-static bar, or to turn the anti-static bars on or off. Each of these functions are explained 
below.
Figure 3.32  Anti-Static Bars section
Anti-Static Bars On or Off
The Echo Liquid Handler can be commanded to turn its anti-static bars on or off at any time.
Click the On or Off button to turn the anti-static bars on or off.
Upper Anti-Static Bar Up or Down
The Echo Liquid Handler can be commanded to lower or raise its upper anti-static bar.
The upper anti-static bar can be raised or lowered regardless of the door or source plate positions. 
If the upper anti-static bar is commanded to be lowered while the destination plate gripper stage is 
extended outside of the Echo Liquid Handler, an Actuate Ionizer Down Error will appear.
Select the Up or Down radiobutton to choose the position for the upper anti-static bar.
Instrument Control
The Echo Liquid Handler is the hardware and software installed on the Echo instrument that 
controls all functions of the instrument. There are cases when the Echo Liquid Handler must be shut 
down or restarted. The Instrument Control section enables the user to perform a soft reset, hard 
reset, or shut down the Echo Liquid Handler when required. Each of these functions are explained 
below.

001-16479B     3-34
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Figure 3.33  Instrument Control section
CAUTION
If the Echo Client Utility is connected to a stub mode Echo Liquid Handler service 
running on the client PC, clicking the Hard Reset button will “reset” the client PC, 
and clicking the Power button will “shut down” the client PC.
Soft Reset
CAUTION
Clicking the Soft Reset button causes the Echo service to be restarted on the Echo 
controller.
Hard Reset
CAUTION
Clicking the Hard Reset button causes the Echo Liquid Handler to reboot. After 
rebooting the Echo Liquid Handler, any attached client computer programs must 
be reconnected to the Echo Liquid Handler.
Power
CAUTION
Clicking the Power button causes the Echo Liquid Handler to initiate the “shut 
down” procedure. If an Echo Liquid Handler needs to be turned off, it should 
always be “shut down” before the Echo AC power switch is turned off. For more 
information on shut down options, see Turn Off Echo Power.
Focus Tab
The Focus tab enables the user to perform acoustic transducer related calibration procedures. 
Several Echo Liquid Handler mechanisms can be user-calibrated. The acoustic transducer 
calibration procedure is in the Focus tab.
The Focus tab is explained in the topic below.

001-16479B    3-35
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
Figure 3.34  Focus Tab
Focus Calibration Check
The Echo acoustic transducer includes a lens that focuses acoustic energy pulses for purposes of 
droplet ejection and well auditing. The focal length of the transducer lens is expected to slightly 
drift over the life of an instrument. This drift must be compensated for to ensure consistent focus 
position along the transducer Z-axis during well auditing and droplet ejection. Incorrect focus 
position during well auditing may result in a biased measurement of fluid impedance, or fluid 
concentration. Incorrect focus position during droplet ejection may also result in slower drops with 
less ideal placement.
A focus calibration check should be performed periodically. The Echo Liquid Handler keeps track of 
how long it has been since the last focus calibration check was performed. When a new focus 
calibration check should be performed, the Focus Calibration indicator in the System Status 
section will change from green to yellow.

001-16479B     3-36
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Figure 3.35  System Status section
CAUTION
When the Focus Calibration indicator is yellow, Beckman Coulter strongly 
recommends that the user perform the Focus Calibration procedure as soon as 
possible.
The Focus calibration procedure measures the focal length of the acoustic transducer and compares 
it to the previous measurement. If the difference between these measurements is minimal, then the 
system updates its calibration database with the new focal length and the procedure is finished. If 
the difference is larger than a preset threshold, users should contact us to ensure the system is 
running properly before accepting the focal length new value.
To run the Focus Calibration procedure:
1 In the Echo Client Utility, navigate to the Focus tab.
2 Click Run to run the focus calibration procedure.

001-16479B    3-37
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
Figure 3.36  Focus Tab
3 Click Update ToF to commit the new value.

001-16479B     3-38
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Figure 3.37  Focus tab before calibration
NOTE  If you move to another tab before clicking Update ToF, your changes will not be applied and the 
content of the Focus tab will be reset.
4 After Update ToF is clicked and the new values are committed, the Update ToF button is 
disabled.

001-16479B    3-39
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
Figure 3.38  Focus tab after calibration
The focus calibration procedure causes the Echo door to open, the source plate gripper stage 
extends, and the Echo Liquid Handler performs a focal-sweep on a built-in internal registration 
plate. The focal-sweep uses acoustic “pings” bounced off an internal registration plate while the 
transducer is being moved vertically. The focal-sweep process measures the transducer’s focal 
length. After the focal-sweep is done, the bottom of the registration plate is dried.
If the focus calibration values are outside the normal range, a red warning box is displayed 
indicating the focus calibration values are out of range. If the user clicks Update ToF, a 
confirmation dialog box is displayed to ensure the user is aware of committing calibration values 
that are out of range. Out of range focus calibration values should not be committed unless 
instructed by Beckman Coulter Service and Support.

001-16479B     3-40
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Figure 3.39  Focus tab outside of normal range
Figure 3.40  Confirm Focus ToF dialog box
Labware Tab
The Labware tab is used to manage source and destination microplate definitions. It enables the 
user to create new destination plates, and edit or delete existing destination plate definitions.

001-16479B    3-41
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
Figure 3.41  Labware tab
The table below describes the buttons/fields in the Labware tab and their functionality.
Table 3.15  Callout table for Labware tab 
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Plate 
Name List
The Plate Name List contains all of the source and destination plates that have 
been defined for your system (may vary from the list in the previous figure). See 
Plate Name Convention for details on the plate naming convention.
2 Add Adds a plate definition. Only a destination plate can be added.
3 Edit Edit a plate definition. Select a plate definition and click the Edit button or double-
click the plate name to open the Plate Specification window. Source plate 
specification editing is limited to selecting a barcode location including none. 
Destination plate specification editing is not restricted.
4 Copy Copy a plate definition. Select a plate definition and click the Copy button. The user 
can copy a source or destination plate definition to create a new plate definition. 
Alternate source or destination plate names can be created by copying existing 
plate types.
5 Delete Delete a plate definition. Select a plate definition and click the Delete button. The 
selected destination plate specification will be deleted. The user can delete a 
destination plate definition but source plate specifications cannot be removed 
unless they were created via the Copy function.

001-16479B     3-42
Software
Echo Client Utility  
For more information on supported Labware for the Echo Liquid Handler, see Labware.
Plate Name Convention
Each plate name listed on the Labware tab refers to a combination of physical plate and well 
specifications, fluid characteristics (source plate only), and other factors that enable the Echo 
Liquid Handler to accurately and reliably dispense as little as 2.5 nL of sample from every well of the 
microplate.
Source Plates
Beckman Coulter names every source plate with familiar plate naming convention, such as 384PP 
and abbreviated liquid types, such as AQ, to help operators identify the plate names. This section 
describes the conventions used.
Structure of the source plate name:
No. of wells + plate specs. _ liquid type _ key feature _ other features
Example 1: 384PP_AQ_BP
(384-well+polypropylene _ aqueous_buffer)
For a list of available source plate specifications, see Labware.
Destination Plates
For destination plates, the Echo Liquid Handler only requires the plate specifications. This includes 
where to place the sample and how much can it receive. In the Plate Type Editor, you can also use 
microscope slides that are held in place with an ANSI/SLAScompatible holder that is < 16 mm in 
height.
Structure of the destination plate name:
No of wells + plate specs_Dest
Example 1: 384PP_Dest
(384-well + polypropylene_Dest)
This destination plate can accept sample from any Echo qualified source plate.
Example 2: Greiner_384PS_781096
(vendor name, which includes 384-well + polystyrene)
6 Reload Reload the plate types that have been edited or deleted since the plate type list was 
last saved.
7 Save Save any changes made to the plate type list, such as adding a new plate definition.
Table 3.15  Callout table for Labware tab (Continued)
Callout 
Number
Name Description
001-16479B    3-43
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
In this example, the vendor name is used to describe the plate and there is no Dest ending. 
Operators can create destination labware at any time and adopt whatever is the most convenient 
convention for their lab. Laboratories using multiple labware types should consider formats which 
reduce the chance of the operator choosing the wrong destination plate, as this creates risk of plate 
collision during transfer.
NOTE  If you are not sure whether a plate name is for a source plate or destination plate, highlight the plate 
name. If the Delete button is grayed out, the labware is a source plate.
Plate Type Editor
The Plate Type Editor dialog box is used to edit the barcode location for source plates and add or 
edit destination plates. Source plate definitions require exact specifications to accurately transfer 
nanoliter volumes; therefore, they are defined specifically for the Echo Liquid Handlers and tested 
at Beckman Coulter (Echo-qualified). For this reason, source plates cannot be defined by the user. 
For existing source plates, only the barcode location can be edited. Source plate specifications 
cannot be removed from the Echo Client Utility or the Plate Name List. All source plate 
specifications can be used as destination plate specifications; however, no user-defined destination 
plate specification can be used as a source plate specification.
The Echo Liquid Handler is programmed with several compatible destination plates; however, the 
user can add destination plates through the Labware tab in the Echo Client Utility. Adding a new 
destination plate, or editing an existing destination plate, are virtually the same process.
Figure 3.42  Plate Type Editor
NOTE  The edit window for the source plate looks the same as the destination plate, but only the barcode 
location can be edited.
The table below describes the buttons/fields or sections in the Plate Type Editor dialog box and 
their functionality.

001-16479B     3-44
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Table 3.16  Callout table for Plate Type Editor
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 (Source or 
Destination) Name
User-defined name to identify the plate. This name will be listed in the 
Labware tab.
2 Barcode Location Location of barcode label:
 • None
 • Left (West)
 • Right (East) Not available by default. If you would like to use the right 
barcode location, contact us.
 • Long (South) Requires the optional installation of a long side 
barcode reader.
3 Manufacturer Name of the plate manufacturer.
4 Lot Number Lot number assigned by the plate manufacturer.
5 Part Number Part number assigned by the plate manufacturer.
6 Rows Number of rows in the microplate. 
Valid Range: 1-8600 
Default Value: 16
7 Columns Number of columns in the microplate. 
Valid Range: 1-128000 
Default Value: 24
8 A1 X Offset (A)* Distance from left outside edge to center of first column where the 
left edge of the part will be defined as the two 12.7 mm areas (as 
measured from the corners) as specified in ANSI SLAS 1-2004 (R2012).
Valid Range: 0.000-128.000 
Default Value: 12.130
NOTE  The Echo Liquid Handler's frame of reference for the destination 
is an inverted microplate. Increasing the A1-X offset will shift the 
inverted microplate to the right, and therefore drop placement 
would be further left.
9 A1 Y Offset (B) Distance from top outside edge to center of first row where the top 
edge of the part will be defined as the two 12.7 mm areas (as measured 
from the corners) as specified in ANSI SLAS 1-2004 (R2012). 
Valid Range: 0.000-86.000 
Default Value: 8.990

001-16479B    3-45
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
10 X Center Spacing (C) Column spacing: Each following row/column shall be an additional X.Y 
mm in distance from the top/left outside edge of the plate as specified 
in ANSI SLAS 4-2004 (R2012). 
Valid Range: 0.010-128.000 
Default Value: 4.500
11 Y Center Spacing (D) Row spacing: Each following row/column shall be an additional X.Y mm 
in distance from the top/left outside edge of the plate as specified in 
ANSI SLAS 4-2004 (R2012).
 
Valid Range: 0.010-86.000 
Default Value: 4.500
12 Plate Height (E) The overall height of the plate as specified in ANSI SLAS 2-2004 (R2012). 
Valid Range: 6.500-16.600 
Default Value: 16.600
NOTE  When using barcode labels on higher plate heights (for example, 
16.6 mm), align the barcode label with the top of the plate to ensure 
proper scanning.
13 Flange Height (F)** The height of the flange (skirt) as specified in ANSI SLAS 3-2004 
(R2012). 
Valid Range: 0.000-16.600. Must be less than Plate Height (E). 
Default Value: 2.410
14 Well Width (G) The width of the well opening at the bottom (not an SLAS specified 
dimension.
 
Valid Range: 0.010-128.000 
Default Value: 3.300
Table 3.16  Callout table for Plate Type Editor
Callout 
Number
Name Description

001-16479B     3-46
Software
Echo Client Utility  
NOTE  * The items marked A-G are measurements that need to be taken by hand or filled in from the 
manufacturer's specifications. These dimensions and further details on their definitions can be found 
https://www.slas.org/resources/information/industry-standards/.
** Currently, the Echo Liquid Handler does not use dimensions F (flange height) and H (well capacity). 
Any value entered for flange height or well capacity is ignored.
NOTE  Some values that are valid in isolation may be invalid in combination with other values.
Survey Tab
The Survey tab enables the user to set and change survey options. The user can run a survey 
procedure that performs an acoustic survey of the fluid in the loaded source plate.
15 Well Length(G) The length of the well opening (not an SLAS specified dimension. 
Valid Range: 0.010-86.000 
Default Value: 3.300
16 Well Capacity (H) The overall capacity of the well in microliters. 
Valid Range: 0.000-100000.000 
Default Value: 0.050
Table 3.16  Callout table for Plate Type Editor
Callout 
Number
Name Description

001-16479B    3-47
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
Figure 3.43  Survey Tab
To start the survey procedure:
1 In the Echo Client Utility, navigate to the Survey tab.
2 Verify that the source plate you loaded in the Echo Liquid Handler is shown in the Source Plate 
section.
3 In the Survey Data section, select specific wells to survey or leave all the wells unselected to 
survey the full plate.
4 Click Survey to begin the plate survey. The acoustic survey will be performed. The acoustic 
transducer moves in an efficient, non-stop path beneath each specified well. Acoustic pulses 
are transmitted up into a well, and the resulting return data is saved for analysis.
5 Once the survey has completed, the Survey Data section in the Survey tab is updated with 
survey data.

001-16479B     3-48
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Figure 3.44  Survey Data
6 After the survey, the following options are available below the Survey Data section to the left 
of the Statistics section. Select the appropriate survey type depending on the application.
 •V o l u m e : Displays fluid volume.
 • Fluid Composition:  Displays fluid composition based on the fluid type selected.
 • Fluid Thickness:  Displays well fluid thickness.
The source microplate survey data is displayed in the Survey Data section. Either volume, fluid 
composition, or well fluid thickness (height) will be displayed, depending on the radio button 
selected.
In the Statistics section, the minimum, maximum, average, Standard Deviation and CV data 
from the survey is reported.
7 Optionally, click Copy Grid Data to copy the selected survey data to the Clipboard. From the 
Clipboard, the data can be pasted into Microsoft Excel or any other text editor.

001-16479B    3-49
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
8 To view complete survey data results, click the View Full Results button and the associated 
application, such as Microsoft Excel is opened. The Echo Client Utility saves a CSV file 
containing the survey results to a file name in the following format: Date-Time of creation, 
SurveyData keyword, and plate type surveyed. For example, 2018-06-10_12-31-
46__SurveyData__384PP_DMSO2.csv.
9 Optionally, from the Survey as drop-down list, select a different source plate type of the same 
plate format and click Survey to run another survey.
NOTE  Unless a new plate is loaded in the Source Plate section, the survey selection and data is not 
refreshed.
Fluid Replacement Tab
The Fluid Replacement tab guides the user through the process to replace the coupling fluid bottle 
with a new coupling fluid bottle filled with 1 Liter of Type 1 Ultrapure water. Clicking the Start 
Fluid Replacement button starts the coupling fluid bottle replacement process. If the fluid 
replacement process cannot start, a warning is displayed indicating the problem. If the fluid 
replacement process starts successfully, a workflow is displayed that guides the user through the 
steps. For more information, see Replace Echo Coupling Fluid.
001-16479B     3-50
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Figure 3.45  Fluid Replacement tab
To start the fluid replacement process:
1 In the Echo Client Utility, navigate to the Fluid Replacement tab.
2 Click the Start Fluid Replacement button.
NOTE  If the user attempts to navigate to a different tab during the fluid replacement process, a dialox 
box is displayed to indicate that you cannot switch tabs during the fluid replacement process.

001-16479B    3-51
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
3 The Fluid Replacement Workflow is displayed and step 1 in the workflow is enabled. Go to the 
back of the Echo Liquid Handler and check that the fluidics pump is off and then remove the 
coupling fluid bottle from the bottle holder. Unscrew the bottle cap with the attached tubing 
and then dispose of the used coupling fluid.
NOTE  If there is significant contamination, and/or signs of corrosion in the coupling fluid tubing, in the 
debubbler, at the nosecone, or anywhere else, please contact us.
NOTE  If the Coupling Fluid Level status indicator is yellow when the fluid replacement workflow starts, 
this indicates that the coupling fluid bottle is empty or not detected.
Figure 3.46  Fluid Replacement Workflow displayed
4 After the coupling fluid bottle has been removed, step 2 in the workflow is enabled.

001-16479B     3-52
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Figure 3.47  Fluid Replacement Workflow Step 1
5 Fill a clean coupling fluid bottle with 1 Liter Ultrapure Type 1 water and screw on the bottle cap 
with the attached tubing. Then replace the coupling fluid bottle in the bottle holder.

001-16479B    3-53
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
Figure 3.48  Fluid Replacement Workflow Step 2
Once the fluid replacement process is started, if the user clicks the Cancel button and the 
coupling fluid level is sufficient, the following message box is displayed.
Figure 3.49  Canceling Fluid Replacement dialog box
Once the fluid replacement process is started, if the user clicks the Cancel button and the 
sensor indicates that either the coupling fluid bottle is empty or not present, the following 
messages are displayed.

001-16479B     3-54
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Figure 3.50  Canceling Fluid Replacement dialog box
A second dialog box is displayed to confirm if the user wants to end the fluid replacement 
process.
Figure 3.51  Canceling Fluid Replacement dialog box
6 If the user did not cancel the fluid replacement process, they can click the Complete button to 
finish the fluid replacement process and return to the initial screen before the fluid 
replacement workflow was displayed.

001-16479B    3-55
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
Figure 3.52  Fluid Replacement Complete
NOTE  If the Coupling Fluid Age status indicator is yellow when the fluid replacement workflow starts, 
this indicator will revert to green when the fluid replacement process completes.
Service Tab
The Service tab enables Beckman Coulter Service and Support personnel to make changes to the 
Echo Liquid Handler. This tab should only be used by users when directed by Beckman Coulter 
Service and Support personnel.
The Service tab has four sections and each are explained in the topics below.

001-16479B     3-56
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Figure 3.53  Service Tab
Plate Registration Calibration
In the Service tab, the Plate Registration section enables calibrating the well position for the 
selected source plate and updates the Labware database. This calibration is essential to position the 
acoustic transducer under the well center.
NOTE  Normally the register calibration will not need to be performed by a user. However, it can be useful 
during certain repair, diagnostic, or recovery procedures. Perform the register calibration only as directed 
by Beckman Coulter Service and Support personnel.
If plate registration at calibration is required, use the following procedure:
1 Navigate to the Service tab.
2 In the Source Plate section, click the Extend plate gripper button to select the source plate 
format and source plate type and click OK.
3 Place the source plate on the plate gripper.
4 Click the Retract button to draw the plate into the instrument.

001-16479B    3-57
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
5 In the Plate Registration section, click the Register button. The Echo Liquid Handler 
calibrates the well position and displays the new well center values.
Figure 3.54  Plate registration section
6 In the Plate Registration section, click the Apply button to update the database.
NOTE  If the user selected another tab without applying the new values, the Plate Registration control will be 
reset.
Power Calibration
Proper acoustic droplet ejection relies on a calibrated RF energy source. Environmental 
temperature changes can affect the characteristics of the Echo RF energy pulses. Power calibration 
is performed automatically by the Echo Liquid Handler as part of each liquid transfer protocol. 
However, in some cases a manual power calibration is required.
In the Service tab, the Power section enables calibrating the power and updates the Echo database.
NOTE  Normally a manual power calibration will not need to be performed by a user. However, it can be 
useful during certain repair, diagnostic, or recovery procedures. Perform power calibration only as 
directed by Beckman Coulter Service and Support personnel.
If manual power calibration is required, use the following procedure:
1 Navigate to the Service tab.
2 In the Power section, click the Measure button. The Echo Liquid Handler performs the 
following procedure:
 • The most recent power calibration record stored in the Echo database is read. This data will 
be used in the next step.

001-16479B     3-58
Software
Echo Client Utility  
 • An RF pulse is generated.
 • Several RF measurements are taken.
 • A new amplifier feedback value is calculated and displayed as Amplifier Feedback.
 • A new pulse energy value is measured and displayed as Pulse Energy.
 • A new Vpp value is measured and displayed as Amplitude.
Figure 3.55  Power section after clicking Measure button
Reference
 • Amplitude(Vpp):  The Amplitude field displays the reference tone burst amplitude.
 •P u l s e  E n e r g y : The Pulse Energy field displays the reference pulse energy value.
Measured
 • Amplitude(Vpp):  The voltage peak-to-peak Amplitude field will be empty until power 
calibration is performed.
 •P u l s e  E n e r g y : The Pulse Energy field will be empty until power calibration is performed.
 • Amplifier Feedback:  The Amplifier Feedback field displays the current power correction 
factor, and normally should be very close to 1.0.
3 Click Apply to record the new power calibration record in the Echo database.
NOTE  If the user selected another tab without applying the new values, the Power Calibration control will be 
reset.

001-16479B    3-59
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
System Gain
In the Service tab, the System Gain section enables overriding the automated power calibration 
and updates the Echo database. If required, this option should be used after performing a Power 
Calibration.
NOTE  Normally a manual override of the automated power calibration will not need to be performed by a 
user. However, it can be useful during certain repair, diagnostic, or recovery procedures. Perform manual 
override of the automated power calibration only as directed by Beckman Coulter Service and Support 
personnel.
If manual override of the automated power calibration is required, use the following 
procedure:
1 Navigate to the Service tab.
2 In the System Gain section, click the Override button.
Figure 3.56  System Gain section after clicking Override button
3 Select a new scalar multiplier value for System Gain. The default System Gain value is 1.0.
4 Click Apply to override the automated power calibration record that is stored in the Echo 
database.

001-16479B     3-60
Software
Echo Client Utility  
Figure 3.57  System Gain section after clicking Apply button
NOTE  If the System Gain is set to a value other than 1.0, the System Gain indicator is shown in the 
System Status section. For more information, see Status Indicators.
 • If the System Gain value is set between 0.9 and 1.1, the System Gain indicator is yellow as 
shown above.
 • If the System Gain value is set between 0.5 to 0.89, the System Gain indicator is red.
Plate Sensors
In the Service tab, the Plate Sensors section enables bypassing the source and destination plate 
sensors and updates the Echo database.
To bypass plate sensors, use the following procedure:
1 Navigate to the Service tab.
2 In the Plate Sensors section, select the Ignore Source Plate Sensor checkbox to bypass the 
source plate present sensor. This may be useful if the source plate sensor malfunctions so that 
a transfer protocol can execute without triggering a “no source plate loaded” error message.
3 In the Plate Sensors section, select the Ignore Destination Plate Sensor checkbox to bypass 
the destination plate present sensor. This may be useful when an individual destination plate 
is not detected by the destination plate present LED sensor, or when transferring to a target 
that does not fit in the destination plate gripper like the expected ANSI/SLAS compliant targets. 
When checked, a protocol can execute without triggering a “no destination plate loaded” error 
message.
NOTE  If the Ignore Destination Plate Sensor checkbox is selected, a plate load error could result and 
no error messages will be triggered.

001-16479B    3-61
Software
Echo Client Utility  3
Figure 3.58  Plate Sensors section

001-16479B     3-62
Software
Echo Client Utility  
001-16479B    4-1
CHAPTER 4
  Maintenance and Service
Daily maintenance consists of checking the coupling fluid level and checking for leaks in the 
instrument.
Scheduled user maintenance consists of replacing the water filter, replacing the water in the 
coupling fluid bottle, washing the bottles, and updating the focus transducer calibration.
One year preventive maintenance is provided by Beckman Coulter service representatives if the 
Echo Liquid Handler is still under warranty or under a service contract.
Daily Maintenance
Perform the following checks once a day and the corresponding procedures as needed:
1. Check the coupling fluid bottle level daily.
 • If the coupling fluid level is at 350 mL or less, replace the coupling fluid bottle with a full 
bottle of fresh coupling fluid. Do not top off. Over time, the act of topping off will result in 
a greater build up of particulates and biomass in the fluid lines. This can have a negative 
effect on reliability. For more information, see 
Echo Coupling Fluid Maintenance.
 • If the coupling fluid is cloudy, replace the coupling fluid. Contact us for further 
instructions. For more information, see Replace Echo Coupling Fluid.
Scheduled Maintenance
Beckman Coulter recommends that the following maintenance procedures be performed on a 
regular basis. Maintenance promotes accurate, precise, and reliable fluid transfers.
Every Week
Weekly (or earlier if the coupling fluid level becomes low), the Echo user should perform the 
following preventive maintenance procedures:
1 Replace the coupling fluid bottle with a clean 1 Liter bottle of Type 1 Ultrapure Water. For more 
information, see Echo Coupling Fluid Maintenance.
001-16479B     4-2
  Maintenance and Service
Scheduled Maintenance  
2 If the warning light on the System Status tab of the Echo Client Utility is yellow, perform focus 
calibration as indicated by the Focus Calibration warning. This procedure is typically required 
to be completed biweekly. For more information, see Focus Calibration Check.
NOTE  Use the recommended amount of Type 1 Ultrapure Water.
Once Per Month
Once per month, the Echo user should perform the following procedures:
1 Inspect anti-static bars. If they appear clean and dust free, cleaning them will not provide a 
benefit. If they appear dirty, follow the anti-static bar cleaning procedure in the Clean the Anti-
Static Bars topic. If they still appear dirty after the cleaning procedure, contact us.
2 Check the water filter, follow maintenance procedure if necessary. For more information, see 
Water Filter Maintenance.
3 Inspect the coupling fluid tubing for biofilm growth. If growth is present, contact us. Some 
yellow discoloration is acceptable, however, heavy discoloration indicates a problem. For more 
information, see Replace Echo Coupling Fluid.
One Year Preventive Maintenance
Beckman Coulter will provide one year preventive maintenance. Our customer relations 
management system automatically schedules the timing of the preventive maintenance. You can 
contact us to see when the preventive maintenance is scheduled and adjust the timing of the 
preventative maintenance service call to meet your laboratory schedule. If you are no longer in 
warranty and do not have a service contract, contact us to obtain a quote and schedule preventive 
maintenance.
001-16479B    4-3
  Maintenance and Service
Maintenance Procedures  4
Maintenance Procedures
WARNING
Do not attempt to service or repair the internal Echo mechanisms yourself. The 
electrical, laser, and mechanical systems must be maintained by trained 
personnel. Other than the user-level maintenance procedures described, all 
service and repair must be performed by Beckman Coulter field engineers. If you 
have questions regarding what may be serviced by an Echo user, please contact 
us.
Echo Coupling Fluid Maintenance
The Echo coupling fluid couples the energy from the acoustic transducer to the bottom of the 
source plate. Bubbles in the tubing (from very low fluid level) or contamination in the fluid can 
reduce the accuracy or precision of source plate surveys and fluid transfers. The coupling bottle 
should be purged and refilled immediately when this occurs. Maintaining clean coupling fluid at the 
proper fill level ensures a high level of performance in the Echo Liquid Handler.
Replace the fluid in the coupling fluid bottle when one of the following occurs:
 • Coupling Fluid  indicator on the Echo Client Utility System Status tab is yellow, indicating that 
the coupling fluid has dropped below the required level. For more information, see Coupling 
Fluid Level Indicator.
Figure 4.1  Diagnostic tab showing coupling fluid level
 • LCD panel Warning indicator turns yellow when the coupling fluid level is low. For more 
information, see Warning Status Light.

001-16479B     4-4
  Maintenance and Service
Maintenance Procedures  
Figure 4.2  LCD Panel with power, warning, and fault indicator lights
 • Echo ActiveX events report that the coupling fluid has dropped below the required level. Refer 
to the Echo Integration Manual.
 • Fluid appears cloudy.
 • Fluid transfer accuracy or precision has been affected by coupling fluid contamination.
 • One week has passed since the last coupling fluid replacement.
NOTE  During periods of heavy duty use, replacing the coupling fluid bottle may be needed more than 
once per week.
Coupling Fluid Replacement Materials Required
The following materials are required to refill the coupling fluid bottle:
 • 1 Liter of Type 1 Ultrapure Water
 • 1 empty, clean 1 Liter coupling fluid bottle (square bottle, part #ECHO-AL15-S)
 • Gloves for protection when handling the fluids
 • Paper towels or shop cloths to deal with any unexpected fluid leaks or spills
Replace Echo Coupling Fluid
Follow the steps below to replace the coupling fluid bottle:
1 In order to access the coupling fluid bottle, first remove the left side (from the back of the Echo) 
of the rear light shield. The rear light shield is connected to the Echo via magnets and is 
removed by exerting an outward force using the finger recess on the left face of the light shield.
2 Fill a clean one liter coupling fluid bottle with one liter of Type 1 Ultrapure water. This bottle 
will replace the coupling fluid bottle that is currently on the Echo.
3 Ensure that no fluid transfer or other maintenance procedures are under way.

001-16479B    4-5
  Maintenance and Service
Maintenance Procedures  4
4 Open the Echo Client Utility and navigate to the Fluid Replacement tab.
5 Click the Start Fluid Replacement button to start the fluid replacement process. If any issues 
are encountered while trying to start the fluid replacement process, a warning is displayed. If 
the fluid replacement process starts successfully, the replacement process workflow is shown 
and guides the user through the replacement process. Please refer to the Fluid Replacement 
Tab topic for the remaining steps.
6 After successful completion of the coupling fluid replacement procedure, to replace the left 
rear light shield, reverse the action in step 1 by lining up the metal pins with the holes on the 
light shield panel. Once aligned, the magnets will pull the light shield into place.
Water Filter Maintenance
During plate survey and fluid transfer, the coupling fluid is exposed to dust and particles from the 
air or from the bottom of the source microplates. The inline water filter on the chiller tubing filters 
out dust and particles before the coupling fluid returns to the transducer.
To ensure that the coupling fluid is filtered effectively, Beckman Coulter will replace the water filter 
at the annual Preventative Maintenance. If the water filter traps excessive material, it may become 
clogged or shed trapped particles before the annual Preventative Maintenance is due. In that case, 
the water filter element should be cleaned immediately.
Figure 4.3  Water filter in good condition (left) versus water filter that needs cleaning (right)
The disassembled water filter is made up of three parts: clear bowl, black housing, and stainless 
steel water filter element.

001-16479B     4-6
  Maintenance and Service
Maintenance Procedures  
Figure 4.4  Water filter disassembled
Tools and materials needed:
 • Lint-free swab (P/N 001-11152, ITW-Texwipe TX708A or STX708A), if needed.
 • Gloves
 • Type 1 Ultrapure Water
 • Sink
 • Absorbent wipe for drips
Follow the steps below to maintain the water filter:
1 Ensure that no fluid transfer or diagnostic procedures are under way.
2 Open the Echo Client Utility and navigate to the Controls tab.
3 Click On/Off button to the Off position to turn off the Coupling Fluid Pump.
4 Check the back of the Echo Liquid Handler to verify the coupling fluid pump is off.
5 Put on gloves.
6 Disconnect the tubing with the filter from the back of the Echo Liquid Handler.
7 Disconnect the other end from the chiller.
8 If any drips occur, use the wipe to clean them.
9 Take the entire tubing to a sink for disassembly.

001-16479B    4-7
  Maintenance and Service
Maintenance Procedures  4
10 Disassemble the water filter above the sink so water from the tubing is captured by the sink.
a. Unscrew and remove the clear water filter bowl (do not remove the housing from the 
tubing).
b. Take note of the installed position and remove the stainless steel mesh water filter 
element.
NOTE  Handle the water filter element by the black plastic cage only and do not touch the steel 
mesh.
11 Rinse the element and bowl under flowing tap water. If the buildup does not rinse off at first, 
use a lint-free swab to gently wipe the water filter element to loosen the residue material and 
rinse again.
NOTE  Make sure to wipe both the inside and the outside of the water filter element and be careful not 
to damage the steel mesh.
12 rform a final rinse with Type 1 Ultrapure Water before reassembling the water filter.
13 Insert the water filter element into the housing in its original position.
14 Ensure the orange gasket is seated in the bowl and then screw it back onto the housing.
15 Reinstall the tubing in the reverse order of deinstallation.
a. Connect the tubing to the chiller.
b. Connect the tubing to the Echo Liquid handler.
c. Ensure the water filter is oriented with the clear bowl downwards.

001-16479B     4-8
  Maintenance and Service
Maintenance Procedures  
16 From the Controls tab, in the Coupler Pump section, set the Coupler Pump to On.
17 Inspect the water filter for leaks as the lines get refilled and tighten the bowl if necessary.
NOTE  If a clean spare water filter (P/N 001-11032) is available, it is recommended to replace the existing 
water filter element and bowl with the new one. The user should still clean the old water filter 
element and bowl using the steps above and dry and store the parts for future use.
18 Shake the filter and rotate upside down to release excess air. Tap the line on the rear right side 
of the clear plastic cylinder. Release any excess air by slightly loosening the plastic membrane 
screw counter clockwise . Loosen only enough to bleed excess air and immediately hand tighten 
to prevent leaks.
CAUTION
The following items should be avoided:
 • Aggressive cleaning agents such as hypochlorite bleach, acids, and alkalis
 • Organic solvents, including alcohols
 • Abrasives or sharp-edged tools
 • Heat as the water filter is not rated to be autoclavable
Clean the Anti-Static Bars
The Echo Liquid Handler uses two anti-static bars to neutralize any static charge on the source and 
destination plates. The antistatic bars are just inside the door, one right below and the other right 
above the door opening.
Over time, anti-static bars may accumulate dust or other contaminants on their emitter pins and 
ground reference surfaces. This accumulation could result in droplets being inaccurately ejected 
into the destination plate wells (for example into the corners or onto the sides of a well). Periodic 
cleaning will maintain proper anti-static bar operation.
Once a month, dry brush the anti-static bars using the following procedure:
1 Turn off the Echo carriage motors by pushing the Stop switch on the Echo Liquid Handler.
2 Launch the Echo Client Utility.
3 Open the door by clicking Open in the Door section in the Main Window.
001-16479B    4-9
  Maintenance and Service
Maintenance Procedures  4
4 Turn off the anti-static bars by clicking Off in the Anti-Static Bars section in the Controls tab.
5 Locate the two anti-static bars.
Figure 4.5  Anti-static bar location
6 Gently clean the emitter points and ground reference surfaces on both anti-static bars with a 
dry, soft-bristle, nylon toothbrush.
Figure 4.6  Anti-static bar areas requiring cleaning
The table below describes the callouts for the anti-static bar areas that require cleaning.
NOTE  Leave the upper anti-static bar in either its raised or lowered position—either position is OK.
Table 4.1  Callout table for Anti-static bar
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Ground reference surfaces There are 2 ground reference surfaces.
2 Emitter points There are 11 emitter points.

001-16479B     4-10
  Maintenance and Service
Maintenance Procedures  
7 Turn on the Echo carriage motors by turning the Stop switch counterclockwise and releasing it.
8 In the Controls tab, click Home Stages in the Stages section. For more information, see 
Stages.
9 Click OK in the Home Stages dialog box.
Clean the Destination Plate Gripper Grid
The grid on the destination plate gripper is charged to a potential of up to several kilovolts during 
fluid transfer. The electrical field overrides any static charge that may reside in the destination 
plate to ensure that the droplets transferred from the source plate wells are directed upward into 
the center of the destination wells.
If the destination plate gripper becomes grossly contaminated, contact us.
Cycle Fluid Through Echo System
Follow the steps below to cycle fluid through the Echo system at initial startup or after the fluidics 
have been drained.
CAUTION
The chiller does not need to be running for this procedure, however, do not cycle 
coupling fluid through the Echo Liquid Handler that is below 16°C or above 30°C. 
Extreme temperatures can damage the acoustic transducer. Temperatures below 
20°C and above 24°C will cause the Echo to report an error.
1 Load a full bottle of coupling fluid (1 Liter).
2 Turn on the coupling fluid pump. The coupling fluid will be pumped into the Echo Liquid 
Handler. After three to five minutes, verify that the coupling fluid is returning to the coupling 
fluid bottle. Check the debubbler to confirm that it has not taken on air. If it is more than half 
full of air, loosen the cap to allow the water level to rise, and then tighten the cap back in place, 
and observe again in 5 minutes. For more information, see Replace Echo Coupling Fluid and 
Echo Coupling Fluid Maintenance.
3 After filling the fluidic circuit, the coupling fluid bottle may be partially empty. Turn the 
coupling fluid pump off, and add coupling fluid so that the bottle contains 1 L of coupling fluid. 
Make sure that the angled return tube isn’t covered by the new fluid level.
001-16479B    4-11
  Maintenance and Service
Extended Non-Use and Storage  4
4 Turn on the coupling fluid pump.
5 Check the Coupling Fluid status in the Echo Client Utility System Status section. The indicator 
should be green.
Extended Non-Use and Storage
The Echo Liquid Handler is designed to be used on a regular basis (daily or within a week). Regular 
use keeps the acoustic transducer wet and provides consistent liquid transfer results.
The acoustic transducer must remain wet to retain the high degree of precision and accuracy that 
is required for nanoliter volume transfer. If the transducer is allowed to dry out, the focal length 
can change. Prolonged drying of the transducer may result in an extended repair.
If you plan to shut down the Echo Liquid Handler for more than four days but less than fourteen 
days use the Extended Storage procedure.
If you plan to shut down the Echo Liquid Handler for more than fourteen days, contact us to arrange 
for the transducer to be fully capped. For more information, see Long Term Storage.
Echo Maintenance Alerts
The Echo Liquid Handler contains internal checks to ensure that it performs liquid fills under 
optimal conditions. If, for example, the coupling fluid temperature is outside the normal range 
(21.2°C – 23.0°C), a yellow warning light appears on the Echo front and back panels. If the coupling 
fluid temperature continues to rise or fall outside of the warning range (20.2°C – 24.0°C), a red fault 
light appears.
In the Echo Client Utility, the System Status section displays all the status lights. When you see the 
warning or fault lights, see the Echo Maintenance Alerts and Procedures table below.
001-16479B     4-12
  Maintenance and Service
Echo Maintenance Alerts  
Figure 4.7  System Status section
The following table lists the normal maintenance alerts that a user would see, as well as the 
respective corrective procedures.
Perform the following Echo maintenance procedures as needed:
Table 4.2  Echo Maintenance Alerts and Procedures 
Maintenance Alert Procedure
Warning light is yellow. Possible causes: See Status Indicator Lights.
The Echo stages (acoustic transducer, source plate, 
and destination plate) are not homed.
Perform Home calibration. See Stages.
The fluid level is low in the coupling fluid bottle. Add more fluid. See Echo Coupling Fluid 
Maintenance.
The coupling fluid temperature is outside of the 
normal range 22.1°C ± 0.9°C (71.8°F± 1.6°F)
Check the chiller setting, it should be at 22°C. See 
Coupling Fluid Temperature and Indicator.
The door is neither fully open nor fully closed. Check for obstruction. Check compressed air 
pressure, it could be too low. See 
Compressed Air 
Pressure Indicator
The upper anti-static bar is neither fully up nor fully 
down.
Check compressed air pressure. See Compressed Air 
Pressure Indicator

001-16479B    4-13
  Maintenance and Service
Setup Problems  4
Setup Problems
If the Echo Client Utility cannot connect with the Echo Liquid Handler, the following message will 
appear:
Figure 4.8  Connection failure message
This message is not a cause for alarm. Possible causes for the connection failure include:
 • The Echo Liquid Handler has not been turned on.
The source plate dryer nozzle is neither fully up nor 
fully down.
Check compressed air pressure. See Compressed Air 
Pressure Indicator
A focus calibration check needs to be performed. Perform focus calibration check. See Focus 
Calibration Check.
The coupling fluid needs to be replaced. Perform fluid replacement procedure. See Fluid 
Replacement Tab.
The Echo Liquid Handler is in Storage Mode. Perform extended storage recovery procedure. See 
Extended Storage.
Fault light is red. Possible causes: See Status Indicator Lights.
The user-supplied compressed air supply is low 
(< 80 PSI) or nonexistent.
Increase air pressure. See Compressed Air Pressure 
Indicator.
The user-supplied vacuum pressure is low (<  15 in 
Hg Vac) or nonexistent.
Increase vacuum pressure. See Vacuum Supply 
Pressure Indicator.
The Stop switch has been activated. See Stop Switches and Stop Functions.
A coupling fluid leak has been detected. See Fluid Leak Indicator.
LCD message indicates user assistance needed. Follow instructions on the LCD screen.
Client PC indicates a problem. This message is generated by custom programming. 
See your System Administrator.
The coupling fluid temperature is outside of the 
warning range: 20.2°C – 24.0°C.
Check the chiller setting, it should be at 22°C. See 
Coupling Fluid Temperature and Indicator.
Table 4.2  Echo Maintenance Alerts and Procedures (Continued)
Maintenance Alert Procedure

001-16479B     4-14
  Maintenance and Service
Replacing the Fuse  
 • The Echo Liquid Handler has been turned on, but it has not completed its initialization.
— Check the gripper stage homing sequences, particularly the theta rotation of the 
destination gripper stage.
— Check the door opening sequence.
 • The Ethernet cable is not connected between the computer and the Echo Liquid Handler.
 • The IP address or hostname entered in the Echo Client Utility is incorrect and could not connect 
to the instrument.
 • The Echo Liquid Handler is failing to communicate.
Check for the cause, attempt to resolve the problem, and try to launch the software again. If the 
message persists, contact us.
Replacing the Fuse
NOTE  Perform this maintenance procedure only as needed.
The fuse protects the electrical components of the instrument from power surges. It does not 
require routine maintenance but may require replacement if the instrument does not start up.
To replace the fuse:
1 Turn off the Beagle module.
WARNING
Risk of damage to the instrument. To prevent damage to the instrument 
electronics, wait at least 10 seconds before unplugging the power cord after 
shutting down the instrument.
2 At the instrument side panel, unplug the power cord from the instrument and the power outlet.
3 Find the black rectangular fuse holder directly above the power cord receptacle. The fuse 
holder looks like a drawer and displays a picture of the fuse, see Figure 4.9.
001-16479B    4-15
  Maintenance and Service
Replacing the Fuse  4
Figure 4.9  AC power and fuse compartment
4 Find the slot approximately 1/16 inch below the fuse holder. Insert a flat-head screwdriver 
vertically into this slot and slide the fuse holder toward you.
5 Remove the fuse from the holder and replace it with the same type and rating as the old fuse.
 • 100-120V Rated Unit: F2A, 250V
 • 200-240V Rated Unit: F2A, 250V
6 Reinstall the fuse holder by pushing it back into the fuse receptacle.
7 Reconnect the power cord at the rear of the instrument, plug in the other end of the power cord 
to an outlet, and start up the instrument.

001-16479B     4-16
  Maintenance and Service
Replacing the Fuse  
001-16479B    5-1
CHAPTER 5
Instrument Specifications
Communications
The user environment must support the following communication requirements:
Fluid Transfer
Drop transfer resolution: 2.5 nL
Volume transfer range: 2.5 nL to 5 μL
NOTE  Actual transfer range is dependent on fluid type and assay plate.
Transfer Accuracy: <10% deviation from target volume
Transfer Precision: <8% CV (except protein crystallography fluid class)
Server connection Echo Liquid Handling Platform (Server Version 3.1.x)
Network connection 10/100/1000 BaseT
Network protocol TCP/IP
User account Beckman Coulter (The client PC must have an account, with administrator 
privileges, that is accessible by Beckman Coulter Service and Support to service 
the Echo Liquid Handler system.)
Table 5.1  Fluid Transfer Ranges by Plate Table
Plate Maximum Minimum Working Range
384PP 65 μL 15 μL 50 μL
384LDV 12 μL 2.5 μL 9.5 μL
1536LDV 5.5 μL 1.0 μL 4.5 μL
FluidX AcoustiX Sample Tube (FASTube) 85 μL 15 μL 70 μL
001-16479B     5-2
Instrument Specifications
Labware  
Labware
Source Labware Compatibility: See the tables below for details.
Table 5.2  Compatible Source Plates Specifications for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler(s) for DMSO 
fluids
384PP Plate 
001-14555
384LDV Plate 
001-12782
1536LDV Plate 
001-6969
FluidX AcoustiX Sample Tube 
(FASTube)a
a. Not applicable for Echo 650 and 655 Liquid Handler instruments.
Number of Wells 384 384 1536 96
Volume Range 15-65 μL 2.5-12 μL 1.0-5.5 μL 15-85 μL
Working Volume 50 μL 9.5 μL 4.5 μL 70 μL
Dead Volumeb
b. Varies with fluid properties. May be lower.
15 μL 2.5 μL 1.0 μL 15 μL
Max Fill Volumeb 65 μL 12 μL 5.5 μL 85 μL
Centrifugation 
Recommendationc
c. Recommended to remove bubbles caused by the filling process or reagent out-gassing.
200 g RCF 
for 1 min
200 g RCF for 
5
 min
200 g RCF for 
1
 min
200 g RCF for 1 min
Table 5.3  Compatible Source Plates Specifications for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler(s) for Buffer 
fluids
384PP Plate 
001-14555
384LDV Plate 
001-12782
1536LDV Plate 
001-6969
FluidX AcoustiX Sample Tube 
(FASTube)a
a. Not applicable for Echo 650 and 655 Liquid Handler instruments.
Number of Wells 384 384 1536 96
Volume Range 15-65 μL 3.0-12 μL 1.5-5.5 μL 20-85 μL
Working Volume 50 μL 9.0 μL 4.0 μL 65 μL
Dead Volumeb
b. Varies with fluid properties. May be lower.
15 μL 3.0 μL 1.5 μL 20 μL
Max Fill Volumeb 65 μL 12 μL 5.5 μL 85 μL
Centrifugation 
Recommendationc
c. Recommended to remove bubbles caused by the filling process or reagent out-gassing.
1500 g RCF 
for 5 min
1500 g RCF 
for 5
 min
1500 g RCF for 
5
 min
1500 g RCF for 5 min
Table 5.4  Compatible Source Plates Specifications for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler(s) for 
Buffer/Protein fluids
384PP Plate 
001-14555
384LDV Plate 
001-12782
1536LDV Plate 
001-6969
FluidX AcoustiX Sample Tube 
(FASTube)a
Number of Wells 384 384 1536 96
Volume Range 20-50 μL 6.0-14 μL 1.5-5.5 μL 20-85 μL
001-16479B    5-3
Instrument Specifications
Electrical  5
Destination Labware Compatibility: All Echo qualified microplates and most ANSI/SLAS-compliant 
microplates in 96-well, 384-well, 1536-well, and 3456-well format that are 8-16 mm in height are 
compatible.
NOTE  ANSI=American National Standards Institute; SLAS=Society for Laboratory Automation and 
Screening. For information on plate standards, go to http://www.slas.org/education/microplate.cfm
Short and medium flange height microplates (SLAS-3, 4.1 and 4.2) are supported. Tall flange height 
microplates (SLAS-3, 4.3) are not supported. Supported microplate height (SLAS-2, 4.2.1.1) is 8.0–
16 mm (0.31–0.63 in).
For a list of barcode reader formats that are supported by the Echo Liquid Handler, see Optional 
Hardware.
The table below shows the approximate fill time per plate transferred per 24 hour period, including 
robotic movement of microplates in and out of the instrument.
For system throughput details, see System Throughput.
Electrical
There are two electrical configurations of the Echo Liquid Handler:
NOTE  The electrical requirements listed above do not account for chiller power requirements.
Working Volume 30 μL 8.0 μL 4.0 μL 65 μL
Dead Volumeb 20 μL 6.0 μL 1.5 μL 20 μL
Max Fill Volumeb 50 μL 14 μL 5.5 μL 85 μL
Centrifugation 
Recommendationc
1500 g RCF 
for 5 min
1500 g RCF 
for 5
 min
1500 g RCF for 
5
 min
1500 g RCF for 5 min
a. Not applicable for Echo 650 and 655 Liquid Handler instruments.
b. Varies with fluid properties. May be lower.
c. Recommended to remove bubbles caused by the filling process or reagent out-gassing.
Table 5.4  Compatible Source Plates Specifications for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler(s) for 
Buffer/Protein fluids
384PP Plate 
001-14555
384LDV Plate 
001-12782
1536LDV Plate 
001-6969
FluidX AcoustiX Sample Tube 
(FASTube)a
Table 5.5  Electrical Configurations for the Echo Liquid Handler
Voltage Frequency Power Fuse Part Number
100-120 V 50/60 Hz 8 A 250 VAC, F10 A 001-3966
200–240 V 50/60 Hz 4 A 250 VAC, F5 A 001-3967
001-16479B     5-4
Instrument Specifications
Installation Category  
Installation Category
Installation Category II
Ratings
Noise Ratings
The noise ratings for the Echo Liquid Handler are below:
Power Ratings
The power ratings for the Echo Liquid Handler are below:
Physical
The user must set aside the space to accommodate Echo Liquid Handler installation.
Noise Rating 64 dBA 
Power Rating 600W without the chiller
Heat Rating 600W without the chiller
The Echo Liquid Handler 
Dimensions
53.8 cm width x 74.6 cm depth x 91.5 cm height (21.2 x 29.3 x 36.0 inches)
Echo Liquid Handler 
working envelope 
(minimal installation 
requirements)
Top: It is recommended to have 25.4 cm (10 in) above the instrument to 
remove the top cover for servicing.
Front: It is recommended to have 40.6 cm (16 in) to allow sufficient clearance 
to load and unload microplates by hand or by robot.
Side: It is recommended to have 121.9 cm (48 in) minimum on left and right 
sides to allow for serviceability. The Echo Liquid Handler should have sufficient 
space to be rotated, otherwise it will need to be removable for service.
Rear: It is recommended to have 30.5 cm (12 in) minimum behind the 
instrument to allow for cables, hoses, tubing, and maintenance access. The 
coupling fluid bottle and optional caddy fit within the rear clearance but can 
be relocated if necessary.
SMC Chiller Dimensions 30 cm plus fittings width x 34 cm Depth x 18 cm Height (11.8 in x 13.4 in x 
36.4 in). It is recommended that the chiller be installed within 121.9 cm 
(48 inches) of the Echo Liquid Handler.
001-16479B    5-5
Instrument Specifications
Environmental  5
NOTE  The instrument can be installed with a minimum of 2.5 cm (1 in) at the top if there is sufficient space 
to lift the top and slide it all the way forward. Talk to your Beckman Coulter service representative for 
additional details.
Environmental
Pollution Degree
Pollution Degree: 2
Altitude
Altitude: Up to 2000m
Site Requirements
The following site requirements must be met before the Echo Liquid Handler can be installed:
NOTE  The Echo Liquid Handler power configuration is factory set and requires a Field Service visit in order 
to be changed on site.
Echo Client PC Additional space for the client PC, monitor, keyboard and mouse.
Other Space must be allocated for:
 • Any robotics in the system
 • Workspace for microplates
Operating environment Temperature: 21°C ± 5°C (70°F± 9°F) 
Relative humidity: 10-80%, non-condensing for the Echo Liquid Handler 
and 35-80% for the SMC Chiller
AC Power (2 options) Option 1: 100-120 V, 50/60 Hz, > 10A
Option 2: 200-240 V, 50/60 Hz, > 5A
A minimum of two electrical sockets within 183 cm (6 feet) of the Echo 
Liquid Handler supporting a minimum of 800 W are required.
The Echo Liquid Handler and SMC chiller maximum power consumption is 
600W and 500W respectively.
Up to four additional electrical sockets are required for the client PC, 
monitor, vacuum pump (optional) and air compressor (optional).
001-16479B     5-6
Instrument Specifications
Environmental  
NOTE  The Junair OF302-4B oil-less compressor can be purchased from Beckman Coulter (Part #001-12164). 
For more information, see the Junair Compressor (Optional and sold separately by Beckman Coulter) 
topic.
NOTE  A standalone Vacuubrand MZ 2S-NT vacuum system can be purchased from Beckman Coulter (Part 
#001-8104). For more information, see the Vacuum Pump (Optional and sold separately by Beckman 
Coulter) topic.
NOTE  The 10 L surge tank comes standard with the Echo Liquid Handler to ensure consistent vacuum.
User Supplied Equipment Requirements
The user must provide the following items:
Compressed air source Clean, filtered, oil-free, dry air at 552 kPa (80 PSI) minimum, 1034 kPa 
(150  PSI) maximum
Maximum consumption by Echo Liquid Handler does not exceed 1 cfm at 
150 PSI
Vacuum source for source 
plate dryer (2 options)
Option 1: House supply. Minimum 200 Torr (266 mbar, 22 in Hg Vac) 
minimum pumping speed 8.0 m3/hr
Option 2: Standalone vacuum with surge tank (10 L). 100 Torr (133 mbar, 
26 in Hg Vac), minimum pumping speed 2.0 m3/hr
Instrument mounting surface 
(minimal requirements)
The Echo Liquid Handler can emit vibration while in operation and is 
susceptible to vibration from other devices. For this reason, the Echo 
system should be placed on a surface that is isolated from surrounding 
equipment or designed to suppress the transmission of vibration from 
devices. The surface must be sturdy, level, and water-resistant with 
cross-bracing or welded joints.
The surface must be capable of supporting a minimum of 142 kg (313 lbs) 
weight with sufficient surface area to accommodate the Echo Liquid 
Handler in the recommended operating envelope (see Echo Liquid 
Handler Dimensions). If the mounting surface is a table top, the table legs 
should not rest on casters. If the table has casters, they should be locked.
If the chiller will be installed on the bench surface, it must accommodate 
an additional 14 kg (31 lbs).
Destination plate samples At installation, ensure common destination plates to be used with the 
instrument are available for tuning the destination plate gripper.
Coupling Fluid Use only ASTM D-1193 Type 1 water in the fluidics system
Coupling Fluid Temperature: 22.1°C ± 0.9°C (71.8°F± 1.6°F)
001-16479B    5-7
Instrument Specifications
Client PC (minimum requirements)  5
NOTE  Client PC can be purchased directly from Beckman Coulter (Part #ECHO-Client Computer). For 
information on the Client PC available from Beckman Coulter, see the Client PC (Sold separately by 
Beckman Coulter) topic. For more information on minimum requirements for the Client PC, see the Client 
PC (minimum requirements) topic.
NOTE  If you are integrating the Echo Liquid Handler into an automated system and need to install the Client 
+ Server software onto a workstation, it must contain an Intel Core i5 processor or better.
NOTE  If you are setting up an Echo 650T or 655T Liquid Handler that will be using tubes, a capper/decapper 
is required before Beckman Coulter Service and Support can install or service the instrument.
Client PC (minimum requirements)
Client PC specifications:
Software specifications:
 • Echo Plate Reformat
 • Echo Dose-Response
 • Echo Cherry Pick
 • Echo Array Maker
 • Echo Plate Audit
 • Echo Combination Screen
NOTE  Echo 65XT Liquid Handlers require Echo software applications version 1.7 or higher.
Hardware Compressed air fitting compatible with 0.170 in ID / 0.250 in OD tubing 
between the compressed air supply and the Echo Liquid Handler tubing 
(Beckman Coulter provides the compressed air line and fitting with the 
Echo Liquid Handler)
Vacuum fitting that connects 3/8 in ID, 5/8 in OD tubing to either house 
vacuum or a vacuum pump. The supplied vacuum line is HercoBraid, 3/8 
in ID, 5/8 in OD (RyanHerco P/N 0512-072)
Client PC Minimum Requirements: Microsoft Windows 7 using 32- or 64-bit OS, or 
Microsoft Windows 10 64-bit; Intel Core 2 Duo processor or later; 1GB of 
RAM or greater; 1 GB of available disk storage; display resolution of 1280 
x 1024 (1920x1020 preferred); 2 x Gigabit ethernet ports
Operating system Microsoft Windows 7 (32-bit or 64-bit) OS, Microsoft Windows 10 (64-bit) 
OS which must be run in Windows 7 Compatibility Mode
CPU Intel Core 2 Duo or later
Memory 1 GB RAM or greater
Hard drive storage 1 GB of available disk storage
Video Resolution 1280 x 1024 resolution
Ethernet 10/100/1000 Ethernet port
001-16479B     5-8
Instrument Specifications
Optional Hardware  
Optional Hardware
The Echo Liquid Handler comes with short side barcode readers. The long side barcode reader is 
optional.
NOTE  The readable bar width expresses the range in which the width of thin barcode bars (narrow bar width) 
is readable.
Table 5.6  Barcode Reader(s)
Compatible barcode reader formats Readable bar width (mm)
CODE 39 0.19 - 1.0
ITF 0.19 - 1.0
INTERLEAVED 2 of 5 0.19 - 1.0
CODABAR 0.19 - 1.0
UPC/EAN 0.19 - 1.0
CODE 128 0.25 - 1.0
COOP 2 of 5 0.19 - 1.0
CODE 93 0.25 - 1.0
001-16479B    A-1
APPENDIX A
Appendix
Consumables
The consumables and corresponding specifications recommended to be used with the Echo Liquid 
Handler are listed below:
Table A.1  Compatible Source Plates Specifications for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler(s) for DMSO 
fluids
384PP Plate 
001-14555
384LDV Plate 
001-12782
1536LDV Plate 
001-6969
FluidX AcoustiX Sample Tube 
(FASTube)a
a. Not applicable for Echo 650 and 655 Liquid Handler instruments.
Number of Wells 384 384 1536 96
Volume Range 15-65 μL 2.5-12 μL 1.0-5.5 μL 15-85 μL
Working Volume 50 μL 9.5 μL 4.5 μL 70 μL
Dead Volumeb
b. Varies with fluid properties. May be lower.
15 μL 2.5 μL 1.0 μL 15 μL
Max Fill Volumeb 65 μL 12 μL 5.5 μL 85 μL
Centrifugation 
Recommendationc
c. Recommended to remove bubbles caused by the filling process or reagent out-gassing.
200 g RCF 
for 1 min
200 g RCF for 
5
 min
200 g RCF for 
1
 min
200 g RCF for 1 min
Table A.2  Compatible Source Plates Specifications for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler(s) for Buffer 
fluids
384PP Plate 
001-14555
384LDV Plate 
001-12782
1536LDV Plate 
001-6969
FluidX AcoustiX Sample Tube 
(FASTube)a
a. Not applicable for Echo 650 and 655 Liquid Handler instruments.
Number of Wells 384 384 1536 96
Volume Range 15-65 μL 3.0-12 μL 1.5-5.5 μL 20-85 μL
Working Volume 50 μL 9.0 μL 4.0 μL 65 μL
Dead Volumeb
b. Varies with fluid properties. May be lower.
15 μL 3.0 μL 1.5 μL 20 μL
Max Fill Volumeb 65 μL 12 μL 5.5 μL 85 μL
Centrifugation 
Recommendationc
c. Recommended to remove bubbles caused by the filling process or reagent out-gassing.
1500 g RCF 
for 5 min
1500 g RCF 
for 5
 min
1500 g RCF for 
5
 min
1500 g RCF for 5 min
001-16479B     A-2
Appendix
Calibrations  
Calibrations
Table A.3  Compatible Source Plates Specifications for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler(s) for 
Buffer/Protein fluids
384PP Plate 
001-14555
384LDV Plate 
001-12782
1536LDV Plate 
001-6969
FluidX AcoustiX Sample Tube 
(FASTube)a
a. Not applicable for Echo 650 and 655 Liquid Handler instruments.
Number of Wells 384 384 1536 96
Volume Range 20-50 μL 6.0-14 μL 1.5-5.5 μL 20-85 μL
Working Volume 30 μL 8.0 μL 4.0 μL 65 μL
Dead Volumeb
b. Varies with fluid properties. May be lower.
20 μL 6.0 μL 1.5 μL 20 μL
Max Fill Volumeb 50 μL 14 μL 5.5 μL 85 μL
Centrifugation 
Recommendationc
c. Recommended to remove bubbles caused by the filling process or reagent out-gassing.
1500 g RCF 
for 5 min
1500 g RCF 
for 5
 min
1500 g RCF for 
5
 min
1500 g RCF for 5 min
Table A.4  Standard Calibrations for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler(s) 
Source Plate Type and Calibration Example Fluid
Omics 384PP_AQ_GP3 Reagents without surfactants. Can contain DNA, 
proteins, serum, plasma, enzymes, antibodies, and 
proteins stored in buffer or up to 50% glycerol.
384PP_AQ_SP2 Buffers, reagents containing surfactant (PCR 
mastermix, lysis buffers, reagents with Triton X-100, 
Tween-20, SDS, NP-4-, etc.), with or without 
serum/plasma.
384PP_AQ_CP Reagents without surfactants. MPD, PEGS, and 
Osmotic solutions.
384LDV_AQ_B2 Simple buffers: PBS, cell culture media without 
protein, cDNA, primers/probes.
384LDV_AQ_P2 Buffers, reagents containing protein (no surfactants), 
e.g. enzymes, media with protein, serum, and 
antibodies.
96TR_AQ_GP (Echo 650T and 655T 
Liquid Handler only)
Reagents without surfactants. Can contain DNA, 
proteins, serum, plasma, enzymes, antibodies, and 
proteins stored in buffer or up to 50% glycerol.
96TR_AQ_SP (Echo 650T and 655T 
Liquid Handler only)
Buffers, reagents containing surfactant (PCR 
mastermix, lysis buffers, reagents with Triton X-100, 
Tween-20, SDS, NP-4-, etc.), with or without 
serum/plasma.
001-16479B    A-3
Appendix
System Throughput  A
System Throughput
Critical Micelle Concentrations
The following tables provide critical micelle concentration conversion values.
Screening 384PP_DMSO2 70-100% DMSO
384LDV_DMSO 70-100% DMSO
1536LDV_DMSO 70-100% DMSO
1536LDV_DMSO_HT (Echo 655 and 
655T Liquid Handler only)
70-100% DMSO
96TR_DMSO (Echo 650T and 655T 
Liquid Handler only)
70-100% DMSO
Table A.4  Standard Calibrations for Echo 650, 655, 650T, 655T Liquid Handler(s) (Continued)
Source Plate Type and Calibration Example Fluid
Table A.5  System Throughput (100nL Dispense Per Destination Well) for Echo 655 and 655T
Source Plate Type and 
Calibration
Dispense Plate 
Type
Dispense 
Type
Dispense 
Volume Per Well
Destination Plate Fill 
Cycle Time (min)
384PP_AQ_GP3 384 384:384 100 nL 2.6-3.2
384PP_AQ_SP2 384 384:384 100 nL 2.6-3.0
384PP_AQ_CP 384 384:384 100 nL 7.2
384LDV_AQ_B2 384 384:384 100 nL 3.4
384LDV_AQ_P2 384 384:384 100 nL 3.6
96TR_AQ_GP (Echo 655T 
Liquid Handler only)
96 4x96:384 100 nL 5.6-6.4
96TR_AQ_SP (Echo 655T 
Liquid Handler only)
96 4x96:384 100 nL 5.6-6.4
384PP_DMSO2 384 384:384 100 nL 2.3
384LDV_DMSO 384 384:384 100 nL 2.5
1536LDV_DMSO 1536 1536:1536 100 nL 6.0
1536LDV_DMSO_HT 1536 1536:1536 100 nL 5.1
96TR_DMSO (Echo 655T 
Liquid Handler only)
96 4x96:384 100 nL 4.8
001-16479B     A-4
Appendix
Critical Micelle Concentrations  
Critical Micelle Concentration: Percent Weight to Volume Conversions Table
Critical Micelle Concentration: Concentration in mM Conversions Table
NOTE  CMC is based on the surfactant in water at room temperature. Additives and changes in temperature 
will impact these values.
1Sigma Aldrich, Biological Detergents Poster. 
2Calbiochem Guide to Detergents (booklets), 2001. 
3Pierce/Thermo Scientific website - Detergents for Cell Lysis and Protein Extraction 
http://www.piercenet.com/method/detergents-cell-lysis-protein-extraction#detergent-types 
4Surfactants from Renewable Resources, M. Kjellin and I. Johansson, editors. Wiley. p. 245. 2010. 
5Sigma Aldrich Hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (H 6269) product information sheet. 
6The CMC for SDS has a range of 6-8 mM, depending on the temperature and salt concentration. 
7The CMC for Chaps has a range of 4.3-10 mM, depending on the temperature and salt 
concentration. 
8The CMC for CTAB has a range of 0.2-1.1 mM, depending on the temperature and salt 
concentration. 
9Calculated from CMC (mM) value. 
10Micellar properties of the zwitterionic bile derivative CHAPS. 1988. (Upper bound, pure water 
value, and pH & temperature insensitivity) http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3365263 
11Membrane Protein Solubilization: Recent Advances and Challenges in Solubilization of Serotonin 
Receptors. 2005. (Lower bound) 
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1080/15216540500167237/pdf 
12Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochem. Eng. Aspects 290 (2006) 206–212.

001-16479B    A-5
Appendix
Chiller Setup  A
Chiller Setup
A Beckman Coulter service representative will set up the chiller during Echo Liquid Handler 
installation. If you need to set up the chiller again (for example, after relocation of the Echo Liquid 
Handler), use the procedure below. The references in parenthesis throughout the steps refer to the 
callouts in the chiller image below.
Figure A.1  Front and rear view for SMC Chiller
The table below describes the different parts of the SMC Chiller.
1 Place the chiller on a stable base under the Echo Liquid Handler or on a stable base beside the 
Echo Liquid Handler. Avoid exposure to strong vibrations and shock.
NOTE  It is assumed that the chiller is being set up in a typical laboratory environment. Avoid direct 
exposure to water/steam, oil, chemicals, or prolonged sunlight.
Table A.6  Callout table for front and rear view for SMC Chiller
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Control panel LCD screen displaying instrument status
2 Air inlet Air inlet for instrument temperature regulation
3 Power switch Power switch for powering instrument on/off
4 Water in Water input to chiller connected to water out on Echo Liquid Handler fluidics 
panel
5 Water out Water output from chiller connected to water in on Echo Liquid Handler 
fluidics panel
6 Air outlet Air outlet for instrument temperature regulation
7 Cooling fins Cooling fins allowing for heat dissipation. Must allow free airflow in this area
8 Power connection Power cord connection

001-16479B     A-6
Appendix
Chiller Setup  
Figure A.2  Tubing connections on the chiller
2 Ensure the chiller is setup so that there is free airflow around the air inlets at the front of the 
chiller and at the air outlet and cooling fins at the back of the chiller.
NOTE  Do not place the chiller in a sealed enclosure.
3 Connect the chiller tubing to the Echo (Water in) > Chiller (Water out) and Echo (Water 
out) > Chiller (Water in) as shown above.
NOTE  The connectors are keyed so they can only be installed in the correct configuration. Do not modify 
the connectors.
4 Turn on the Echo pump and allow the fluid line to fill.
5 Connect chiller power cable to a correctly grounded power outlet in your facility using the 
provided cable.

001-16479B    A-7
Appendix
Chiller Setup  A
6 Toggle the power switch to the | or on position.
 • The chiller control panel lights up and displays the firmware version for about a second.
 • It displays the normal operation screen.
 • The chiller starts controlling temperature immediately.
NOTE  The parameters in the control panel are explained below: 
PV - Current or Present Value for temperature 
SV - Target or Setpoint Value for temperature 
If an alarm arises, the error code is indicated in the top line. 
Mode - Indicates operation mode.
7 If necessary, press SEL button to change the setpoint value.
a. The MODE parameter on the control panel will change from Normal to blank.

001-16479B     A-8
Appendix
Chiller Setup  
b. The < indivatoron the control panel switches from PV to SV.
c. Press the Up Arrow or Down Arrow buttons to change the temperature setpoint value (SV) 
to the desired number.
d. Press the RET button to confirm the change.
NOTE  If the RET button is not pressed within 1 minute from the last button press, the unit will revert 
to the initial settings.
NOTE  Settings are permanent even if the chiller is powered down.

    Index-1
Index
F
fuse
replacement, 4-14
I
introduction to online help, 1-xxix
M
maintenance procedures
fuse replacement, 4-14
S
Software, 3-1
     Index-2
Index
  
001-16479B    Warranty-1
Beckman Coulter, Inc.
Customer End User License Agreement
This Product contains software that is owned by Beckman Coulter, Inc. or its suppliers and is protected by 
United States and international copyright laws and international trade provisions. You must treat the 
software contained in this Product like any other copyrighted material. This license and your right to use the 
Product terminate automatically if you violate any part of this agreement.
This is a license agreement and not an agreement for sale. Beckman Coulter hereby licenses this Software to 
you under the following terms and conditions:
You May:
1. Use this software in the computer supplied to you by Beckman Coulter;
2. Maintain one copy of this software for backup purposes (the backup copy shall be supplied by Beckman 
Coulter);
3. After written notification to Beckman Coulter, transfer the entire Product to another person or entity, 
provided you retain no copies of the Product software and the transferee agrees to the terms of this 
license agreement.
You May Not:
1. Use, copy or transfer copies of this Software except as provided in this license agreement;
2. Alter, merge, modify or adapt this Software in any way including disassembling or decompiling;
3. Loan, rent, lease, or sublicense this Software or any copy.
Limited Warranty
Beckman Coulter warrants that the software will substantially conform to the published specifications for the 
Product in which it is contained, provided that it is used on the computer hardware and in the operating 
system environment for which it was designed. Should the media on which your software arrives prove 
defective, Beckman Coulter will replace said media free of charge within 90 days of delivery of the Product. 
This is your sole remedy for any breech of warranty for this software.
Except as specifically noted above, Beckman Coulter makes no warranty or representation, either expressed 
or implied, with respect to this software or its documentation including quality, performance, 
merchantability, or fitness for a particular purpose.
No Liability for Consequential Damages
In no event shall Beckman Coulter or its suppliers be liable for any damages whatsoever (including, without 
limitation, damages for loss of profits, business interruption, loss of information, or other pecuniary loss) 
arising out of the use of or inability to use the Beckman Coulter Product software. Because some states do not 
allow the exclusion or limitation of liability for consequential damages, the above limitation might not apply 
to you.
General
This agreement constitutes the entire agreement between you and Beckman Coulter and supersedes any 
prior agreement concerning this Product software. It shall not be modified except by written agreement 
dated subsequent to the date of this agreement signed by an authorized Beckman Coulter representative. 
Beckman Coulter is not bound by any provision of any purchase order, receipt, acceptance, confirmation, 
correspondence, or otherwise, unless Beckman Coulter specifically agrees to the provision in writing. This 
agreement is governed by the laws of the State of California.
001-16479B     Warranty-2
Beckman Coulter, Inc. Customer End User License Agreement
  
[UNREADABLE_PAGE]
© 2021 Beckman Coulter, Inc. 
All Rights Reserved
www.beckman.com
Related Documents
Beckman Coulter Echo documentation consists 
of the following publications:
 • Echo Array Maker  Quick Start Guide
 • Echo Combination Screen User Guide
 • Echo Combination Screen Quick Start Guide
 • Echo Cherry Pick User Guide
 • Echo Cherry Pick Quick Start Guide
 • Echo Plate Reformat User Guide
 • Echo Plate Reformat Quick Start Guide
 • Echo Plate Audit User Guide
 • Echo Plate Audit Quick Start Guide
 • Echo Dose-Response User Guide
 • Echo Dose-Response Quick Start Guide
 • Echo 21CFR11 Compliance Manager User Guide
 • Echo 21CFR11 Compliance Manager Quick Start Guide
 • Echo 21CFR11 Compliance Manager Admin User Guide
 • Echo 21CFR11 Compliance Manager Admin Quick Start Guide
 • Echo 500 Series Liquid Handler User Guide
 • Echo 525 Series Liquid Handler User Guide
 • Echo 650 Series Liquid Handler User Guide
 • Echo Software Applications Integration Guide
 • Echo Liquid Handler Software Integration Guide
 • Tempo Automation Control Software User Guide
 • Access Dual Robot System User Guide
 • Glossary of Symbols