C68406AA    
September 2020
User Guide
Echo Plate Audit Application
Beckman Coulter, Inc.
250 S. Kraemer Blvd.
Brea, CA  92821  U.S.A.
Echo Plate Audit Application 
User Guide
PN C68406AA (September 2020)
©2020 Beckman Coulter, Inc. 
All rights reserved.
Beckman Coulter, the stylized logo, and the Beckman 
Coulter product and service marks mentioned herein are 
trademarks or registered trademarks of Beckman Coulter, 
Inc. in the United States and other countries.
Windows 7, Windows 8, and Windows 10 are registered 
trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the 
United States and/or other countries.
All other trademarks are the property of their respective 
owners.
Contact Us
If you have any questions, contact our Customer Support 
Center.
 • Worldwide, find us via our website at
www.beckman.com/support/technical
 • In the USA and Canada, call us at 1-800-369-0333.
 • Outside of the USA and Canada, contact your local 
Beckman Coulter Representative.
Glossary of Symbols is available at 
beckman.com/techdocs (PN C24689).
May be covered by one or more pat. - see 
www.beckman.com/patents
Original Instructions
C68406AA    iii
Revision Status
This document applies to the latest software listed and higher versions. When a subsequent software 
version changes the information in this document, a new issue will be released to the Beckman Coulter 
website. For labeling updates, go to www.beckman.com/techdocs and download the most recent manual 
or system help for your instrument.
Revision 2 9/2020
Manual reformatted for new corporate template.
Echo Plate Audit Application version 1.8.0.
C68406AA     iv
Revision Status
  
    v
Content
Revision Status, iii
Revision Status, iii
CHAPTER 1: Preface, 1-1
About this Guide, 1-1
Intended Audience, 1-1
Software Requirements, 1-1
Customer Responsibilities, 1-2
Technical Support Resources, 1-2
Documentation Conventions, 1-3
CHAPTER 2: Introduction, 2-1
Introduction, 2-1
CHAPTER 3: Getting Started, 3-1
Starting the Software, 3-1
Activating the Instrument, 3-4
Understanding the Main Window, 3-5
Survey Data Set Window, 3-5
Protocol Window, 3-7
Setting Up the Software, 3-8
Shutting Down the Software, 3-10
CHAPTER 4: Software Operations, 4-1
Starting a New Protocol, 4-1
Selecting the Source Plate Type, 4-2
Selecting the Survey Area, 4-3
Importing a Pick List, 4-3
Importing a Pick List While Running a Protocol, 4-5
Editing the Protocol, 4-8
Running a Protocol, 4-10
Importing a Survey Data Set, 4-11
     vi
Content
  
Viewing Reports, 4-13
Analyzing Plate Data, 4-13
Comparing Plates Within a Batch or Over Time, 4-14
Comparing Fluid Hydration and Volume Across Replicates, 4-16
Using a Filter to Compare Expected Versus Actual Values, 4-18
Identifying Wells for Replenishment, 4-19
Creating a Custom Rule, 4-20
Understanding Warning Rules and Error Rules, 4-20
Reusing Rules, 4-20
Exporting Rules from Files, 4-21
Importing Rules from Files, 4-21
Running Reports Based on Rules, 4-21
Running Example Scenarios, 4-22
Verifying Sufficient Volume to Complete a Protocol, 4-22
CHAPTER 5: Software Reference, 5-1
Toolbar, 5-1
File Menu, 5-1
File menu with a protocol selected in the main application 
window, 5-2
File menu with a survey data set selected in the main 
application window, 5-3
Protocol Menu, 5-3
Tools Menu, 5-4
Help Menu, 5-4
Survey Data Set Tab, 5-5
Plate Tab, 5-5
Data Matrix Tab, 5-6
Table Tab, 5-6
Raw Data Tab, 5-7
Protocol Tab, 5-8
Add Plate, 5-13
Delete Plate, 5-15
Select Region, 5-16
Add Region, 5-17
Delete Region, 5-19
Delete All Regions for Plate, 5-21
Delete All Regions, 5-23
Error Check, 5-24
Run, 5-24
Protocol Options Tab, 5-25
Understanding Protocol Options, 5-25
Surveys, 5-26
Understanding Output Options, 5-27
Output Files, 5-27
Survey and Rule Validation Reports, 5-27
Rule Definitions, 5-31
    vii
Content
  
Preferences, 5-34
Labware Definitions, 5-34
Plate Type List, 5-35
Plate Type Editor, 5-37
Plate Export, 5-40
Run Protocol, 5-41
Simulator Window, 5-43
Run Status Window, 5-45
Plate Prompt, 5-47
Focus Calibration, 5-48
Coupling Fluid Replacement, 5-51
Glossary
Beckman Coulter, Inc. 
Customer End User License Agreement
     viii
Content
  
C68406AA    1-1
CHAPTER 1
Preface
This section provides information about who the intended audience is, the software requirements, 
technical support resources, and documentation conventions used. It includes the following 
sections.
 • About this Guide
 • Intended Audience
 • Software Requirements
 • Technical Support Resources
 • Related Documents
 • Documentation Conventions
About this Guide
This guide describes the key features of the Echo Plate Audit application.
Intended Audience
The intended audience for this guide is laboratory personnel. Researchers can use the Echo Plate 
Audit application to create and run “survey only” plate transfer protocols for Echo Liquid Handlers.
Software Requirements
To use the Echo® Plate Audit Application, the following items are required:
 • Echo Liquid Handler instrument using server version 2.4.x or later and Echo.Net Framework 
version 1.8.0
 • Software license key from Beckman Coulter Inc.
 • Computer system meeting the following requirements:
— Operating system: Microsoft Windows 10 64-bit, (must be run in Windows 7 Compatibility 
Mode); Microsoft .Net Framework 4.6
NOTE  Echo Plate Audit Application will run in 32-bit mode on Windows 10 64-bit Operating System.
— CPU: Intel® Core™ i5 or later
— Memory: 4 GB or greater
— Network connection: 2 x 10/100/1000 BaseT
C68406AA     1-2
Preface
Technical Support Resources  
— Network protocol: TCP/IP
— Hard drive: 4 GB Free Space Available
— Video: Minimum 1600 x 1200 resolution
The Echo Plate Audit Application works closely with the Echo Liquid Handler Software for Client 
Computers and should be installed on the same client PC.
The Echo Software Compatibility Matrix table below documents the versions of software supported 
by this guide and their compatibility.
Echo Software Version Compatibility Matrix
NOTE  For information on the compatibility of a specific software version, please contact us.
Customer Responsibilities
The customer is responsible for installing, configuring, and securing the Windows 10 operating 
system on their computer, including the creation of any user accounts and password complexity 
rules that may apply, and the application of any software patches and security updates that are 
necessary to keep the system secure. The customer is also responsible for installing anti-virus and 
anti-malware software and keeping the virus definitions from the vendor up to date so as to keep 
the computer safe.
The Echo application software accepts certain inputs, such as Sample ID and Sample Name, which 
the user might populate with personally identifiable information.  Furthermore, the Echo 
application software uses those inputs to generate reports that are stored unencrypted on the disk.  
Accordingly, it is the responsibility of the customer to ensure that the information provided to the 
Echo application, and subsequent reports that are stored on the disk, do not contain any personally 
identifiable information, or that the information is obfuscated or encrypted when stored on the 
disk to comply with any applicable regulations related to data privacy and security.
Technical Support Resources
For technical support issues, contact Customer Service  www.beckman.com/support/technical.
Echo Client Software Echo Application 
Software
Tempo Automation 
Control Software
Echo.Net Framework
2.4.5 - 2.5.x 1.5.4 or later 1.5.2 or later 1.5.4 or later
2.4.5 - 2.6.x 1.6.0 or later 1.6.0 or later 1.6.0 or later
2.4.5 - 2.6.x 1.7.0 or later 2.1.xa or later
a. Check with your Beckman Coulter  Sa les Representative for availability.
1.7.0 or later
3.1.x 1.7.2 or later 2.1.xa or later 1.7.2 or later
2.4.5-2.6.x 1.8.0 or later 2.2.0 or later 1.8.0 or later
3.1.x 1.8.0 or later 2.2.0 or later 1.8.0 or later
C68406AA    1-3
Preface
Documentation Conventions  1
For telephone support, call (877) 742-6548.
Documentation Conventions
Style Purpose
blue italicized text (PDF, Web only) Cross references, link, Web addresses
courier std Commands, filenames, directories, paths, user input
bold text Interactive interface objects, keys, buttons
italicized text Book titles, glossary terms
C68406AA     1-4
Preface
Documentation Conventions  
C68406AA    2-1
CHAPTER 2
Introduction
Introduction
The Echo Plate Audit application enables the creation and analysis of survey data from the Echo 
Liquid Handler without fluid transfer. All plates processed in an Echo Plate Audit protocol are 
treated as source plates and surveyed according to the plate type selected. After plates are 
surveyed, the analysis view in Echo Plate Audit enables data visualization for easy comparison of 
fluid properties.
Since the Echo Liquid Handler has the capability to survey and assess the composition of fluid in a 
microplate well, the Echo Plate Audit application can use this capability to collect and present the 
sample properties for analysis. Characteristics including fluid height, volume, and composition can 
be visually compared to benchmarks or across replicates. Additionally, wells with low sample 
volume are easily identified for replenishment. Analysis rules can be created to quickly assess 
samples across plates and qualify sample plates for protocols run on Access workstations. In Tempo 
automation control software, plates that violate a validation rule can be flagged to prevent use in a 
future run or to simply warn operators.
The key features of this application are described below:
 • Side-by-side comparison for reports from multiple runs
 • Ability to analyze plate-to-plate variations within a batch
 • Allows the setting of volume and composition thresholds to identify failing wells
 • Ability to create pass and fail rules
 • Ability to set benchmarks and compare plates over time
 • Create rules to quickly assess samples across plates
 • Use rules to validate samples for screening
The steps to creating a typical transfer protocol for Echo Plate Audit Application are shown 
below.
1 Start a new protocol. For more information, see Starting a New Protocol.
2 Select the source plate type. All protocols start with this step. For more information, see 
Selecting the Source Plate Type.
3 Select the survey area. For more information, see Selecting the Survey Area.
4 Create custom rules. For more information, see Rule Definitions.
C68406AA     2-2
Introduction
Introduction  
5 Edit the protocol. For more information, see Editing the Protocol.
6 Run the protocol. For more information, see Running a Protocol.
7 View reports. After the protocol run is completed, the .epadata file is displayed with the 
resulting survey data. For more information, see Viewing Reports.
8 Save the protocol and survey data set.
C68406AA    3-1
CHAPTER 3
Getting Started
This chapter describes the basic tasks to start, set up, and exit the Echo Plate Audit application. It 
includes the following topics.
 • Starting the Software
 • Activating the Instrument
 • Understanding the Main Window
 • Setting Up the Software
 • Shutting Down the Software
Starting the Software
To start the Echo Plate Audit application:
1 Open the Start menu.
2 Select All Programs (or Programs) > BeckmanCoulter > Echo Plate Audit.
3 Select the Echo Plate Audit application.
Figure 3.1  Location of Echo Plate Audit application
NOTE  To create a shortcut to the Echo Plate Audit application on the computer desktop, right-click on 
the Echo Plate Audit icon and select Send to and Desktop.
After launching the application, the Connect to Instrument prompt is displayed.

C68406AA     3-2
Getting Started
Starting the Software  
Figure 3.2  Connect to instrument dialog box
The Connect to Instrument dialog box connects the Echo Plate Audit application to a specific 
Echo instrument, if there are multiple instruments. If there are no instruments listed for 
Instrument, it means that the application has never connected to an instrument. After the first 
time a user connects to the instrument from the application, that Echo instrument will be 
added to the dropdown list in the application.
NOTE  Activating an instrument allows the user to run an actual protocol on a licensed Echo instrument. 
The user can still connect to the Echo instrument and create a protocol even if the licensing 
requirements have not been completed, but must click the Work Offline button to work offline. The 
protocol can be created but cannot be run until the licensing requirements have been met. If the user 
recently installed or upgraded the software, the instrument will need to be activated. See Activating 
the Instrument for more information.
4 Choose one of the following start options:
 • Connect : Select an Echo Liquid Handler from the Instrument menu and click Connect. The 
Main Window opens with the connection status and instrument information at the bottom 
of the screen. This option enables the user to execute the sample or reagent survey as soon 
as the survey protocol is ready.

C68406AA    3-3
Getting Started
Starting the Software  3
Figure 3.3  Echo Plate Audit application connected to an Echo Liquid Handler
 • Work Offline : Click Work Offline. The Echo Plate Audit application opens with the 
connection status set to offline at the bottom of the screen. This option enables the user to 
create a survey protocol and run a simulation without connecting to the Echo Liquid 
Handler.
Figure 3.4  Echo Plate Audit application offline

C68406AA     3-4
Getting Started
Activating the Instrument  
Activating the Instrument
To run a protocol created from the Echo Plate Audit application on an Echo Liquid Handler, the user 
must activate this application for each Echo Liquid Handler. Each application has to be activated for 
the instrument connected.
 • The Echo Plate Audit application must be activated with the software license key provided by 
Beckman Coulter.
 • If the Echo Plate Audit application was installed with the Echo Liquid Handler by a Beckman 
support engineer, the activation step should not be necessary.
To activate the instrument
1 Start the Echo Plate Audit application. See Starting the Software for more information.
2 In the Connect to Instrument dialog box, type the name or IP address of the Echo server to 
connect to and click Connect.
Figure 3.5  Connect to instrument dialog box
3 Click the Tools tab in the Toolbar and select the Activate Instrument option.
4 Enter the license key. The license key is an encrypted block of text that authorizes the user to 
run the Echo Plate Audit application with a specific Echo Liquid Handler.
The license key can be entered in either of the following ways:
 • Copy the license key from the file received from Beckman Coulter and paste it into the 
License Key text box.
 • Click the Open License Key File button and browse for the license key file.

C68406AA    3-5
Getting Started
Understanding the Main Window  3
Figure 3.6  Activate instrument screen
NOTE  The Get Current Key function is a useful troubleshooting tool used to verify that the key is written 
correctly to the instrument. When the Get Current Key button is clicked, the application searches 
for the license key and inserts it into the License Key text box. In case of an error, send the 
encrypted key to Beckman Coulter to determine if the license key is corrupted or if it applies to a 
different instrument.
5 Click the Activate button.
The Echo Liquid Handler should be activated now. This procedure is not required again unless 
a different instrument is activated or the application needs to be upgraded.
Understanding the Main Window
The main Window displays the Protocol window if a protocol is opened and the Survey Data Set 
window if a survey data set is opened. The sections below describe each of these windows and their 
screen components.
Survey Data Set Window
When a new or existing survey data set is opened, the main Window displays the Survey Data Set 
window.

C68406AA     3-6
Getting Started
Understanding the Main Window  
Figure 3.7  Main Survey Data Set window
The table below describes the buttons/fields or sections in the Main Survey Data Set Window and 
their functionality.
Table 3.1  Callout table for Main Survey Data Set Window
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Toolbar The toolbar contains software menus that provide options to open and save 
survey protocols, set up the software, define Labware, run the protocol, 
customize protocol options, and display the online Help. The icons in the toolbar 
provide shortcuts to the most frequently selected options, such as the Run 
Protocol function. For a detailed description, see 
Tools Menu
2 Survey Data 
Set file name
The survey data set file name identifies the survey data set in the computer’s 
directory. The application uses an .epadata file extension and stores the file in 
the default directory: C:\Labcyte\Echo\Protocols. The default directory 
can be changed to a user specified directory.
3 Window tabs The window tabs open the following software windows:
 • Plate window  — The main Survey Data Set window is the first window that 
is displayed when a new or existing survey data set is opened. It displays the 
wells that were surveyed. For a detailed description, see Protocol Tab.
 • Data Matrix window  — Displays fluid volume  for each well that was 
surveyed. For a detailed description, see Protocol Options Tab.
 • Table window  — Displays a table with all the data generated that can be 
used as a survey report.
 •R a w  D a t a  w i n d o w — Displays the survey data in XML.
4 Plate List List of plates surveyed in the protocol.

C68406AA    3-7
Getting Started
Understanding the Main Window  3
Protocol Window
When a new or existing protocol is opened, the main Window displays the Protocol window.
Figure 3.8  Main Window
The table below describes the buttons/fields or sections in the Main Window and their 
functionality.
5 Status bar The status bar displays Echo connection information, such as instrument name, 
serial number, and the version of the Echo client software that is running.
6 Navigation 
and Exit 
buttons
The left and right arrows become active when there are too many protocols open 
to view all of the file names. The arrows shift the protocol tabs left or right to 
display the file names. The Exit icon closes the displayed protocol.
7 Filter 
Information 
box
Allows the user to filter the survey data by plate type, fluid type, volume, height, 
and fluid composition. The filtered data can also be exported to a .csv file to be 
viewed later.
Table 3.1  Callout table for Main Survey Data Set Window
Callout 
Number
Name Description

C68406AA     3-8
Getting Started
Setting Up the Software  
Setting Up the Software
The Echo Plate Audit application is simple to set up. Default settings, such as output file type and 
report format, can be modified here. The Echo Plate Audit application provides survey data in three 
file formats (csv, xml, and txt) with reporting options that can be customized to meet protocol-
specific needs.
Table 3.2  Callout table for Main Window
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Toolbar The toolbar contains software menus that provide options to open and save 
survey protocols, set up the software, define Labware, run the protocol, customize 
protocol options, and display the online Help. The icons in the toolbar provide 
shortcuts to the most frequently selected options, such as the Run Protocol 
function. For a detailed description, see 
Toolbar.
2 Protocol 
window
The protocol window is labeled with the protocol file name. The software uses an 
.epa file extension and stores the file in the default directory: 
C:\Labcyte\Echo\Protocols. The default directory can be changed to a user 
specified directory.
3 Protocol 
window tabs
The window tabs open the following software windows:
 • Main Protocol window  — The main Protocol window is the first window that 
is displayed when a new or existing protocol is opened. It contains all of the 
default protocol data necessary to perform the survey. For a detailed 
description, see Protocol Tab.
 • Options window  — The Options window displays  protocol-specific options, 
such as survey history, output file type, and report formats. For a detailed 
description, see 
Protocol Options Tab.
4 Status bar The status bar displays Echo connection information, such as instrument name, 
serial number, and the version of Echo client software that is running.
5 Navigation 
and Exit 
buttons
The left and right arrows become active when there are too many protocols open 
to view all of the file names. The arrows shift the protocol tabs left or right to 
display the file names. The Exit icon closes the displayed protocol.
C68406AA    3-9
Getting Started
Setting Up the Software  3
To change the default settings, and set up preferences:
1 Open the Tools menu and select Preferences.
Figure 3.9  Preferences/Options dialog box
2 Select Run-specific or Plate-specific for the output files.
 • Run-specific  — Stores all of the survey results in a file.
 • Plate-specific  — Stores all of the survey  results in separate files.
3 Customize the survey and rule validation reports.
 • File type  — Select XML, CSV, and/or TXT file formats.
 •F o r m a t — Customize the survey report header, body, and footer.
 •D i r e c t o r y — Change the directory location for the survey report.
 • Filename  — Change the file name for the survey report.

C68406AA     3-10
Getting Started
Shutting Down the Software  
4 Customize the error and warning rule definitions.
 • Error Rule  — Customize the error rule by adding conditions, setting the plate status criteria 
and choosing the scope. For more information, see Rule Definitions.
 •W a r n i n g  R u l e — Customize the warning rule by adding conditions, setting the plate status 
criteria and choosing the scope. For more information, see Rule Definitions.
These options are used as default settings for all survey protocols. To change the options for an 
individual protocol, use the Options tab. For more information, see Protocol Options Tab.
Shutting Down the Software
There are two ways to exit the Echo Plate Audit application:
 • Open the File menu and select Exit.
Figure 3.10  Exit function in the File menu
 • Click the Close icon in the application.
Figure 3.11  Close window icon

C68406AA    4-1
CHAPTER 4
Software Operations
This chapter describes how to use the Echo Plate Audit application. It includes the following topics.
 • Starting a New Protocol
 • Selecting the Source Plate Type
 • Selecting the Survey Area
 • Importing a Pick List
 • Importing a Pick List While Running a Protocol
 • Editing the Protocol
 • Running a Protocol
 • Importing a Survey Data Set
 • Viewing Reports
— Analyzing Plate Data
— Comparing Plates Within a Batch or Over Time
— Comparing Fluid Hydration and Volume Across Replicates
— Using a Filter to Compare Expected Versus Actual Values
— Identifying Wells for Replenishment
 • Creating a Custom Rule
— Understanding Warning Rules and Error Rules
— Reusing Rules
— Running Reports Based on Rules
— Running Example Scenarios
Starting a New Protocol
There are multiple ways to start a new protocol.
1. Select New from the File menu.
2. Click the New  icon in the Toolbar.
3. Press CTRL+N from the keyboard.
NOTE  The new protocol is temporarily labeled Protocol 1 as the file name until the user saves the 
protocol with a new name.

C68406AA     4-2
Software Operations
Selecting the Source Plate Type  
Figure 4.1  Protocol Setup window
NOTE  As information is entered into the template, an * appears next to the file name. This is a reminder 
that the file has information that has not been saved. Remember to save the protocol after designing 
the source plate and periodically saving thereafter.
 • All new protocols start with the Protocol Setup window. This window defines the plate 
names, plate formats, plate types, and if the user wants a full plate survey.
 • Plate type refers to the fluid type being used and the plate format determines the graphical 
layout that is shown in the protocol creation window.
 • When surveying a full plate, select Full Plate under Survey Region in the Protocol Setup 
window. The software automatically configures the protocol to survey a full plate once the 
Protocol Setup window is closed.
Selecting the Source Plate Type
Choosing the plate format determines the physical plate parameters that the Echo Plate Audit 
application uses. Choosing the plate type determines the survey method that the Echo Liquid 
Handler uses; taking the plate and fluid properties into account. These settings enable the Echo 
system to survey multiple fluid types in the same source plate. For example, using the plate format 
384PP and plate type MyBuffer_AQ_GP instructs the Liquid Handler to survey samples from a 384PP 
format plate with a survey method suited for the Glycerol fluid class.
These steps are critical when creating the application protocol.
1 In the Protocol Setup window, set the Name for the Source Plate. The default name is Source.
2 Select the Plate Format to be 384PP, 384LDV, or 1536LDV. Based on the plate format chosen, 
the compatible plate types appear for Default Type.
3 Select the Default Plate Type to set the fluid type for the Source Plate.

C68406AA    4-3
Software Operations
Selecting the Survey Area  4
4 In the Survey Region information box, select Full Plate to set the protocol to survey the entire 
source plate. Other survey regions can be created after closing the Protocol Setup window.
5 Click OK to save changes and create the specified protocol or Cancel to discard changes.
6 To add an additional source plate, see Add Plate.
NOTE  Not all plate formats and plate types are available on all instruments. The specific plate requirements 
per user environment are specified in the purchase agreement and programmed into the instrument 
prior to shipping.
Selecting the Survey Area
A region must be selected and added before it can be surveyed. There are different ways to select 
wells:
 • Click top-left corner to select all the wells in the plate.
 • Click on a number(s) (1-24) to select all the wells in that column(s).
 • Click on a letter(s) (A-P) to select all the wells in that row(s).
 • Click and drag to select specific wells.
NOTE  If full plate replication was selected in the Protocol Setup window, a region containing all the wells in 
the plate was automatically created.
The Add Region command allows the user to add a region to a source plate so that it can be 
surveyed. Multiple survey regions can be added to a single protocol, each with a unique plate type 
selection. For more information, see Add Region.
Importing a Pick List
As an alternative to graphically creating the source well mappings, the Echo Plate Audit application 
allows users to import a file to explicitly map source wells to be surveyed. After importing the file, 
these surveys are graphically represented in a new Echo Plate Audit protocol.
When a pick list is imported via the Import Pick List menu option, it can be modified or used as is. 
The user has the option to save the pick list changes back to the original file or as a new file.
To import a pick list:
1 Create a new protocol or open an existing protocol.
C68406AA     4-4
Software Operations
Importing a Pick List  
2 Select Import Pick List from the File menu.
Figure 4.2  Open Pick List dialog box
3 Choose a .csv file that contains pick list data.
4 When the Open Pick List dialog box is shown, click Open. See Importing a Pick List While 
Running a Protocol. for more information on importing a pick list.
NOTE  For this example, a full plate survey protocol was created before importing a 384-
384_NextAvailableWell.csv file.
Figure 4.3  Contents of 384-384_NextAvailableWell.csv File
After the pick list file is imported, the full plate survey protocol is merged with the 384- 
384_NextAvailableWell.csv. The new protocol is shown below.

C68406AA    4-5
Software Operations
Importing a Pick List While Running a Protocol  4
Figure 4.4  Full Plate Replication Protocol with 384-384_NextAvailable.csv
NOTE  The 384-384_NextAvailableWell.csv file contents matches the regional information 
imported. This includes the transfer volume values.
NOTE  The Transfer Volume is an optional field that specifies the total volume that is transferred out of 
the well in subsequent transfer protocols. The Echo Plate Audit application will survey the plate and 
verify that there is sufficient volume in the well, taking into account the dead-volume of the plate, to 
ensure that the transfer protocols are successful.
If the transfer volume plus the dead volume is less than the survey volume, those wells will be 
flagged to the user in the output reports.
Importing a Pick List While Running a Protocol
Importing a pick list from the Run Options dialog box is a quick way to run existing Echo Plate Audit 
protocols with partial source plates as defined by an input file. Using a pick list eliminates the need 
to create a unique protocol.
When importing a pick list via the Run Options dialog box, the pick list parameters override any 
plate parameters in the protocol for the run.
NOTE  The pick list cannot be saved in the protocol. To save a pick list into an existing protocol, the Import 
Pick List feature must be used from the main Protocol window. See Importing a Pick List for more 
information.

C68406AA     4-6
Software Operations
Importing a Pick List While Running a Protocol  
The pick list is a table of specific wells that have been selected from a group of wells for analysis. 
The pick list is typically created in a text or spreadsheet file.
Guidelines for defining pick list:
 • Pick lists using row and column location must use the one-based coordinate system, which 
means that the first well in the upper left corner of the microplate is labeled row 1, column 1, 
or (1,1).
 • Pick list must be saved in .csv file format to be used by the Echo Plate Audit application.
NOTE  If an error is encountered when importing a pick list, the error message will show the column data that 
is needed.
To import a pick list:
1 Open the File menu and select Import Pick List or click on the Import Pick List icon in the 
Toolbar. This opens an Open Pick List dialog box.
2 Select the pick list file to be imported and click Open. This opens the Import Pick List dialog 
box.
3 Click Import to import the pick list.
Figure 4.5  Import Pick List dialog box
The table below describes the buttons/fields or sections in the Import Pick List dialog box and 
their functionality.

C68406AA    4-7
Software Operations
Importing a Pick List While Running a Protocol  4
Table 4.1  Callout table for Import Pick List dialog box
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Skip Lines The pick list can contain heading information (for example, assay 
information, date, etc.), but it should be skipped when importing. Select 
a numerical value for Skip Lines to skip the number of specified heading 
lines for the column headings (header line).
2 Auto-Map button Maps the column headings and data automatically.
3 File contains header 
columns
If the pick list contains a header line (column headings), select this 
option.
4 Delimiter The delimiter used to separate data in the pick list file.
5 Column Details  • Position  — Specifies the position in the file.
 • File Header  — Specifies the header for the column.
 • Column  — Specifies the column name . This drop-down list defines 
the columns that can be added to the pick list.
 •I m p o r t — Specifies if the data for the associated column should be 
imported or not.
6 Preview Result or File 
Content table
The results for this table are toggled based on if the user clicks the 
Preview or the File content button.
7 Remove duplicate line 
entries checkbox
Check this to remove duplicate entries in the source file when creating 
the pick list.
8 Preview or File 
content button
Toggles between the preview result showing the IDs, corresponding 
source wells, and other data available and the file content result showing 
the line number and corresponding data.
9 Save Column 
Mapping to File button
Exports the column mappings to a text file.
10 Load Column Mapping 
from File button
Imports the column mappings to be viewed.
11 Import button Imports the source wells, destination wells, and transfer volume into the 
current protocol.
NOTE  By clicking Import, the existing protocol data is overwritten and 
cannot be undone unless the protocol was previously saved.
12 Cancel button Closes the Import Pick List dialog box without saving any changes.
C68406AA     4-8
Software Operations
Editing the Protocol  
Editing the Protocol
There are two ways to edit an existing protocol.
1. Select Open from the File menu and select the protocol to be edited.
2. Click the Open  icon in the Toolbar and select the protocol to be edited.
To edit the protocol:
1 Once the protocol to be edited has been loaded into the main Protocol window, the user can 
add or edit regions of the plate maps, add a fixed plate, or edit the settings entered initially 
when the protocol was first created in the Protocol Setup window.
2 Select Protocol in the Protocol Plates box to view and edit the protocol settings such as the 
survey area, and the number of times a survey should be repeated and the time interval 
between each survey.
3 Select the plate to edit or delete the entire plate or regions in the plate.
 • Select the plate type to change the plate type.
 • Select a specific region to edit the region.
 • Select the plate to view and edit all the regions in the plate.
 • Select the region and click Delete or Edit.
 • To delete a region, right-click the region in the protocol tree and select Delete.
4 Select items in the Protocol Plates box to view and change protocol settings, plate maps, and 
individual regions in the plate maps.
5 Use the color-coded tree for the wells in the Protocol Plates box to track and change the 
regions in the source plate maps.
6 Use the Protocol Information box to edit the settings for the items selected in the Protocol 
Plates box. Enter the protocol Name and Description in the main Protocol window.

C68406AA    4-9
Software Operations
Editing the Protocol  4
Figure 4.6  Main Protocol window

C68406AA     4-10
Software Operations
Running a Protocol  
Running a Protocol
To begin a protocol simulation or live run:
Figure 4.7  Run Options dialog box
1 Select Run from the Protocol menu or click the Run  icon in the Toolbar.
2 Select the Instrument if it is not already selected.
3 Optionally, enter a Reference ID and/or Order ID to be used to reference the run in the output 
report files.
4 Select the Full Plates or Partial Plates option:
 • Choose the Full Plates option to pick the full plate. The Full Plates option is defined by the 
protocol, but the user must specify the number of source plates to process.
 • Choose the Partial Plates option to pick specific plates. When the Partial Plates option is 
selected, an Import button is displayed to import a .csv pick list indicating the wells to be 
surveyed. For more information on how to define a pick list, see Importing a Pick List While 
Running a Protocol.

C68406AA    4-11
Software Operations
Importing a Survey Data Set  4
5 Change the value for Number of repeats to override the number of repeat surveys set for the 
protocol. Changing the Repeat Time Interval value will override the original setting in the 
protocol for the time delay between repeated surveys.
6 Click the Plate Calculator button to view the number of plates needed to run the protocol.
Figure 4.8  Plates Used dialog box
7 Optionally, click Simulate to test the protocol.
NOTE  Running a simulation is recommended to verify the transfers defined in the protocol before a live 
run.
8 Click Run to execute the protocol.
Importing a Survey Data Set
Importing a survey data set is useful to compare multiple survey reports.
To import a survey data set:
1 Start the Echo Plate Audit application. For more information, see Starting the Software.
2 Select the File > New > New Survey Data Set menu option. An empty survey data set is 
created.
3 Select the File > Import Survey Files menu option. An Open Survey Data dialog box is opened.

C68406AA     4-12
Software Operations
Importing a Survey Data Set  
4 Navigate to C:\Labcyte\Echo\Cache\Logs\Survey and choose an .xml file to import and 
click Open.
5 The plate is added in the Plate tab as a new plate. Additional iterations of the same plates that 
are added are listed as new Iterations.
6 Select the File > Save > Survey Data Set menu option. A Save Data Sets dialog box is shown.
7 Enter a filename and click Save to save and close the dialog box. This saves the survey data set 
with the various plates that were added and allows for re-use at a later time.
Figure 4.9  Imported survey data set
Table 4.2  Callout table for Plate tab
Callout Number Name Description
1 N/A Three plates were added to this survey data set

C68406AA    4-13
Software Operations
Viewing Reports  4
Viewing Reports
A survey data set is generated after a successful protocol run is completed. The survey data set is 
comprised of various reports that can be used to analyze plate data. The results of these .csv files 
are graphically displayed in the following tabs when a survey data set (.epadata) file is opened.
 •P l a t e  V i e w — Displays the wells that were surveyed.
 • Data Matrix View  — Displays fluid volume for each well that was surveyed.
 •T a b l e  V i e w — Displays a table with all the data generated that can be used as a survey report.
 •R a w  D a t a  V i e w — Displays the survey data in XML.
For more information about reporting, see the following topics:
 • Analyzing Plate Data
 • Comparing Plates Within a Batch or Over Time
 • Comparing Fluid Hydration and Volume Across Replicates
 • Using a Filter to Compare Expected Versus Actual Values
 • Identifying Wells for Replenishment
Analyzing Plate Data
The survey area for the plate is defined in the main Protocol window.
Figure 4.10  Main Protocol window

C68406AA     4-14
Software Operations
Viewing Reports  
The survey area selected determines if an optimized region, bounded region, or whole plate should 
be surveyed. The number of times the survey should be repeated and the interval of time between 
each survey is also set.
After the survey area is defined and the protocol is run, a corresponding survey data set it created 
for the protocol.
To view the survey data set plate data:
1 Start the Echo Plate Audit application. For more information, see Starting the Software.
2 Select the File > Open menu option or click on the Open icon in the Toolbar.
3 Navigate to C:\Labcyte\Echo\Reports\Labcyte Echo Plate Audit.
4 Open the folder for the protocol survey data set that was created and select the .epadata file. 
The folders are organized by the date the protocol was run.
5 Double-click on the .epadata file to open it. The Plate tab is displayed.
Comparing Plates Within a Batch or Over Time
To compare plates within a batch, a user should run the same Echo Plate Audit protocol across 
multiple plates. Then the user can compare plate 1 to plate 2.
To compare within a batch:
1 Create or open a new protocol. For more information, see Starting a New Protocol.
2 In the main Protocol window, select Protocol in the Protocol Plates tree. The Protocol 
Information section is displayed.
3 Save and run the protocol for the number of plates in the batch. For more information, see 
Running a Protocol.
Table 4.3  Callout table for Plate tab
Callout Number Name Description
1 Survey Area Used to define how and which regions of the plate should be surveyed.
C68406AA    4-15
Software Operations
Viewing Reports  4
4 After the run is completed, the survey data is displayed in a new .epadata file.
5 Use the Plate tab to view a graphical representation of the plate data.
6 In the Plate section on the Plate tab, the plates surveyed can be sorted by Plate or Iteration.
7 Use the Set Reference button to set one of the plates in a batch as the reference plate. Now 
when any other plate in the batch is selected, the data displayed will represent the difference 
between the selected plate and the benchmark.
Figure 4.11  .Epadata Set Reference section
To compare plates over time, the user can repeat an Echo Plate Audit protocol multiple times for a 
single plate or a batch of plates at a specific interval (once every minute, hour, or day). Then the 
user can compare the data across the different time points for each plate (set instance one as a 
bench mark, and then when instance two or three is selected, the data displayed will represent the 
difference between that instance and the benchmark.
To compare plates over time:
1 Create or open a new protocol. For more information, see Starting a New Protocol.
2 In the main Protocol window, select Protocol in the Protocol Plates tree. The Protocol 
Information section is displayed.
3 In the Repeat Survey section, enter the desired time interval for Repeat Time Interval. This 
value indicates the wait time between surveys for a given plate or batch of plates. For example, 
the time interval can be set to 00:00:60 to survey the plate(s) every minute, 00:60:00 to survey 
the plate(s) every hour, or 24:00:00 to survey the plate(s) every day.

C68406AA     4-16
Software Operations
Viewing Reports  
4 Save and run the protocol. When running the protocol, set the number of source plates equal 
to the number of plates in a batch. For more information, see Running a Protocol.
5 After the run is completed, the survey data is displayed in a new .epadata file.
6 Use the Plate tab to view a graphical representation of the plate data.
7 In the Plate section on the Plate tab, all plates from the batch are listed. Select any plate in the 
batch to view its specific survey data.
8 Use the Set Reference button to set one of the iterations of a plate as the reference. When any 
other iteration of the same plate is selected, the data displayed will show the difference 
between the selected iteration and the reference.
Figure 4.12  .Epadata Set Reference section
Comparing Fluid Hydration and Volume Across Replicates
To study the changes in fluid composition or volume over time for samples in a microplate, a 
protocol can be created to repeatedly survey wells at a specified interval.
To compare fluid composition across replicates:
1 Create or open a new protocol. For more information, see Starting a New Protocol.
2 In the main Protocol window, select Protocol in the Protocol Plates tree. The Protocol 
Information section is displayed.
3 In the Repeat Survey section, enter the desired value for Number of repeats. This value 
indicates the number of times the wells will be surveyed within a batch.

C68406AA    4-17
Software Operations
Viewing Reports  4
4 In the Repeat Survey section, enter the desired time interval for Repeat Time Interval. This 
value indicates the wait time between surveys for a given plate.
5 Save and run the protocol. For more information, see Running a Protocol.
6 After the run is completed, the survey data is displayed in a new .epadata file.
7 Use the Plate tab to view a graphical representation of the plate data.
8 In the Filter section on the Plate tab, the plates surveyed can be sorted by Plate Type or Fluid 
Type. To filter the plate for fluid composition, select a specific Fluid Type. By selecting a 
specific type of fluid, the Fluid Composition values are displayed.
9 Set the desired values for Fluid Composition. To manually set a range, the No Limit checkbox 
must be unchecked.
 • On the Plate tab, in the graphical plate representation, the colors for the wells change 
based on the ranges set for Fluid Composition.
 • On the Data Matrix tab, in the data values table, the colors for the wells change based on 
the ranges set for Fluid Composition. Since the values are shown in the table, it is easy to 
see how the actual values for fluid composition relate to the range specified.
To compare fluid volume across replicates:
1 Create or open a new protocol. For more information, see Starting a New Protocol.
2 In the main Protocol window, select Protocol in the Protocol Plates tree. The Protocol 
Information section is displayed.
3 In the Repeat Survey section, enter the desired value for Number of repeats. This value 
indicates the number of times the wells will be surveyed within a batch.
4 In the Repeat Survey section, enter the desired time interval for Repeat Time Interval. This 
value indicates the wait time between surveys for a given plate.
5 Save and run the protocol. For more information, see Running a Protocol.
C68406AA     4-18
Software Operations
Viewing Reports  
6 After the run is completed, the survey data is displayed in a new .epadata file.
7 Use the Plate tab to view a graphical representation of the plate data.
8 In the Filter section on the Plate tab, the plates surveyed can be sorted by Plate Type or Fluid 
Type.
9 Set the desired values for Fluid Volume. To manually set a range, the No Limit checkbox must 
be unchecked.
 • On the Plate tab, in the graphical plate representation, the colors for the wells change 
based on the ranges set for Fluid Volume.
 • On the Data Matrix tab, in the data values table, the colors for the wells change based on 
the ranges set for Fluid Volume. Since the values are shown in the table, it is easy to see 
how the actual values for fluid volume relate to the range specified.
NOTE  To make a realistic comparison for hydration, the values set for Number of repeats and Repeat Time 
Interval on the main Protocol tab must be realistic for the fluids and plates used.
Using a Filter to Compare Expected Versus Actual Values
In an .epadata file, the Plate tab has a User Survey Data From section. This section allows the 
user to view the Actual Survey Region or the User-Selected Region. The User-Selected Region 
refers to the regions created by the user in the main Protocol tab.
The Actual Survey Region is specified when a protocol is first created. The defaults for the Survey 
Area are set to Optimized Region, the Number of repeats is set to 1, and the Repeat Time Interval 
is set to 0. The bounding region is a single rectangular survey region including all user selected 
regions and adjacent wells. The optimized region eliminates as many non-user selected wells as 
possible in an attempt to minimize the overall survey time.
In many cases the optimized region is greater than the actual region selected by the user. When the 
protocol is run, the optimized, bounded, or whole plate region is surveyed. When the .epadata file 
is displayed, the User-Selected Region is shown by default. If the user is interested in viewing the 
Actual Survey Region, the user should select Actual Survey Region in the Use Survey Data From 
information box.
NOTE  The User-Selected Region filter is typically used since the user may not be interested in survey data 
for the additional wells surveyed by the bounded or optimized region.
C68406AA    4-19
Software Operations
Viewing Reports  4
Figure 4.13  Plate tab window
Identifying Wells for Replenishment
The user may want to identify wells for replenishment to ensure that the fluids required to 
complete a protocol run are sufficient. The minimum well volume limit should be set to identify any 
wells below the limit.
To identify wells for replenishment:
1 Create or open a new protocol. For more information, see Starting a New Protocol.
2 In the main Protocol window, select Protocol in the Protocol Plates tree. The Protocol 
Information section is displayed.
3 Save and run the protocol. For more information, see Running a Protocol.
4 After the run is completed, the survey data is displayed in a new .epadata file.
5 Use the Data Matrix tab to view the plate data in a table format.
6 In the Filter section on the Data Matrix tab, the plates surveyed can be sorted by Plate Type 
or Fluid Type.

C68406AA     4-20
Software Operations
Creating a Custom Rule  
7 Set the Fluid Volume range to identify the wells for replenishment. Typically this range would 
be zero to some minimum value that would be required to successfully complete the fluid 
transfer for the required plates. The user can also choose a valid range and use that to 
determine the wells that have sufficient fluid to complete the fluid transfers.
NOTE  To manually set a range for Fluid Volume, the No Limit checkbox must be unchecked.
 • On the Plate tab, in the graphical plate representation, the colors for the wells change based on 
the ranges set for Fluid Volume.
 • On the Data Matrix tab, in the data values table, the colors for the wells change based on the 
ranges set for Fluid Volume. Since the values are shown in the table, its easy to see how the 
actual values for fluid volume relate to the range specified.
8 Click Export Selection to File to export selected wells to a .epadata file. The wells in the 
.epadata file can be used as a destination locations for transfers from stock solutions. 
Alternatively, the wells identified can be removed from any pick lists to prevent attempts to 
transfer from invalid wells.
9 Click Save.
Creating a Custom Rule
Custom rules are created to help the user identify warning and/or error conditions. There is one 
warning rule and one error rule defined per protocol. If the user does not choose to define custom 
rules, the default rules are applied to the protocol run to generate survey data.
Understanding Warning Rules and Error Rules
Warning and error rules are used to define specific conditions that the user wants to flag for a 
specific protocol. These rules are typically created to help identify if a plate is viable for a certain 
process or not.
For more information on how to define warning and error rules, see Rule Definitions.
Reusing Rules
Rules can be exported and imported using a .rul file. The .rul file can be created by exporting a 
rule created in the Custom Rule dialog box. Likewise, a previously exported .rul file can be 
imported in the Custom Rule dialog box.
C68406AA    4-21
Software Operations
Creating a Custom Rule  4
Exporting Rules from Files
To export a custom warning or error rule:
1 Open the Options tab or select Tools > Preferences.
2 Click the Error Rule or the Warning Rule button to open the Custom Rule dialog box.
3 Customize the error or warning rule by adding various conditions. For more information, see 
Rule Definitions.
4 Click Export to export the customized rule shown in Custom Rule dialog box. A Save Rule File 
dialog box is shown where the user must specify the file name for the rule.
5 Click Save to save the rule and close the Save Rule File dialog box.
Importing Rules from Files
To import a custom warning or error rule:
1 Open the Options tab or select Tools > Preferences.
2 Click the Error Rule or the Warning Rule button to open the Custom Rule dialog box.
3 Click Import to import a previously customized rule into the Custom Rule dialog box. A Open 
Rule File dialog box is shown where the user can select a previously created .rul file.
4 Click Open to open the rule and close the Open Rule File dialog box. The rule is loaded into the 
Custom Rule dialog box.
Running Reports Based on Rules
Reports are generated every time a protocol is run. Use the Options tab to define the rules, rule 
validation reports, and survey reports. For more information, see Protocol Options Tab.
C68406AA     4-22
Software Operations
Creating a Custom Rule  
Running Example Scenarios
The examples below are the most typical scenarios a user would use the Echo Plate Audit 
application for. The steps needed to successfully complete each of the protocols are listed for quick 
reference. In many cases, the steps have been described in previous sections and the user is referred 
back to those sections for details.
Verifying Sufficient Volume to Complete a Protocol
When a user must verify that there is sufficient volume in a well or plate before running a protocol 
with specific volume requirements, running an Echo Plate Audit protocol with specific volume 
related rules can be helpful. The survey protocol can be run to verify sufficient volume before an 
actual transfer protocol is run via other applications such as Echo Plate Reformat, Echo Cherry Pick, 
Echo Dose-Response, or Echo Array Maker.
To verify sufficient volume to complete a protocol:
1 Start a new protocol. For more information, see Starting a New Protocol.
2 Select the source plate type. All protocols start with this step. For more information, see 
Selecting the Source Plate Type.
3 Select the survey area. For more information, see Selecting the Survey Area.
4 Create custom rules. For more information, see Rule Definitions.
In this example, a custom error rule was created with the following conditions:
 • Error if Fluid Volume is less than 30.000 microLiters for greater than 25% of the plate.
C68406AA    4-23
Software Operations
Creating a Custom Rule  4
Figure 4.14  Error Check dialog box
5 Run the protocol. For more information, see Running a Protocol.
In this example, one source plate with full survey was created before the protocol was run.

C68406AA     4-24
Software Operations
Creating a Custom Rule  
Figure 4.15  Main Protocol window
6 View reports. After the protocol run is completed, the .epadata file is displayed with the 
resulting survey data.
Figure 4.16  Plate tab for corresponding .epadata file

C68406AA    4-25
Software Operations
Creating a Custom Rule  4
7 To view the results of the error or warning rules, open the corresponding RuleReport.csv 
file.
NOTE  In the .csv file, notice that all the columns with a Survey Fluid Volume < 30.000 have an 
Error in the corresponding Rule Well column. Since more than 25% of the wells had a Survey 
Fluid Volume < 30.000, the Rule Plate column also has an Error. This indicates to the user 
that this plate does not have sufficient fluid volume for transfer and should not be used.
Figure 4.17  RuleReport.csv file for protocol run
8 Save the protocol and survey data set for future use.

C68406AA     4-26
Software Operations
Creating a Custom Rule  
C68406AA    5-1
CHAPTER 5
Software Reference
This chapter describes all of the Echo Plate Audit application screens. It includes the following 
topics.
 • Toolbar
 • Protocol Tab
 • Protocol Options Tab
 • Preferences
 • Labware Definitions
 • Run Protocol
 • Simulator Window
 • Run Status Window
Toolbar
The Toolbar contains the File, Protocol, Tools, and Help menus, and individual icons for frequently 
used functions.
Figure 5.1  Toolbar
The topics below describe the functions that can be performed using the Toolbar.
 • File Menu
 • Protocol Menu
 • Tools Menu
 • Help Menu
File Menu
The File menu changes based on whether a Protocol or Survey Data Set is open in the main 
application window.

C68406AA     5-2
Software Reference
Toolbar  
Figure 5.2  File menu without a protocol or survey data set open
 •C o n n e c t  t o  i n s t r u m e n t — Selects an Echo instrument  to connect to the software.
 •N e w  — Creates a new survey data  set or survey protocol.
 •O p e n  — Opens an existing survey protocol or survey data set.
 •E x i t  — Closes the Echo Plate Audit software.
File menu with a protocol selected in the main application window
Figure 5.3  File menu
NOTE  The default view in the main application window is the Protocol tab.
 •C o n n e c t  t o  i n s t r u m e n t — Selects an Echo instrument  to connect to the software.
 •N e w  — Creates a new survey protocol.
 •O p e n  — Opens an existing survey protocol.
 • Import Pick List  — Imports a predefined pick li st. For more information, see Importing a Pick 
List While Running a Protocol.
 •S a v e  — Saves the current survey protocol.
 •S a v e  A s — Copies the current survey protocol to a different file name.
 •E x i t  — Closes the Echo Plate Audit software.

C68406AA    5-3
Software Reference
Toolbar  5
File menu with a survey data set selected in the main application window
Figure 5.4  File menu
 •C o n n e c t  t o  i n s t r u m e n t — Selects an Echo instrument  to connect to the software.
 •N e w  — Creates a new survey data set.
 •O p e n  — Opens an existing survey data set.
 • Import Survey Data Set  — Imports a survey data set.  For more information, see Importing a 
Survey Data Set.
 • Save Survey Data Set  — Saves the current survey data set.
 •S a v e  A s — Copies the current survey data  set to a different file name.
 •E x i t  — Closes the Echo Plate Audit software.
Protocol Menu
Figure 5.5  Protocol menu
NOTE  The Protocol menu is only available if a Protocol is open in the main application window.
 • Error Check  — Checks the protocol for inconsistent information.
 •R u n  — Executes the survey protocol that is displayed.

C68406AA     5-4
Software Reference
Toolbar  
 • Add Region  — Adds the selected region.
 • Import Pick List  — Imports a predefined pick list.
 • Delete Region  — Deletes the selected region.
 • Delete All Regions for Plate  — Deletes all the regions for the selected plate.
 • Delete All Regions  — Deletes all the selected regions.
 • Add Plate  — Adds a new plate to the protocol.
 • Delete Plate  — Deletes a plate from the protocol.
Tools Menu
Figure 5.6  Tools Menu
 • Preferences  — Used to set survey, output, and report options for all protocols.
 • Labware Definitions  — Manages existing labware defi nitions or adds new definitions.
 •A c t i v a t e  I n s t r u m e n t — Used to enter the software licen se key to use the Echo Plate Audit 
software.
Help Menu
Figure 5.7  Help Menu
 •U s e r  G u i d e — Launches the application User Guide in PDF format.
 • Quick Start Guide  — Launches the application Quick Start Guide in PDF format.
 •A b o u t … — Display the version number of  the Echo Plate Audit software.

C68406AA    5-5
Software Reference
Survey Data Set Tab  5
Survey Data Set Tab
Plate Tab
The Survey Data Set tab displays the following information:
Figure 5.8  Survey Data Set tab with Plate tab selected
The table below describes the buttons/fields or sections in the Survey Data Set tab and their 
functionality.
Table 5.1  Callout table for Survey Data Set tab
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Main Protocol tab File name of the survey data set.
2 Survey Data 
windows
Plate, Data Matrix, Table, and Raw Data tabs. Details of the Plate tabs are 
described below. For more information on the Data Matrix tab, see 
Data 
Matrix Tab. For more information on the Table tab, see Table Tab. For more 
information on the Raw Data tab, see Raw Data Tab.
3 Source Plate Graphical representation of the source plate.
4 Use Survey Data 
From
Used to determine if actual survey data or user-selected survey data should 
be displayed.
5 Plate Lists the plates that were surveyed.

C68406AA     5-6
Software Reference
Survey Data Set Tab  
Data Matrix Tab
The Data Matrix tab displays the values for the survey data. The bottom half of the tab is the same 
as the Plate tab and allows the user to filter the survey data by plate type, fluid type, fluid volume, 
fluid height, and fluid composition.
Figure 5.9  Survey Data Set tab with Data Matrix tab selected
Table Tab
The Table tab displays all the survey data in columns. The bottom half of the tab is the same as the 
Plate tab and allows the user to filter the survey data by plate type, fluid type, fluid volume, fluid 
height, and fluid composition.
6 Filter  • Plate Type  — List of available plate types.
 • Fluid Type  — List of available fluid types.
 • Volume  — Volume of fluid expressed in na noliters (nL). If the volume is 
specified in the pick list, it will override the data specified in the protocol.
 • Height  — Height of well in millimeters (mm).
 • Fluid Composition  — Percentage of fluid type to water.
7 Export Selection 
to File
Exports the survey data to a .csv file for future use.
Table 5.1  Callout table for Survey Data Set tab
Callout 
Number
Name Description

C68406AA    5-7
Software Reference
Survey Data Set Tab  5
Figure 5.10  Survey Data Set tab with Table tab selected
Raw Data Tab
The Raw Data tab displays all the survey data in XML. The bottom half of the tab is the same as the 
Plate tab and allows the user to filter the survey data by plate type, fluid type, fluid volume, fluid 
height, and fluid composition.
Figure 5.11  Survey Data Set tab with Raw Data tab selected

C68406AA     5-8
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  
Protocol Tab
The Protocol tab displays the following information:
Figure 5.12  Protocol tab with Protocol selected
The table below describes the buttons/fields or sections in the Protocol tab and their functionality.
Table 5.2  Callout table for Protocol tab
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Main Protocol tab File name of the survey data set.
2 Protocol windows Protocol and Options windows. Details of the Protocol window are 
described below. For more information on the, see Understanding Protocol 
Options.
3 Name Defines the name of the protocol.
4 Description Defines the name of the protocol.
5 Protocol Selecting the protocol in protocol tree is used to set protocol specific 
features.
6 Source Plate Type Defines the source plate type used in the protocol.
7 Source Plate(s) Defines the source plate(s) used in the protocol.
8 Region(s) Defines the region(s) in a source plate.

C68406AA    5-9
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  5
In the Protocol Plates tree of the Protocol tab, if Protocol is selected, the following settings 
become available:
Figure 5.13  Protocol selected
The table below describes the buttons/fields in the Protocol Information section and their 
functionality.
9 Source Plate Graphical representation for the selected source plate. Used to select a 
region before adding the region.
10 Selected source 
plate, source plate 
type, and source 
region information
The bottom left information box in the Protocol tab has fields that change 
depending on what is selected in the Protocol Plates tree. The examples 
below illustrate the different fields that appear depending on what is 
selected in the Protocol Plates tree.
Table 5.2  Callout table for Protocol tab
Callout 
Number
Name Description

C68406AA     5-10
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  
In the Protocol Plates tree of the Protocol tab, if Source plate type is selected, the following 
settings become available:
Figure 5.14  Source plate type selected
Table 5.3  Callout table for Protocol Information section
Callout 
Number
Name Description
Survey Area Defines the survey area for the source plates.
 • Optimize Region  — Surveys the minimum number of wells while trying to 
minimize the survey time.
 • Bounding Region  — The rectangular region bounding all the user-selected 
regions should be surveyed.
 • Whole Plate  — The entire plate should be surveyed regardless of the 
where the regions are defined.
Repeat Survey Defines the parameters for repeating a survey.
 • Number of repeats  — The number of iterations a survey should be 
repeated.
 • Repeat Time Interval  — The time interval betw een repeat surveys for a 
protocol.

C68406AA    5-11
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  5
The table below describes the buttons/fields in the Plate Information section and their 
functionality.
NOTE  Changes are applied once cursor is removed from the field modified.
In the Protocol Plates tree of the Protocol tab, if a specific Source plate is selected, the following 
settings become available:
Figure 5.15  Source plate selected
In the Regions for Plate box, the regions for the selected plate are listed. The user can click Edit to 
modify a region or Delete to remove a region from the plate.
NOTE  If there are no regions for the plate, this list will be empty.
Table 5.4  Callout table for Plate Information section
Callout Number Name Description
1 Name Name of the source plate.
2 Plate Type Defines the plate type.

C68406AA     5-12
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  
In the Protocol Plates tree of the Protocol tab, if a specific Region plate is selected, the following 
settings become available:
Figure 5.16  Region selected
In the Region Information box, the wells and corresponding transfer volumes for the region for the 
selected plate are listed. These values are specified in the .csv file for the pick list.

C68406AA    5-13
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  5
Add Plate
The Add Plate command allows a user to add a new plate to the protocol.
Figure 5.17  Main Protocol Window Before Add Plate Executed
The table below describes the callout(s) in the Protocol tab.
To add a new plate, in the main Protocol window, select Source and click the Add Source Plate 
 icon or select the Protocol > Add Plate menu option.
Table 5.5  Callout table for Protocol tab
Callout Name Description
1 N/A Initial source plate is present

C68406AA     5-14
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  
Figure 5.18  Main Protocol Window After Add Plate executed
The table below describes the callout(s) in the Protocol tab.
Table 5.6  Callout table for Protocol tab
Callout Name Description
1 N/A Second source plate added. Regions need to be added separately.

C68406AA    5-15
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  5
Delete Plate
The Delete Plate command allows a user to delete a plate from the protocol.
Figure 5.19  Main Protocol Window Before Delete Plate Executed
To delete a plate, in the main Protocol window, select the Source to be deleted and click the Delete 
Source Plate  icon or select the Protocol > Delete Plate menu option.

C68406AA     5-16
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  
Figure 5.20  Main Protocol Window After Delete Plate Executed
The table below describes the callout(s) in the Protocol tab.
Select Region
A region must be selected before it can be added or replicated. There are different ways to select 
wells:
 • Click top-left corner to select all the wells in the plate.
 • Click on a number (1-24) to select all the wells in that column.
 • Click on a letter (A-P) to select all the wells in that row.
 • Click and drag to select specific wells.
Table 5.7  Callout table for Protocol tab
Callout Name Description
1 N/A Delete the Source [2] source plate that was added in the previous example.

C68406AA    5-17
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  5
Add Region
The Add Region command allows the user to add a region to a source plate.
Figure 5.21  Main Protocol Window Before Add Region Executed
The table below describes the callout(s) in the Protocol tab.
To add a region to a plate, in the main Protocol window, select the Source plate to add the region 
to, and click the Add region  icon or select the Protocol > Add Region menu option.
Table 5.8  Callout table for Protocol tab
Callout Name Description
1 N/A There are 4 regions in Source [1] source plate.

C68406AA     5-18
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  
Figure 5.22  Main Protocol Window After Add Region Executed
The table below describes the callout(s) in the Protocol tab.
Table 5.9  Callout table for Protocol tab
Callout Name Description
1 N/A Now there are 5 regions in Source [1] source plate.

C68406AA    5-19
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  5
Delete Region
The Delete Region command allows the user to delete a selected region.
Figure 5.23  Main Protocol Window Before Delete Region Executed
The table below describes the callout(s) in the Protocol tab.
To delete a region, in the main Protocol window, select the region in the Source plate to be deleted 
and click the Delete Region icon or select the Protocol > Delete Region menu option.
Table 5.10  Callout table for Protocol tab
Callout Name Description
1 N/A Delete the region added in the previous example.

C68406AA     5-20
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  
Figure 5.24  Main Protocol Window After Delete Region Executed
The table below describes the callout(s) in the Protocol tab.
Table 5.11  Callout table for Protocol tab
Callout Name Description
1 N/A Region 5 has been deleted.

C68406AA    5-21
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  5
Delete All Regions for Plate
The Delete All Regions for Plate command allows the user to delete all the regions for the selected 
plate.
Figure 5.25  Main Protocol Window Before Delete All Regions for Plate Executed
The table below describes the callout(s) in the Protocol tab.
To delete all the regions in a plate, in the main Protocol window, select the Source plate whose 
regions should be deleted and select the Protocol > Delete All Regions for Plate menu option.
Table 5.12  Callout table for Protocol tab
Callout Name Description
1 N/A The four regions for Source [1] plate will be deleted.

C68406AA     5-22
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  
Figure 5.26  Main Protocol Window After Delete All Regions for Plate Executed
The table below describes the callout(s) in the Protocol tab.
Table 5.13  Callout table for Protocol tab
Callout Name Description
1 N/A Source [1] plate has no regions now.

C68406AA    5-23
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  5
Delete All Regions
The Delete All Regions command allows the user to delete all the regions for all the plates with one 
command.
Figure 5.27  Main Protocol Window Before Delete All Regions executed
The table below describes the callout(s) in the Protocol tab.
To delete all the regions for all the plates, in the main Protocol window, select Source and select 
the Protocol > Delete All Regions menu option.
Table 5.14  Callout table for Protocol tab
Callout Name Description
1 N/A There are four regions for Source [1] plate.
2 N/A There are two regions in Source [2] plate.

C68406AA     5-24
Software Reference
Protocol Tab  
Figure 5.28  Main Protocol Window After Delete All Regions Executed
The table below describes the callout(s) in the Protocol tab.
Error Check
The Error Check command allows the user to check the protocol for inconsistent information.
To check the current protocol for errors, in the main Protocol window, select the Error Check 
menu option.
Run
The Run command initiates the survey protocol that is displayed.
To run the current survey protocol, in the main Protocol window, click the Run  icon or select 
the Protocol > Run menu option. For more information, see Run Protocol.
Table 5.15  Callout table for Protocol tab
Callout Name Description
1 N/A All four regions for Source [1] plate and two regions for Source [2} plate have 
been deleted.

C68406AA    5-25
Software Reference
Protocol Options Tab  5
Protocol Options Tab
The Protocol/Options window is accessible by clicking the Options tab behind the Protocol tab. 
This window enables the user to customize the survey, output, rule, and reporting options for the 
Echo Plate Audit application. These settings are automatically used for the protocol created.
Each of the sections in the Protocol Options Tab is explained in the following topics.
 • Understanding Protocol Options
 • Understanding Output Options
Understanding Protocol Options
The Protocol/Options window displays the following protocol and output options.
Figure 5.29  Options tab
NOTE  The options settings are similar to the Preferences/Options window, but apply only to the protocol 
displayed.

C68406AA     5-26
Software Reference
Protocol Options Tab  
Surveys
There are two ways to manage survey history:
 • Re-Survey every source plate  — Default setting that automatically surveys the source plate 
every time the protocol is run. Survey history is saved, but not referenced each time.
 • Maintain survey history  — Used to store survey data for source plates.
With Maintain survey history chosen, information from the initial survey is referenced for 
subsequent transfers — eliminating the requirement to resurvey.
This feature can reduce processing time during a protocol run — particularly if the source plate 
is swapped several times during a protocol run. The user can specify the length of time that the 
survey data is retained, from a few minutes to never resurvey.
The software stores the survey data by plate barcode; therefore, the data is independent of the 
protocol and can be used across different protocols until the expiration time.
NOTE  For additional information, read the user note “How Long Will A Survey Last When Performing 
Acoustic Droplet Ejections?” or  contact us.
The Maintain survey history function is located in the Options tab.
Figure 5.30  Surveys box
If the user selects Maintain survey history, an Expiration button appears.
Click Expiration to open the Survey Data Expiration dialog box and set the expiration values.
Figure 5.31  Survey Data Expiration dialog box
The following parameters can be set in the Survey Data Expiration dialog box:
 • Never expires  — Existing survey data is always re-used.

C68406AA    5-27
Software Reference
Protocol Options Tab  5
 • User-specified expiration time  — Existing survey data is re-used for the time that is specified 
in minutes or Days:Hours:Minutes.
NOTE  If a stored survey does not cover the plate area that is required by the protocol (for example, some of 
the wells were empty when the plate was originally surveyed, but then filled later on), the software will 
survey the new wells and add this data to the stored survey data.
The stored survey data is instrument-specific. For example, if a source plate is surveyed in instrument A, 
the stored survey data cannot be used in instrument B.
Although survey history can be used indefinitely, it is not recommended.
Understanding Output Options
The output options are explained in the following topics:
 • Output Files
 • Survey and Rule Validation Reports
 • Rule Definitions
Output Files
The Output Files box in the Options window organizes the survey results according to the 
following criteria:
Figure 5.32  Output Files options
The following parameters can be set for output files:
 • Run-specific  — All protocol data is stored in one file, in the order that the results are generated.
 • Plate-specific  — Protocol data is stored in separate files, based on source plates, depending on 
the process order specified in the main Protocol window.
Survey and Rule Validation Reports
File Type
Survey and rule validation results can be saved to the following file formats that are compatible 
with most laboratory information systems:
 • XML (extensible markup language)
 • CSV (comma separated values)
 • TXT (text file)
The results are saved in the formats selected, and stored in the directory specified in the Directory 
option.

C68406AA     5-28
Software Reference
Protocol Options Tab  
Report Format
The survey and rule validation reports can be customized by clicking the Format button in the 
Protocol Options tab.
NOTE  The DEFAULT settings in the Rule Validation and Survey Reports are from the Preferences/Options 
window.
Figure 5.33  Report Format Options
The Output Format Builder dialog box shows all the report variables (left selection box) that can 
be added to the report format (right selection boxes). The list of variables changes with the report 
area selected. Information such as Plate Summary, Error Well, OK Well, Warning Well can also be 
included by selecting the respective check box.

C68406AA    5-29
Software Reference
Protocol Options Tab  5
Figure 5.34  Transfer Output Format Builder
Figure 5.35  Survey Output Format Builder

C68406AA     5-30
Software Reference
Protocol Options Tab  
Report Directory
The default report directory for both surveys is C:\Labcyte\Echo\Reports. A different 
directory can be specified by clicking the Directory button and entering a new location. Use the 
Select Folder button to browse to a different directory.
Figure 5.36  Folder Name dialog box
Report Filename
The Echo Plate Audit application uses the following default formats to report the survey and rule 
validation results:
Survey results file name —
$AppName$\$RunDate$\$InstrSN$_$RunType$_$SrcPlateName$($SrcPlateBarcode$)
For example:
Echo Software\2018-02-20\E5XX-0001_Transfer_Plate 1(1-989992-0)
Rule Validation results file name —
$AppName$\$RunDate$\$InstrSN$_$RunReport$_$RunID$
For example:
Echo Software\2018-02-20\E5XX-0001_RuleReport_4567890
The survey and rule validation formats can be changed by clicking the Format button in the 
Protocol Options tab.

C68406AA    5-31
Software Reference
Protocol Options Tab  5
Figure 5.37  Rule Validation Filename Builder
Figure 5.38  Survey Filename Builder
Rule Definitions
Warning and error rules are used to define specific conditions that the user wants to flag for a 
specific protocol. These rules are typically created to help identify if a plate is viable for a certain 
process or not.
Error Rule
The Custom Rule dialog box is used to create rule definitions for error conditions.

C68406AA     5-32
Software Reference
Protocol Options Tab  
Figure 5.39  Custom Rule dialog box for Error Rules
To customize error rule definitions:
1 Click on Error Rule in the Protocol/Options window to create rule definitions for error 
conditions. The Custom Rule dialog box is displayed. If it’s the first time a rule is being added, 
the Default Rule dialog box is displayed.
2 Click Add Condition to add a rule condition.
3 In the Condition Information section, choose a Variable, Relation, and Value for the first 
variable. Three variables can be added for a condition. Variable can be set to None, Plate Type, 
Fluid Volume, Fluid Height, Fluid Composition, or Fluid Type.
4 Select AND or OR to set how the Variables should be compared.
5 Click Add Condition to add additional conditions.
6 In the Plate Status Criteria, add a Percentage of Wells or Number of Wells condition per 
survey or per plate. Only one plate status criteria (percentage or number of wells) can be set. 
Similarly, the scope can be either per survey, or per plate. The Relation and Value should be 
set as needed.

C68406AA    5-33
Software Reference
Protocol Options Tab  5
7 Click the delete condition  icon to delete a condition.
8 Click Import to import a previously created .rul file.
9 Click Export to export the current rule to a .rul file.
10 Click Delete to delete the current rule and reset to default.
11 Click Save to save the custom rule or Cancel to close the dialog box without saving changes.
Warning Rule
Click on Warning Rule to create rule definitions for warning conditions.
Figure 5.40  Custom Rule dialog box for Warning Rules
The Warning Rule dialog box functions exactly like the Error Rule dialog box except it applies to 
warning rules instead or error rules.

C68406AA     5-34
Software Reference
Preferences  
Preferences
The Preferences/Options window is accessible from the Tools menu. This window is very similar 
to the Protocol Options tab, but with the following differences:
 • Settings are automatically applied to all protocols created unless changes were made in the 
Protocol Options window (report formats shown as “default”).
 • Accessible from the Toolbar.
When the user clicks Preferences, the Options window opens to display the following protocol and 
output options:
Figure 5.41  Preferences/Options Window
Labware Definitions
The Echo Plate Audit application relies on the Labware definitions resident in the Echo Liquid 
Handler database. New plate definitions can be added or existing plate definitions can be managed 
by selecting Labware Definitions from the Tools menu.

C68406AA    5-35
Software Reference
Labware Definitions  5
Each of the Labware topics are explained in the following topics.
 • Plate Type List
 • Plate Type Editor
 • Plate Export
Plate Type List
The Plate Type List dialog box enables the user to add new plate definitions or manage existing 
ones.
Figure 5.42  Plate Type List dialog box
NOTE  In case of an error message followed by a blank Plate Type List, connect to an Echo Liquid Handler or 
import the Labware file from the Echo Liquid Handler directory.
The table below describes the buttons/fields or sections in the Plate Type List dialog box and their 
functionality.

C68406AA     5-36
Software Reference
Labware Definitions  
NOTE  In case of an error message followed by a blank Plate Type List, connect to an Echo Liquid Handler or 
import the Labware file from the Echo Liquid Handler directory.
Table 5.16  Callout table for Plate Type List
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Cache 
Plate 
List 
Locally
Click this button to save the plate list from the Echo Liquid Handler to the Echo® Plate 
Audit Application.
2 Add Adds a plate definition. Only a destination plate can be added. Refer to one of the 
following options:
 • Add a Labware definition from the Echo® Plate Audit Application.
 • Add a plate definition from the Echo Liquid Handler software and reload the updated 
Labware definition to the Echo® Plate Audit Application.
3 Edit Edit a plate definition. Select a plate definition and click the Edit button.
 • Source plate definition: Only the barcode location of the source plate can be edited.
 • Destination plate definition: Edit any setting in the definition
4 Copy Copy a plate definition. Select a plate definition and click the Copy button. The user can 
copy a source or destination plate definition. For a source plate definition, an alias or 
child plate is created with exact parameters as the parent plate except the user-defined 
fluid name. For a destination plate, a destination plate definition is created. Alternate 
source or destination plate names can be created by copying existing plate types.
5 Delete Delete a plate definition. Select a plate definition and click the Delete button. The user 
can delete a destination plate definition or an alias or child plate definition previously 
created for a source plate but not a source plate definition.
6 Import Import a single plate definition or group of definitions from a specific file location. The 
file must have an .elwx extension to be imported.
7 Export Export a single plate definition or group of definitions. This includes any user created 
alias or child plate definitions for source plates and destination plate definitions that 
were created.
8 Reload Reload the plate types that have been edited or deleted since the plate type list was 
last saved.
9 Save Save any changes made to the plate type list, such as adding a new plate definition.
10 Close Close the Plate Type List dialog box.
C68406AA    5-37
Software Reference
Labware Definitions  5
Plate Type Editor
The Plate Type Editor dialog box is similar to the Plate Specification window in the Echo Liquid 
Handler software.
Figure 5.43  Plate Type Editor dialog box
Source plate definitions — Source plate definitions require exact specifications to accurately 
transfer nanoliter volumes; therefore, they are defined specifically for the Echo Liquid Handlers 
and tested at Beckman Coulter (Echo-qualified). For this reason, source plates cannot be defined by 
the user. For existing source plates, only the barcode location can be edited. Contact Beckman 
Coulter to add more source plates.
Destination plate definitions — The Echo Liquid Handler is programmed with several compatible 
destination plates; however, the user can add destination plates through the Echo® Plate Audit 
Application or the Echo Liquid Handler software.
The table below describes the buttons/fields or sections in the Plate Type Editor dialog box and 
their functionality.

C68406AA     5-38
Software Reference
Labware Definitions  
Table 5.17  Callout table for Plate Type Editor
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 User-defined name to identify the plate. This name will be listed in the Plate Type 
List dialog box.
2 Barcode 
Location
Location of barcode label on the destination plate:
 • None
 • Left
 • Right
 • Long
3 Manufacturer Name of the plate manufacturer.
4 Lot Number Lot number assigned by the plate manufacturer.
5 Part Number Part number assigned by the plate manufacturer.
6 Rows Number of rows in the microplate.
7 Columns Number of columns in the microplate.
8 A1 X Offset (A)* Distance from left outside edge to center of first column where the left edge 
of the part will be defined as the two 12.7 mm areas (as measured from the 
corners) as specified in ANSI SLAS 1-2004 (R2012). Valid range: 0.0 to 128.0 mm.
9 A1 Y Offset (B) Distance from top outside edge to center of first row where the top edge of 
the part will be defined as the two 12.7 mm areas (as measured from the 
corners) as specified in ANSI SLAS 1-2004 (R2012). Valid range: 0.0 to 86.0 mm.
10 X Center 
Spacing (C)
Column spacing: Each following row/column shall be an additional X.Y mm in 
distance from the top/left outside edge of the plate as specified in ANSI SLAS 4-
2004 (R2012). Valid range: 0.05 to 9.0 mm.
11 Y Center 
Spacing (D)
Row spacing: Each following row/column shall be an additional X.Y mm in 
distance from the top/left outside edge of the plate as specified in ANSI SLAS 4-
2004 (R2012). Valid range: 0.05 to 9.0 mm.
12 Plate Height 
(E)
The overall height of the plate as specified in ANSI SLAS 2-2004 (R2012). Valid 
range: 6.5 to 14.5 mm.

C68406AA    5-39
Software Reference
Labware Definitions  5
NOTE  * The items marked A-G are measurements that need to be taken by hand or filled in from the 
manufacturer's specifications. These dimensions and further details on their definitions can be found at 
https://www.slas.org/resources/information/industry-standards/.
** Currently, the Echo Liquid Handler does not use dimensions F (flange height) and H (well capacity). 
Any value entered for flange height or well capacity is ignored.
13 Flange Height 
(F)**
The height of the flange (skirt) as specified in ANSI SLAS 3-2004 (R2012). Valid 
choices: 2.41 mm, 6.10 mm, and 7.62 mm.
14 Well Width 
(G)
The width of the well opening at the bottom (not an SLAS specified dimension. 
Valid range: 0.0 to 86.0 mm.
15 Well Length 
(G)
The length of the well opening (not an SLAS specified dimension. Valid range: 
0.0 to 128.0 mm.
16 Well Capacity 
(H)
The overall capacity of the well in microliters. Valid range: greater than 0.0 μl.
Table 5.17  Callout table for Plate Type Editor
Callout 
Number
Name Description

C68406AA     5-40
Software Reference
Labware Definitions  
Plate Export
The Export Plates dialog box displays the plates currently available in the Echo® Plate Audit 
Application. The user can select and export one or more plates to a file (.elwx file extension) for 
use in another application.
Figure 5.44  Export Plates dialog box

C68406AA    5-41
Software Reference
Run Protocol  5
Run Protocol
The Run Options dialog box enables the user to run a simulation of the survey protocol or run the 
survey protocol on the Echo instrument. If the application is not connected to an Echo instrument, 
this dialog box also provides a connection dialog box.
Figure 5.45  Run Options dialog box (with full plates selected)

C68406AA     5-42
Software Reference
Run Protocol  
Figure 5.46  Run Options dialog box (with partial plates selected)
To run a protocol:
1 Select Run from the Protocol menu or click the Run  icon in the Toolbar.
2 Select the Instrument if it is not already selected.
3 Optionally, enter a Reference ID and/or Order ID to be used to reference the run in the output 
report files.
4 Select the Full Plates or Partial Plates option:
 • Choose the Full Plates option to pick the full plate. The Full Plate option is defined by the 
protocol, but the user must specify the number of source plates to process.
 • Choose the Partial Plates option to pick specific plates. When the Partial Plates option is 
selected, an Import button is displayed to import a .csv pick list indicating the wells to be 
surveyed. For more information on how to define a pick list, see Importing a Pick List While 
Running a Protocol.

C68406AA    5-43
Software Reference
Simulator Window  5
5 Change the value for Number of repeats to override the number of repeat surveys set for the 
protocol. Changing the Repeat Time Interval value will override the original setting in the 
protocol for the time delay between repeated surveys.
6 Click the Plate Calculator button to view the number of plates needed to run the protocol.
Figure 5.47  Plates Used dialog box
7 Optionally, click Simulate to test the survey protocol.
NOTE  Running a simulation is recommended to verify the surveys defined in the protocol before a live 
run.
8 Click Run to execute the protocol.
Simulator Window
The simulator is an animation of fluid transfer for the selected protocol. The simulation is 
interactive and allows the user to respond to a prompt box to insert and remove plates. Since this 
is a simulation, the prompt box appears for only 5 seconds, then the software automatically 
responds to the prompt and continues to the next step.
The protocol example that is described in this help page uses a pick list of compounds in five source 
plates and a control plate transferring to a single destination plate. The components of the 
simulator window are described below.

C68406AA     5-44
Software Reference
Simulator Window  
Figure 5.48  Simulator Window
The table below describes the buttons/fields or sections in the Simulator Window and their 
functionality.
Table 5.18  Callout table for Simulator Window
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Transfer 
Animation 
Box
Simulates the movement of the destination plate (green) as it receives liquid 
from the source plate. Each source-to destination well transfer is documented 
below the plates.
2 Delays The following Delays commands are available to manage the transfer animation.
 • Animation (milliseconds)  — Controls the speed of the simulated well-by-
well transfer. Speed ranges from 500 ms to 0; default is 15 ms. Higher speeds 
are useful to slow down the animation when transfers jump around the plate. 
For example, during backfills.
 • Plate Prompt (seconds)  — Controls the time interval that the plate prompt 
box is displayed, from 30 s to 0. Zero setting is useful to bypass the prompt 
box entirely and view the animation only.
 • Skip Animation  — Bypasses the animation step  and shows only the transfer 
results for that step. This control enables the user to quickly review the plate 
mapping after each transfer step.
NOTE  This control does not bypass plate prompts or bulk fill displays.
 • Play  — Begins the simulated fluid transfer.
 •C l o s e — Closes the simulation window. If a simulation is in progress, it will 
need to be canceled before the window can be closed.

C68406AA    5-45
Software Reference
Run Status Window  5
Run Status Window
The Run Status window is a dynamic window that provides control buttons to run the protocol, 
and various status windows to show the progress of the plate survey and the state of the Echo 
instrument.
Figure 5.49  Run status window (Echo 55X Series Liquid Handler)
3 Source Plate 
Type Map Box
Shows the source plate that is selected for transfer. As the simulation runs, each 
source well shows the number of times a transfer is made from that well.
4 Destination 
Plate Type 
Map Box
Shows each well that receives transfers and the number of transfers that are 
received.
5 Protocol 
Information 
Box
Provides details about the transfer protocol, such as the number of plates that 
will be needed. As the simulation proceeds, this box is updated to show which 
plates are currently in use.
Table 5.18  Callout table for Simulator Window
Callout 
Number
Name Description

C68406AA     5-46
Software Reference
Run Status Window  
Figure 5.50  Run status window (Echo 650 Series Liquid Handler)
The table below describes the buttons/fields or sections in the Run Status window and their 
functionality.
Callout 
Number
Name Description
1 Source and 
Destination Plate 
windows
Shows the status of each plate as it progresses through the transfer protocol. 
The Legend interprets the symbols used in the status windows.
2 Legend Identifies each of the states (Complete, InProcess, Saved, Pending, Error) 
possible for a source and destination plate during a run.
3 Transfer Map 
window
Shows the details of each well-to-well transfer.
4 System Status 
window
Shows the status of the Echo instrument during the transfer run. If a problem 
occurs, an alert is indicated by the colors turning from green to yellow to red. 
If it is red, the user needs to do something to fix it.
5 Transfer Status 
window
Shows a progress bar of the transfer protocol, as well as percent completion 
and elapsed time. This section also provides a text window that displays all 
the actions that occur during the run.
6 Open Door 
button
Opens the process door of the connected Echo Liquid Handler.
7 Source Plate 
button
Extends the source plate gripper.
8 Destination Plate 
Out button
Extend the destination plate gripper.

C68406AA    5-47
Software Reference
Run Status Window  5
Plate Prompt
The Plate Prompt boxes instruct the user to insert or remove a plate. The plate prompt steps are 
described below:
1 Insert source plate and click OK.
Figure 5.51  Insert source plate prompt box
NOTE  For Echo 650 Series Liquid Handler instruments, the Plate Insert will always be Universal Insert.
2 Remove the source plate and click OK.
9 Stop button Stops the transfer protocol that is in progress.
10 Pause button Pauses the transfer protocol that is in progress.
11 Continue button Continues the transfer protocol that is in progress.
12 Start button Begins the transfer protocol.
13 Close button Closes the Run Status window.
14 Details button Shows the debugging information for the protocol run.
15 Calibrate button Starts the focus calibration procedure.
16 Replace button Starts the coupling fluid replacement procedure (only applies to the Echo 650 
Series Liquid Handler).
Callout 
Number
Name Description

C68406AA     5-48
Software Reference
Run Status Window  
Figure 5.52  Remove source plate prompt box
This process is followed for each source plate in the run set.
Focus Calibration
The Focus Calibration dialog box is automatically displayed when the user selects Run in the Run 
Options dialog box if the Echo Liquid Handler requires acoustic transducer calibration. This is also 
indicated by the yellow warning status indicator for Focus Calibration in the System Status 
section.
Figure 5.53  Focus Calibration Dialog Box
The Focus calibration procedure measures the focal length of the acoustic transducer and compares 
it to the previous measurement. If the difference between these measurements is minimal, then the 
system updates its calibration database with the new focal length and the procedure is finished. If 
the difference is larger than a preset threshold, users should call Beckman Service and Support to 
ensure the system is running properly before accepting the focal length new value.
It is recommended to select Yes and follow the focus calibration steps. If you choose to delay the 
focus calibration, you can click the Calibrate button next to the Focus Calibration status indicator 
in the System Status section in the Run Status window to start the focus calibration steps.
To run the Focus Calibration procedure:
1 Click Yes to begin the Focus Calibration procedure. The Focus Calibration dialog box is 
displayed.

C68406AA    5-49
Software Reference
Run Status Window  5
2 In the Focus Calibration dialog box, click Run.
Figure 5.54  Focus Calibration Dialog Box
3 The new focus calibration values are displayed. If there are no errors, click Update ToF to 
update the focus calibration values. If the focus calibration values are outside the normal range, 
a red warning box is displayed indicating the focus calibration values are out of range. If the 
user clicks Update ToF, a confirmation dialog box is displayed to ensure the user is aware of 
committing calibration values that are out of range. Out of range focus calibration values 
should not be committed unless instructed by Beckman Service and Support.

C68406AA     5-50
Software Reference
Run Status Window  
Figure 5.55  Focus Calibration Dialog Box
4 Once the focus calibration values have been committed, the Update ToF button is disabled. 
Click Close to exit the Focus Calibration dialog box.

C68406AA    5-51
Software Reference
Run Status Window  5
Figure 5.56  Focus Calibration Dialog Box
Coupling Fluid Replacement
NOTE  The coupling fluid replacement procedure is only required for the Echo 650 Series Liquid Handler.
The Coupling Fluid Replacement dialog box is automatically displayed when the user selects Run 
in the Run Options dialog box a if the Echo Liquid Handler needs coupling fluid replacement. This 
is also indicated by the yellow warning status indicator for Coupling Fluid Age in the System 
Status section.
Figure 5.57  Coupling Fluid Replacement dialog box
It is recommended to select Yes and follow the coupling fluid replacement steps. If you choose to 
delay coupling fluid replacement, you can click the Replace button next to the Coupling Fluid Age 
status indicator in the System Status section in the Run Status window to start the fluid 
replacement steps.

C68406AA     5-52
Software Reference
Run Status Window  
To start the fluid replacement process:
1 Click Start to begin the coupling fluid replacement process.
Figure 5.58  Coupling Fluid Replacement Start dialog box
2 The Fluid Replacement Workflow is displayed and step 1 in the workflow is enabled. Go to the 
back of the Echo Liquid Handler and remove the coupling fluid bottle. Unscrew the bottle cap 
with the attached tubing and then dispose of the used coupling fluid fluid.
Figure 5.59  Coupling Fluid Replacement Workflow displayed
3 After the coupling fluid bottle has been removed, step 2 in the workflow is enabled.

C68406AA    5-53
Software Reference
Run Status Window  5
Figure 5.60  Coupling Fluid Replacement Step 1
4 Fill a clean coupling fluid bottle with 1 Liter Ultrapure Type 1 water and screw on the bottle cap 
with the attached tubing. Then replace the coupling fluid bottle in the bottle holder.
Figure 5.61  Coupling Fluid Replacement Step 2
Once the fluid replacement process is started, if the user clicks the Cancel button and the 
coupling fluid level is sufficient, the following message box is displayed.

C68406AA     5-54
Software Reference
Run Status Window  
Figure 5.62  Canceling Fluid Replacement dialog box
Once the fluid replacement process is started, if the user clicks the Cancel button and the 
sensor indicates that either the coupling fluid bottle is empty or not present, the following 
messages are displayed.
Figure 5.63  Canceling Fluid Replacement dialog box
A second dialog box is displayed to confirm if the user wants to end the fluid replacement 
process.
Figure 5.64  Canceling Fluid Replacement dialog box
5 If the user did not cancel the fluid replacement process, they can click the Complete button to 
finish the fluid replacement process and exit the Coupling Fluid Replacement dialog box.

C68406AA    Glossary-1
Glossary
There are many terms used throughout this manual that refer to parts of the Echo Plate Audit 
application. It is useful to know and understand these terms before using the application.
Across — Indicates the ordering of transfers to occur in a row-wise manner.
Batch — A group of plates processed though a single run of an Echo Plate Audit protocol.
Bounding Region — A region that sums all of the user defined regions.
Down — Indicates the ordering of transfers to occur in a column-wise manner.
Fluid Composition —  Percentage value calculated from a comparison of the expected 
measurement of acoustic impedance in a 100% pure fluid and the observed measurement.
Fluid Height —  Measurement from the surface of an acoustically determined well bottom to the 
acoustically determined meniscus of the fluid in the well.
Fluid Volume —  Calculation of the fluid volume in a well using the acoustically observed fluid 
height and well geometry defined for the Labware used.
Optimized Region   — A region that sums all the user defined survey regions with a minimum 
distance for the transducer movement path.
Plate Format — Defines the physical plate based on the number of wells, plate material (for 
example, PP, PS), and fluid capacity (for example, LDV).
Plate Type — Defines the transfer methodology appropriate for the contents transferred. 
Quadrant — One quarter of the total wells available in a microplate. 
Source plate — Echo qualified microplates containing samples or reagents for transfer to 
another microplate serving as a destination plate.
Source Plate Regions   — Sub-groups of wells within a microplate.
Survey  — Process involving several pulses of acoustic energy to map the location of the well 
bottom, fluid height, and acoustic impedance.
Whole Plate Survey   —  Surveys the whole plate, even if only a small region was added to the 
plate by the user.
C68406AA     Glossary-2
Glossary
  
C68406AA    Warranty-1
Beckman Coulter, Inc.
Customer End User License Agreement
This Product contains software that is owned by Beckman Coulter, Inc. or its suppliers and is protected by 
United States and international copyright laws and international trade provisions. You must treat the 
software contained in this Product like any other copyrighted material. This license and your right to use the 
Product terminate automatically if you violate any part of this agreement.
This is a license agreement and not an agreement for sale. Beckman Coulter hereby licenses this Software to 
you under the following terms and conditions:
You May:
1. Use this software in the computer supplied to you by Beckman Coulter;
2. Maintain one copy of this software for backup purposes (the backup copy shall be supplied by Beckman 
Coulter);
3. After written notification to Beckman Coulter, transfer the entire Product to another person or entity, 
provided you retain no copies of the Product software and the transferee agrees to the terms of this 
license agreement.
You May Not:
1. Use, copy or transfer copies of this Software except as provided in this license agreement;
2. Alter, merge, modify or adapt this Software in any way including disassembling or decompiling;
3. Loan, rent, lease, or sublicense this Software or any copy.
Limited Warranty
Beckman Coulter warrants that the software will substantially conform to the published specifications for the 
Product in which it is contained, provided that it is used on the computer hardware and in the operating 
system environment for which it was designed. Should the media on which your software arrives prove 
defective, Beckman Coulter will replace said media free of charge within 90 days of delivery of the Product. 
This is your sole remedy for any breech of warranty for this software.
Except as specifically noted above, Beckman Coulter makes no warranty or representation, either expressed 
or implied, with respect to this software or its documentation including quality, performance, 
merchantability, or fitness for a particular purpose.
No Liability for Consequential Damages
In no event shall Beckman Coulter or its suppliers be liable for any damages whatsoever (including, without 
limitation, damages for loss of profits, business interruption, loss of information, or other pecuniary loss) 
arising out of the use of or inability to use the Beckman Coulter Product software. Because some states do not 
allow the exclusion or limitation of liability for consequential damages, the above limitation might not apply 
to you.
General
This agreement constitutes the entire agreement between you and Beckman Coulter and supersedes any 
prior agreement concerning this Product software. It shall not be modified except by written agreement 
dated subsequent to the date of this agreement signed by an authorized Beckman Coulter representative. 
Beckman Coulter is not bound by any provision of any purchase order, receipt, acceptance, confirmation, 
correspondence, or otherwise, unless Beckman Coulter specifically agrees to the provision in writing. This 
agreement is governed by the laws of the State of California.
C68406AA     Warranty-2
Beckman Coulter, Inc. Customer End User License Agreement
  
[UNREADABLE_PAGE]
© 2020 Beckman Coulter, Inc. 
All Rights Reserved
www.beckman.com
Related Documents
 • Echo Plate Reformat Quick Start Guide
 • Echo Combination Screen User Guide
 • Echo Combination Screen Quick Start Guide
 • Echo Cherry Pick User Guide
 • Echo Cherry Pick Quick Start Guide
 • Echo Array Maker User Guide
 • Echo Array Maker Quick Start Guide
 • Echo Plate Audit User Guide
 • Echo Plate Audit Quick Start Guide
 • Echo Dose-Response User Guide
 • Echo Dose-Response Quick Start Guide
 • Echo 21CFR11 Compliance Manager User Guide
 • Echo 21CFR11 Compliance Manager Quick Start Guide
 • Echo 21CFR11 Compliance Manager Admin User Guide
 • Echo 21CFR11 Compliance Manager Admin Quick Start Guide
 • Echo 500 Series Liquid Handler User Guide
 • Echo 525 Series Liquid Handler User Guide
 • Echo 650 Series Liquid Handler User Guide
 • Echo Software Applications Integration Guide
 • Echo Liquid Handler Software Integration Guide
 • Tempo Automation Control Software User Guide
 • Access Dual Robot System User Guide