fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 11 May 2018
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2018.00565
Edited by:
Jean Rivoal,
Université de Montréal, Canada
Reviewed by:
Jeffrey Charles Waller,
Mount Allison University, Canada
Dave Speijer,
University of Amsterdam, Netherlands
Sebastien Renaut,
Université de Montréal, Canada
*Correspondence:
Marcos A. Tronconi
tronconi@cefobi-conicet.gov.ar
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Plant Physiology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Plant Science
Received: 13 December 2017
Accepted: 10 April 2018
Published: 11 May 2018
Citation:
Tronconi MA, Andreo CS and
Drincovich MF (2018) Chimeric
Structure of Plant Malic Enzyme
Family: Different Evolutionary
Scenarios for NAD-
and NADP-Dependent Isoforms.
Front. Plant Sci. 9:565.
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2018.00565
Chimeric Structure of Plant Malic
Enzyme Family: Different
Evolutionary Scenarios for NAD- and
NADP-Dependent Isoforms
Marcos A. Tronconi*, Carlos S. Andreo and Maria F. Drincovich
Centro de Estudios Fotosintéticos y Bioquímicos, Universidad Nacional de Rosario, Rosario, Argentina
Malic enzyme (ME) comprises a family of proteins with multiple isoforms located in
different compartments of eukaryotic cells. In plants, cytosolic and plastidic enzymes
share several characteristics such as NADP speciﬁcity (NADP-ME), oxaloacetate
decarboxylase (OAD) activity, and homo-oligomeric assembly. However, mitochondrial
counterparts are NAD-dependent proteins (mNAD-ME) lacking OAD activity, which
can be structured as homo- and hetero-oligomers of two different subunits. In this
study, we examined the molecular basis of these differences using multiple sequence
analysis, structural modeling, and phylogenetic approaches. Plant mNAD-MEs show
the lowest identity values when compared with other eukaryotic MEs with major
differences including short amino acid insertions distributed throughout the primary
sequence. Some residues in these exclusive segments are co-evolutionarily connected,
suggesting that they could be important for enzymatic functionality. Phylogenetic
analysis indicates that eukaryotes from different kingdoms used different strategies for
acquiring the current set of NAD(P)-ME isoforms. In this sense, while the full gene family
of vertebrates derives from the same ancestral gene, plant NADP-ME and NAD-ME
isoforms have a distinct evolutionary history. Plant NADP-ME genes may have arisen
from the α-protobacterial-like mitochondrial ancestor, a characteristic shared with major
eukaryotic taxa. On the other hand, plant mNAD-ME genes were probably gained
through an independent process involving the Archaeplastida ancestor. Finally, several
residue signatures unique to all plant mNAD-MEs could be identiﬁed, some of which
might be functionally connected to their exclusive biochemical properties. In light of
these results, molecular evolutionary scenarios for these widely distributed enzymes in
plants are discussed.
Keywords: phylogeny, malic enzyme, land plants, molecular evolution, NAD or NADP speciﬁcity
INTRODUCTION
Malic enzymes (MEs) catalyze the oxidative decarboxylation of L-malate, producing pyruvate,
CO2, and NAD(P)H in the presence of a divalent cation (Mg +2 or Mn +2; Chang and Tong,
2003). MEs are part of a family of structurally related proteins (Malic Enzyme Family, MEF) that
also includes malolactic enzymes (MLEs) and soluble oxaloacetate decarboxylases (OADs), which
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 1 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565
fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 2
Tronconi et al. Plant Malic Enzime Family Evolution
convert L-malate to L-lactate, and oxaloacetate (OAA) to
pyruvate, respectively (Espariz et al., 2011; Supplementary
Figure S1). MEs can be classiﬁed considering diﬀerent criteria.
Based on coenzyme speciﬁcity and their ability to decarboxylate
OAA, MEs are divided into three categories: EC1.1.1.38 (NAD-
dependent; decarboxylates added OAA), EC1.1.1.39 (NAD-
dependent; does not decarboxylate added OAA), and EC 1.1.1.40
(NADP-dependent; decarboxylates added OAA; International
Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology 1; Supplementary
Figure S1 ). Based on the NAD(P) binding domain, MEs can
be further divided into two groups: Class I 2 and Class II-MEs 3.
Class I groups MEs typically found in eukaryotes and in some
eubacteria. This group also includes MLE of Gram-positive
lactic acid bacteria (LAB). Otherwise, the Class II-MEs are
almost exclusively constituted by archebacterial and eubacterial
MEs, along with the OADs found in Gram-positive bacteria. In
eukaryotes, Class II-MEs have been found to date only in the
protist Trichomonas vaginalis and Entamoeba histolytica (Field
et al., 2000; Dolezal et al., 2004). Class I and Class II-MEs group
in two well-separated branches of a phylogenetic tree of MEF
proteins (Espariz et al., 2011), indicating that that they do not
share a common evolutionary history.
Malic enzyme is widely distributed in nature, being present
in organisms of the major biological divisions. This is due to
the extensive participation of its substrates and products in
diﬀerent metabolic pathways. The genome of higher animals
(vertebrates) encodes a uniform set of three MEs, one cytosolic
NADP-dependent enzyme (cNADP-ME, EC 1.1.1.40) and two
mitochondrial isoforms: one NADP-dependent (mNADP-ME,
EC 1.1.1.40) and another NAD-dependent (mNAD-ME, EC
1.1.1.38). Animal cNADP-ME and mNADP-ME provide NADPH
for the biosynthesis of long-chain fatty acids or steroids
(McKeehan and McKeehan, 1982; Goodridge et al., 1996), while
mNAD-ME is only expressed in fast-growing and neoplastic
tissues where it is implicated in energy metabolism (Moreadith
and Lehninger, 1984). On the other hand, the genome of land
plants (embryophytes) encodes a variable, species-dependent,
ME set with several isoforms distributed among cytosol (cNADP-
ME, EC 1.1.1.40), plastids (plNADP-ME, EC 1.1.1.40), and
mitochondria (mNAD-ME, EC 1.1.1.39). Plant cNADP-MEs
have been linked to plant defense responses (Schaaf et al., 1995;
Alvarez et al., 2013), lignin biosynthesis (Schaaf et al., 1995),
cytosolic pH control (Martinoia and Rentsch, 1994), regulation
of stomatal closure (Outlaw et al., 1981; Laporte et al., 2002),
and photosynthetic metabolism in Crassulacean acid metabolism
(CAM) plants (Cushman, 1992). In plastids, plNADP-MEs are
involved in the C 4 photosynthetic process operating in the C 4-
NADP-ME subtype (Drincovich et al., 2010; Saigo et al., 2013)
as well as in defense responses (Maurino et al., 2001; Chi et al.,
2004) and lipid synthesis (Lai et al., 2002). In plant mitochondria,
mNAD-ME participates in the photosynthetic process of C 4-
NAD-ME subtype species, but its constitutive presence in all
tissues of C 3 and C 4 species indicates a housekeeping role for
1http://www.chem.qmul.ac.uk/iubmb
2https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/cddsrv.cgi?uid=133454
3https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Structure/cdd/cddsrv.cgi?uid=133453
this isoform. In this regard, mNAD-ME could channel the large
L-malate reserves commonly present in many plant species to
the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle for their complete oxidation
(Tronconi et al., 2008) or participate in amino acid and lipid
biosynthesis (Sweetlove et al., 2010).
Several biochemical and structural characteristics distinguish
plant mNAD-MEs, e.g., the EC1.1.1.39 category is composed only
of plant mNAD-MEs, as they are the only isoforms unable to
decarboxylate OAA characterized to date. Interestingly, whereas
the animal NAD(P)-MEs and plant NADP-MEs are assembled
as homo-oligomers of monomers with molecular masses in
the range between 60 and 66 kDa, plant mNAD-MEs can be
structured as heteromers of two diﬀerent subunits: α (~60 kDa,
or mNAD-ME1) and β (~58 kDa, or mNAD-ME2) proteins,
and also as α2 and β2 active homodimers (Willeford and
Wedding, 1987; Tronconi et al., 2008, 2010b). In addition, these
enzymes cannot catalyze the reverse reaction (reductive pyruvate
carboxylation) as it has been described for animal NAD(P)-MEs
and plant NADP-MEs (Mallick et al., 1991; Gerrard Wheeler
et al., 2008; Tronconi et al., 2010a). Finally, the Arabidopsis α2
mNAD-ME homodimer displays a complex allosteric inhibition
by L-malate not described for other MEs characterized up to this
point (Tronconi et al., 2012, 2015). These properties of plant
mNAD-ME, not shared with the other MEs found in higher
eukaryotes, are puzzling and could have their origin in a diﬀerent
evolutionary history for these isoforms.
This work addressed the evolutionary relationship of
Class I-MEs found in eukaryotes, focusing on the plausible
divergent origin of plant mNAD-MEs. Multiple primary
sequence alignments and modeling based on three-dimensional
structures were explored using bioinformatic approaches to
analyze elements exclusively present in plant mNAD-ME. The
phylogenetic analysis provides support for diﬀerent evolutionary
scenarios for NADP-ME and NAD-ME genes in plants.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Retrieval of Sequences and Alignments
The sequences of MEs, MLEs, and OADs were recovered from
the National Center for Biotechnology Information database 4.
For plants and algal species with entire genome information,
MEs sequences were extracted from www.phytozome.net, while
animal and fungal MEs were retrieved from www.genomesize.
com and http://fungidb.org, respectively. BLASTP or TBLASN
with a minimal e-value of 0.0001 was used to obtain homologous
MEs in Chromista, Rhodophyta, Excavata, and Amoebozoa
kingdoms with the human cNADP-ME (GI:EAW48664), human
mNAD-ME (GI:EAW62981), and α subunit mNAD-ME from
Arabidopsis thaliana (AT2G13560) used as seeds.
Cyanophora paradoxa and Bigelowiella natans ME sequences
were retrieved from draft genomes (Curtis et al., 2012; Price
et al., 2012) using TBLASN for searching. The partial nucleotide
encoding sequences were translated and putative proteins were
aligned by ClustalW for editing before evolutionary analyses.
4http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 2 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565
fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 3
Tronconi et al. Plant Malic Enzime Family Evolution
For gene identiﬁcation in Rhizopus oryzae and Mucor
circinelloides with a potential photosynthetic ancestry,
Phytophthora sojae genes, assumed to have a photosynthetic
endosymbiotic origin (Tyler et al., 2006), were used as query to
search in the genome database of M. circinelloides5.
For amino acid comparisons and general editing, sequences
were aligned in a ClustalW format. Accession numbers of
protein sequences used in the present study are provided in
Supplementary Table S1.
Prediction of Subcellular Localization of
Proteins
Protein localization was analyzed using MitoProt II (Claros
and Vincens, 1996), TargetP 1.1 (Emanuelsson et al., 2007),
and ChloroP 1.1 (Emanuelsson et al., 1999). Sequences were
considered as co-localized when at least two out of the three
programs predicted matching results.
Mutual Information Analysis
Co-evolving amino acid pairs in plant mNAD-ME isoforms were
identiﬁed by the MISTIC (mutual information server to infer
coevolution) method (Simonetti et al., 2013). Mature isoforms
(without mitochondrial targeting peptide) from angiosperms
were aligned and loaded at http://mistic.leloir.org.ar/index.php in
a FASTA format.A. thaliana α subunit mNAD-ME (AT2G13560)
was chosen as reference sequence. MISTIC calculated the Mutual
Information (MI) between pairs of columns in the multiple
alignments. Brieﬂy, the frequency of appearance for each residue
pair was compared with the individual observed frequency for
each amino acid at the same positions (Buslje et al., 2009;
Simonetti et al., 2013). Next, an MI score was calculated as the
number of standard deviations that the observed MI value falls
above the mean value obtained form a large set of permutated
versions of the alignment for each pair position. MI scores higher
than 6.5 provide suﬃcient speciﬁcity and sensitivity being the
only ones reported (Buslje et al., 2009). Results were displayed
in diﬀerent formats (i) Circos representation for comparison
through the full alignment of position pairs analyzed with MI, (ii)
network graphs composed of nodes joined by edges, where nodes
represent residues and edges between two nodes indicate an MI
value > 6.5, and (iii) logo representation showing the amino
acid enrichment and depletion for a group of MI connected
nodes.
Molecular Evolutionary Analyses
Multiple sequence alignments of amino acid sequences for
evolutionary inferences were constructed with MUSCLE 3.2
version (Multiple Sequence Comparison by Log-Expectation;
Edgar, 2004) implemented in MEGA6 software (Tamura et al.,
2013) and manually edited for missing gaps or poorly aligned
regions. The ﬁnal ME alignment consisted of 142 sequences
and 544 characters. Phylogenetic trees were inferred by the
maximum likelihood (ML) and Bayesian inference (BI) methods
via the MEGA6 (Tamura et al., 2013) and MrBayes 3.1.2
5http://genome.jgi-psf.org/Mucci2/Mucci2
software (Ronquist and Huelsenbeck, 2003), respectively. In ML
analysis, data samples were ﬁrst analyzed to assess the best
substitution model describing the observed sequence change.
The goodness of ﬁt of each model to the data was measured by
the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) and the model with
the lowest BIC score was considered the best description for a
speciﬁc substitution pattern. For our data set, the lowest BIC
value corresponded to the Whelan and Goldman model (WAG;
Whelan and Goldman, 2001) using a discrete gamma distribution
with ﬁve categories ([ +G], α parameter = 2.0533) under the
assumption that a certain fraction of sites are evolutionarily
invariable ([ +I], 2.6198% sites). Hence, this constituted the
evolutionary model: WAG +G (2.0533) +I (2.6198). For
ambiguous states and insertion–deletions, we chose a partial-
deletion treatment with a site coverage parameter at 95%. The
initial tree for the ML search was generated automatically by
applying NJ and BIONJ algorithms, and its branch lengths were
adjusted to maximize the likelihood of the data set for that
tree topology under the selected model of evolution. Heuristic
searches were conducted with the initial tree based on the nearest
neighbor interchange (NNI) search where the alternative trees
diﬀer in one branching pattern. The ﬁnal tree was the one
whose arrangement of branches led to the highest ML value.
Reliability of interior branches was assessed with 500 bootstrap
re-samplings (MLB). Nodes with MLB values 50–69% were
regarded as weakly supported, 70–84% as moderately supported,
and 85–100% as strongly supported (Hillis and Bull, 1993).
Phylogenetic trees were displayed using the MEGA software
version 6.0 (Tamura et al., 2013). Substitutions per site are
denoted as a separated bar with a number in each phylogenetic
tree.
In the BI analysis, two parallel runs, each including four
Metropolis-coupled Markov chain Monte Carlo (MC3) analysis,
were run for 5,000,000 generations and sampled every 100
generations for each partition scheme. This generated an
output of 50,000 trees. For an eﬃcient Metropolis coupling, an
incremental heating scheme of three heated chains and one cold
chain in each run was used, with a temperature parameter setting
of 0.08. In order to conﬁrm that the chains achieved stationary,
“burn-in” plots were evaluated by plotting log-likelihood against
generation number. Also, the ﬁnal average standard deviation of
split frequencies was used as the convergence index, in which
values < 0.01 indicated good convergence, and convergence
of clade posterior probabilities within and between runs was
checked using the potential scale reduction factor (PSRF). After
determining convergence, the initial 25% of the sampled trees for
each MC3 run were discarded as “burn-in, ” and the post-burn-in
trees were used to generate a 50% majority-rule consensus tree.
The percentage of samples recovering any particular clade in a
BI analysis represents the posterior probability (BPP) of a clade.
Node with BPP values ≥95% were considered highly supported
and ≤95% not supported. The tree ﬁgures were displayed using
the FigTree v1.4 software 6 and visually edited. Substitutions per
site are denoted as a separated bar with a number in each
phylogenetic tree.
6http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/ﬁgtree
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 3 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565
fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 4
Tronconi et al. Plant Malic Enzime Family Evolution
Identiﬁcation of Signature Residues
Identiﬁcation of well-conserved positions in the primary
sequences that diﬀer in other groups (SDP , speciﬁcity-
determining positions) within a group of proteins was performed
using SDPpred 7. ME sequences belonging to A +V and G +R
clades (see below) were aligned in a GDE (ClustalW) format
before uploading. For each aligned column, the software
computed a z-score for positions where the amino acid
distribution is more closely associated with grouping than for
an average position of the alignment, which is thus likely to be
an SDP (Kalinina et al., 2004). Next, SDPpred evaluated the
signiﬁcance of the z-scores in order to decide if it is high enough
to indicate an SDP. For this, SDPpred established a z-score
threshold “ p” (or B-cutoﬀ) based on the computation of the
Bernoulli estimator. Positions with z-score > p were designated
as SDPs, as they were non-randomly generated (Kalinina et al.,
2004).
RESULTS
Amino Acid Sequence Analysis of Animal
and Plant MEs
Animal mNADP-ME and mNAD-ME share about 55% identity
with each other and they are 72% and 55% identical to animal
cNADP-ME, respectively (Figure 1). In plants, α and β mNAD-
MEs are about 63% identical and share only 40% identity with
cytosolic or plastidic counterparts ( Figure 1). When animal and
plant mNAD-MEs are compared, the proteins are nearly 38%
identical. These relatively low identity values of plant mNAD-ME
with isoforms from higher eukaryotes are similar to those found
with the SfcA ME of Escherichia coli (Figure 1). Finally, Class I-
and Class II-MEs, represented by the sequence from the archeon
Solfolobus solfataricus, exhibit very low identity (about 20%) with
each other ( Figure 1 ). In this top-down analysis of sequences,
plant mNAD-ME displays the ﬁve conserved sites previously
deﬁned for the ME family (Drincovich et al., 2001), including
the two phosphate cofactor-binding signature motifs: site II and
site V ( Figure 2 ; Chang and Tong, 2003). A multiple protein
sequence alignment of animal and plant NAD(P)-MEs reveals
that the main diﬀerences in plant mNAD-ME lie in short amino
acid insertions (indicated as A–F inFigure 2), with the amino (A)
and carboxyl terminal (F) insertions being the most signiﬁcant
in extension. Two shorter insertions (B and C) are located near
the second dinucleotide-binding signature motif that is part of
the cofactor binding site. In addition, some single-amino acid
substitutions in this region can be highlighted. For instance,
the GAGEAA/G consensus sequence in animal NAD(P)-ME
and plant NADP-ME changes to GAGSAG in plant mNAD-
ME (Figure 2). Also, amino acid residues implicated in cofactor
speciﬁcity are diﬀerent in this enzyme. In NADP-ME, a Lys
residue (K362 for human cNADP-ME) is the major determinant
for NADP speciﬁcity (Hsieh et al., 2011). This amino acid is not
present in animal or plant mNAD-ME; it has been substituted by
Asn in animal mNAD-ME and by Ala or Val in plant mNAD-ME
7http://bioinf.fbb.msu.ru/SDPpred
FIGURE 1 | Sequence identity among ME isoforms comparing class I- versus
class II-MEs; animal MEs; and relevant group isoforms from plant MEs and
NAD-MEs. Circles indicate the identity values (%) obtained by ClustalW
alignment among the different ME isoforms indicated in the graph. Circle size
is proportional to the standard dispersion. For each comparison, 12 animal
MEs and 20 plant ME sequences were used. For class I versus II comparison,
ME sequences for 10 eubacteria, MaeB from E. coli, YtsJ from Bacillus subtilis
(NC_000964.3), and the accessed protein WP_029552528 from Solfolobus
solfataricus as representative sequences of Class II-ME were also included.
The Class I-MEs used for calculations are denoted with (∗) in Supplementary
Table S1. For clarity, comparison between plant cytosolic and plastidic
NADP-ME was not included, which was centered on 85% identity.
(Figure 2). Despite these diﬀerences, the residues that have been
implicated in substrate binding and catalysis in human mNAD-
ME are conserved in plant mitochondrial isoforms ( Figure 2 ;
Chang and Tong, 2003).
Co-evolutionary Residue Positions
In view of the signiﬁcant changes at the primary sequence level
of plant mNAD-ME, we evaluated the extension of the co-
evolutionary relationships between amino acid positions through
the MI principle. MI assumes that mutations of essential residues
may occur only if a compensatory mutation elsewhere in the
protein also takes place to preserve activity (Martin et al.,
2005). Pairs of residues in a sequence alignment exhibiting high
MI score values are postulated to have coevolved and thus
are probably functionally connected. Since over 100 aligned
sequences are required for an accurate MI prediction and such
a number of plant mNAD-MEs are not currently available, our
results are only an approximation to the inference of the co-
evolutionary scenario. Data sets of 78 α and β plant mNAD-ME
mature sequences (590 residues long) were fully aligned and
MI calculation was performed by MISTIC (Simonetti et al.,
2013). High-scoring MI pairs were accumulated in three main
regions of α and β plant mNAD-ME: 53–71, 317–376, and 547–
583 ( Supplementary Figure S2A ). Individual residues with a
high number of MI connections can be found within these
regions. Interestingly, many of these residues are part of the
A, C, D, and F insertion sequences, which are exclusive to
plant mNAD-ME ( Supplementary Figure S2A ). For example,
residues in the A and F regions, which are far apart in
the primary sequence, were highly MI interconnected with
each other and with some residues of insertions C and D
(Supplementary Figure S2B ). This suggests that these unique
sequence segments could be relevant for plant mNAD-ME
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 4 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565
fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 5
Tronconi et al. Plant Malic Enzime Family Evolution
FIGURE 2 | Amino acid sequence alignment of representative NAD-MEs and NADP-MEs. NADP-ME and NAD-ME sequences of human, A. thaliana, and S. italica
as representative of animal, eudicot plants, and monocot plants, respectively, are shown. Conserved sequences found in all NAD(P)-ME (sites I–V) are highlighted.
Insertions present in plant mNAD-MEs are highlighted in blue. Amino acid residues implicated in catalysis (C) as well as in metal (Me), L-malate (S), or cofactor (N)
binding are highlighted in gray. Numbers for each amino acid residue refer to their position in human mNAD-ME primary structure.
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 5 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565
fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 6
Tronconi et al. Plant Malic Enzime Family Evolution
functionality. Additionally, we analyzed pairs of α and β
sequences fused in an amino to carboxyl arrangement in both α–
β and β–α combinations. A common number of MI connections
involving residues belonging to the two subunits were identiﬁed
for both combinations (Supplementary Figure S2C).
Gene Structure of Animal and Plant MEs
The structure of vertebrate and plant ME genes was analyzed
considering the number and homology of encoding exons. ME
genes of four animal species that belong to diﬀerent taxonomic
classes were analyzed: Homo sapiens (Mammalia), Xenopus laevis
(Amphibia), Danio rerio (Actinopterygii), and Columbus livia
(Aves). The structure of NAD(P)-ME genes is well conserved
in the four animal species, with c NADP-ME and mNADP-ME
genes containing 14 encoding exons, and mNAD-ME 15 exons
(Supplementary Figure S3A ). In each species, all exons of the
three ME genes are homologous and the extra exon present in
mNAD-ME arises from the split of exon number 12 of c NADP-
ME or mNADP-ME. Thus, all the animal ME genes seem to be
evolutionarily related.
Among plants, we analyzed the complete ME gene set in
the bryophyte Physcomitrella patens and three tracheophytes
species: Selaginella moellendorﬃi (Lycopodiophyta), A. thaliana
(Angiospermae, eudicot), and Zea mays (Angiospermae,
monocot), which are distant species and show diﬀerent sets of
ME. In general, plant MEs exhibit higher numbers of encoding
exons than the animal genes with some degree of species-
dependence ( Supplementary Figure S3B ). In this regard, both
NADP-ME and NAD-ME genes present 19 encoding exons,
except cNADP-ME2 of Z. mays with eight, since exons 12–19
are fused. Although there is some variability in the number
and structure of exons between animal and plant NAD(P)-ME
genes, two conclusions may be drawn from gene conformation
analysis. First, some degree of colinearity between the exons of
plant NADP-ME genes and those from animals can be noted.
Second, each encoding exons from a particular cNADP-ME
or plNADP-ME gene in plants has its counterpart in other
cNADP-ME or plNADP-ME, but not in mNAD-ME genes, where
their exons only show homology to each other ( Supplementary
Figure S3B).
Phylogeny Pattern of Plant NADP and
NAD-ME
The above results suggest that plant mNAD-MEs could be
evolutionarily unrelated to other eukaryotic MEs. Thus, to
address the evolutionary relationship of plant mNAD-ME, we
performed phylogenetic analyses using Class I-MEs amino
acid sequences from organisms that belong to the major
taxonomic divisions: Archaeplastida (Glaucophyta, Rhodophyta
[red algae], and Viridiplantae [green algae and Embryophyta]),
Opisthokont (Animalia and Fungi), Chromista (Crytophyta,
Heterokonta, and Haptophyta), Rhizaria (Chlorarachniophyta),
Amoebozoa, and Eubacteria (Gram-negative and Gram-positive
bacteria). Archeal ME and eubacterial OAD sequences were
excluded from our analyses as they are members of the
highly divergent Class II-ME group. Hence, data sets of 134
eubacterial and eukaryotic MEs were retrieved from databases,
aligned and, after exclusion of ambiguously aligned regions,
491 amino acid positions were included in ML and BI
phylogenetic analyses (see Supplementary Table S1 for list of
gene ID’s). When two sequences showed >85% of similarity,
one of them was excluded from the alignment. Eukaryotic
Class I-MEs grouped in two major clades in the ML tree
(Figure 3 ). One clade contains all animals NAD(P)-MEs
along with cNADP-MEs and plNADP-MEs from plants. This
group also contains some algae and chromist sequences and
thus constitutes the “Animalia +Viridiplantae clade” (A +V
clade). Homologous sequences from the paraphyletic Gram-
negative group, comprising Verrucomicrobia ( Opitutus terrae )
and α-Proteobacteria ( Mesorizhobium sp.), are also included
in the A +V clade. Amoeba sequences branch as a subgroup
along with fungal and algae enzymes in this clade. On the
other hand, plant mNAD-ME conform the second major
eukaryotic clade together with sequences of green and red
algae and chromists ( Figure 3 ). We named this grouping the
“Green + Red clade” (G +R clade) because in addition to
embryophytes, it comprises green and red algae, as well as
organisms that are evolutionarily related with them through
secondary endosymbiosis. The G +R clade contains a sister
group of MEs from Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria,
and some fungal sequences. Interestingly, all Gram-negative
sequences in this group belong to γ-proteobacteria class. MLEs
are also included in this subclade, as they nest within Gram-
positive MEs ( Figure 3). Finally, some green algae ME isoforms
constitute a cluster separated from the remaining sequences by
a very long branch. The analysis of these sequences indicates
several mutations at positions of the conserved motifs that
characterize the ME family (not shown), suggesting that they
could be a case of neofunctionalization in the MEF. The BI
tree topology was highly congruent with those deduced by ML
analysis (Supplementary Figure S4) with branches well resolved
and supported (BPP ≥95%). In particular, branches grouping the
deep lineages of ME, which were weakly/moderately sustained
in ML approach, were strongly supported in the BI analysis.
When comparing ML and BI trees, two mayor diﬀerences can
be found: amoeba, fungi, and algae sequences form a third
group of eukaryotic ME, separated from the A +V clade in the
BI tree and Gram-negative sequences do not nest with animal
isoforms, constituting a simple cluster within the A +V clade
(Supplementary Figure S4 ). It should be mentioned that the
highly divergent algae ME sequences were omitted in the BI
analysis.
Although the monophyly of the G +R clade is consistently
recovered and strongly supported by ML analysis, internal
branches corresponding to some chromist sequences were
moderately supported ( Figure 3 ). This could be due to the
existence of long branches in the extensive phylogenetic analyses
that destabilize the otherwise robust grouping (Swoﬀord et al.,
1996). Longer branches were indentiﬁed for green algae MEs
belonging to the A +V clade and for Gram-positive MLEs (data
not shown). Thus, a new ML tree mainly focused on G +R
sequences, including a larger number of mNAD-ME sequences
from C 3 and C 4-NAD-ME subtype plants, was constructed. In
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 6 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565
fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 7
Tronconi et al. Plant Malic Enzime Family Evolution
FIGURE 3 | Maximum likelihood tree of Class I-ME protein sequences. Evolutionary history was inferred by using the ML method based on the WAG + G (2.0533) + I
(2.6198) evolutionary model. The tree with the highest log likelihood (–73118.4895) is shown. Analysis involved 134 amino acid sequences (see Supplementary
Table S1 for list of gene IDs). All positions with less than 95% site coverage were eliminated. The ﬁnal data set comprised a total of 491 positions. The tree is drawn
to scale, with branch distance separating two taxa measured in the number of substitutions per site. Numerals indicate support of branches, which were assessed
using 500 boostrap replicates. MaeB sequence from E. coli (a Class II-ME) was included in the analysis as out-group. For animal and plant MEs, M, P , and C indicate
mitochondrial, plastidic, and cytosolic isoforms, respectively. The A+V Clade groups Animalia + Viridiplantae MEs, while G+R Clade clusters green + red isoforms.
Plant ME family members, which are distributed between A+V and G+R lineages, are highlighted in red letters. α and β indicate the two plant mNAD-ME isoforms.
the absence of long branches, the MLB support for chromists
increased signiﬁcantly (Figure 4A).
For α and β mNAD-ME subunits of Angiosperms, monocot
and eudicot isoforms are grouped separately in the G +R
clade ( Figure 4A ). Unlike Angiosperms, the moss P. patens
and the ancient tracheophyte S. moellendorﬃi possess a single
mNAD-ME isoform, which constitutes the most immediate
out-group from the monocot/eudicot grouping and completes
the Embryophyta cluster in the phylogenetic tree. Some
green algae sequences nest closely to embryophytes. Here,
the isoforms of both freshwater green algae ( Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii and Chlorella variabilis) and planktonic green algae
(Ostreococcus spp. and Micromonas pusilla ) were predicted to
be located in the mitochondria ( Figure 4A ). Red algae and
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 7 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565
fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 8
Tronconi et al. Plant Malic Enzime Family Evolution
FIGURE 4 | Phylogenetic tree of G+R clade of Class I-ME (A) and inclusion of C. paradoxa and B. natans MEs (B). (A) Maximum likelihood tree of ME sequences
focusing on the G+R clade. Methods are the same as in Figure 3 [WAG + G(2.0533) + I(2.6198) model]. The tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths measured in
the number of substitutions per site. M, P , H, and C indicate mitochondrial, plastidic, hydrogenosomal, or cytosolic location, respectively. Stars indicate
non-photosynthetic organisms with proved (empty stars) or not proved (ﬁlled stars) photosynthetic past. (B) Maximum likelihood tree constructed (WAG model) with
240 amino acid ME sequences from green and red algae along with the available translated protein regions from the glaucophyte Cyanophora paradoxa and the
secondary photosynthetic Bigelowiella natans (see Supplementary Table S1 for details). Arrows indicate C. paradoxa and B. natans sequences included into the
G+R clade. In both trees, numerals indicate support of branches with 500 boostrap replicates.
chromist sequences constitute a closed and highly supported
subgroup in the G +R clade, where mitochondrial allocation
was predicted for almost all MEs except for the red alga
Galdieria sulphuraria, the haptophyte Emiliania huxleyi, and the
crytophyte Guillardia theta (Figure 4A). Interestingly, a reduced
fungal clade composed by Neocallimastix frontalis, R. oryzae, and
M. circinelloides was found to nest within red algae sequences
with very strong bootstrap support. MEs from R. oryzae and
M. circinelloides are possibly located in the mitochondria while
the N. frontalis isoform would be targeted to the hydrogenosome,
a mitochondria-related compartment present in this anaerobic
fungus (van der Giezen et al., 1997). Along with Oomicetes,
these fungi constitute a group of non-photosynthetic organisms
in the G +R clade ( Figure 4A ). But, unlike Oomicetes, they
lack a proved endosymbiotic evolutionary relationship with
photosynthetic organisms. Even so, the position of R. oryzae and
M. circinelloides MEs in the red algae sub-cluster is supported
by the ﬁnding that other genes in these species are more related
to homologs found in red algae and cyanobacteria than in fungi
(Supplementary Figure S5).
Finally, we tracked a G +R-type ME in an ancient
Archaeplastida member, the glaucophyte Cyanophora paradoxa,
as well as in the chlorarachniophyte B. natans , a secondary
(engulfed green alga) photosynthetic alga. For these species, the
ME sequences are not complete and thus, a new tree using 240
aligned amino acid positions along with those corresponding to
red and green algae homologs was constructed. BothC. paradoxa
and B. natans possess at least one ME isoform phylogenetically
related to the algal proteins that are members of the G +R clade
(Figure 4B).
Signature Residues of the G+R Clade
Based on the aforementioned evolutionary relationship, MEs
found in higher eukaryotes are included in two groups, the
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 8 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565
fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 9
Tronconi et al. Plant Malic Enzime Family Evolution
A+V clade and the G +R clade. We used SDPpred (speciﬁcity
determining position prediction; Kalinina et al., 2004) to search
for residue positions that are well conserved within these two
groups, but diﬀer between them, in order to assign a signature
amino acid sequence to each clade. Two diﬀerent SDP predictions
were performed: one considering all eukaryote A +V and G +R
sequences and another one restricted only to the embryophyte
G+R grouping (plant mNAD-MEs) with all eukaryote A +V
MEs. The 13 SDPs exhibiting the highest z-scores considering
both analyses are shown in Figure 5A. Twelve SDPs showed an
invariable amino acid residue for MEs that belong to the G +R
clade but only ﬁve unambiguous positions were predicted for
A+V sequences. Using the tridimensional structure of human
mNAD-ME (Y ang et al., 2000), we observed that the six SDPs
with the highest z-cores are located near the active site, as
the farthest SDP was located at 8Å from the metallic center
(Figure 5B ). In this regard, using the α mNAD-ME from
A. thaliana as a reference sequence, we found that residues S157
and W254 conserved in G +R sequences change to E164 and
N261, respectively, in the A +V grouping. These residues are
located at the active site in human mNAD-ME ( Figure 5B ).
Particularly, S157 is located in the ﬁrst cofactor-binding signature
motif (Site II in Figure 2). Also, residues M126, W239, and P240
of the G+R group are almost invariably replaced by L133, Y246,
and G247 in the A +V sequences, respectively, and they are part
of domain B where the active site is located ( Figure 5B ). In
particular, when residue P240 of the G +R group is replaced by
G, this site is predicted to be an SDP with the highest conﬁdence
(p-value = 0.000; Figure 5A ). Finally, S309 in the G +R group
is replaced by G313 in the A +V grouping, a highly conserved
residue located in the second dinucleotide-binding signature
motif (Site V in Figure 2).
DISCUSSION
Molecular Evolution of Plant mNAD-MEs
Plant mNAD-MEs show the lowest identity (38–40%, Figure 1)
and similarity (57–60%, not shown) values when compared with
either plant NADP-MEs or NAD(P)-MEs from distantly related
organisms (animal or Escherichia coli). These numbers represent
the minimum homology values shared among sequences that
belong to Class I-MEs. In this regard, when Class I- and Class
II-MEs are compared, the identities are roughly 20% ( Figure 1),
and conserved residues are only those implicated in catalysis
(not shown). Despite having substantial sequence diversity, MEs
share a similar overall tertiary architecture (Chang and Tong,
2003). In fact, the NAD(P)-binding Rossmann fold domain that
is part of the MEF structure has been denoted as an extreme
case where folding is non-sequence driven (Bhattacharyya et al.,
2012). Thus, an important ﬂexibility in sequence seems to
exist in the MEF and, as an example of this property, plant
mNAD-MEs posses several short amino acid residue insertions
distributed throughout the primary structure ( Figure 2 ). The
presence of such segments can be traced to the lower plants
P. patens and S. moellendorﬃi as well as to green algae, but
FIGURE 5 | Speciﬁcity-determining position in MEs of the A+V and R+G clades. (A) 1Amino acid positions in the primary sequence of α mNAD-ME from A. thaliana.
2Amino acid positions in human mNAD-ME. Residues between parentheses show a frequency of occurrence lower than 10%. Residues on the right side of bars
show a frequency of occurrence higher than 10%. ∗Corresponds to SDPs identiﬁed only when embryophyte G+R sequences were compared with all A+V
groupings. ∗∗Corresponds to one residue found only in plastidic NADP-ME from Setaria italica. Letters in bold indicate SDPs with the highest z-scores that were
deﬁned as signature residues. (B) The SDPs with the highest scores are mapped onto the three-dimensional structure of the human mNAD-ME complex with the
L-malate analog (oxalate, in magenta), NAD+(in magenta), Mn+2 (in orange), and fumarate (not shown; 1GZ3, Yang et al., 2002). Signature residues are shown as
stick yellow lines. Residues involved in L-malate binding and catalysis are shown as stick red lines. Residues contacting signature residues are shown as ﬁne lines.
Domains A, B, and C are shown in different colors. For clarity, whole Domain D and theαB3-helix of Domain B were omitted in the model.
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 9 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565
fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 10
Tronconi et al. Plant Malic Enzime Family Evolution
not to red algae or chromists (not shown), suggesting that
they were gained after the split of the green and red algal
lineages. Co-evolution analysis of residue pairs indicated that
these segments exclusive to plant mNAD-ME could be important
for enzymatic functionality, since they are located in MI networks
(Supplementary Figure S2 ). Crucially, as a common number
of MI, connections involve residues belonging to diﬀerent
subunits ( Supplementary Figure S2C ), these inter-subunit co-
evolutionary pairs could be the basis of the exclusive heteromeric
assembly that characterizes plant mNAD-MEs. Although these
regions are far away from each other in the primary structure,
co-evolving insertions might be close in folding intermediates
or might be part of a transmission signal pathway connecting
allosteric and active sites or subunit interfaces (Goodey and
Benkovic, 2008; Marino Buslje et al., 2010). In any case, it
is clear that a requirement to maintain a particular function
constraints structural diversity in these exclusive regions of plant
mNAD-ME.
NADP-ME and NAD-ME Genes Were
Independently Acquired in Plants
A better understanding of the particular molecular evolution
of plant mNAD-MEs, on which their exclusive biochemical
properties rely can be achieved through the comprehensive
phylogenetic approach performed in this work. ML and BI
analyses indicate that Class I-MEs from eukaryotic organisms
are separated in two principal branches ( Figure 3 and
Supplementary Figure S4). The A+V cluster and its immediate
out-group include sequences of all major taxa, from Amoebozoa
to Embryophyta along with ME from Gram-negative bacteria
(Figure 3 ). Because of their presence in unrelated organisms
and the inclusion of α-proteobacteria sequences into the clade,
we conclude that eukaryotes acquired A +V isoforms from the
α-proteobacterial-like ancestor of mitochondria through the
extensive endosymbiotic gene transfer (EGT) that took place
when this organelle was established (Keeling and Palmer, 2008;
Figure 6).
On the other hand, the G+R clade is almost solely constituted
by primary and secondary photosynthetic organisms and species
displaying photosynthetic metabolism in the past ( Figures 3 ,
4A). Since the presence of G +R isoforms can be traced to
the primitive photosynthetic endosymbiont, the glaucophyte
C. paradoxa (Figure 4B ), and considering that most of them
are predicted to have a targeting peptide ( Figure 4A ), the
incorporation of this isoform in mitochondria must have been
an early event during evolution of the Archaeplastida lineage.
Unlike the A +V clade, eubacterial MEs do not nest within the
G+R group, but γ-proteobacteria sequences branch close to it
with moderate (MLB = 64%) and strong (BPP = 98%) support
(Figure 3 and Supplementary Figure S4). The α-proteobacterial
MEs were not closely related to the γ-proteobacteria clade,
which indicates that it is unlikely that G +R type MEs were
gained via mitochondrial endosymbiosis. Also, except for a very
small group of related fungi ( Figures 3 , 4A), the lack of G +R
MEs in other non-photosynthetic eukaryotes lineages further
reduces the likelihood of a mitochondrial origin. Given these
data at hand, one possible scenario would be that G+R-type MEs
were established in mitochondria of photosynthetic organisms
after unikonts and bikonts split via an independent horizontal
gene transfer (HGT), possibly from a γ-proteobacteria-like
to the Archaeplastida ancestor genome ( Figure 6A ). At this
point, it is possible that the presence of a mitochondrial
G+R-type ME was a precondition for plastid establishment or,
alternatively, it was a subsequent requirement for the success
of the emerging photosynthetic eukaryote ( Figure 6A ). Thus,
if the G +R-type ME was implanted in the Archaeplastida
ancestor through an HGT event, the presence of this kind
of ME isoform in mitochondria of secondary photosynthetic
organisms, chromalveolates and rhizarians, should be the result
of the implantation of a red or green alga, respectively,
in two diﬀerent heterotrophic ancestors (Qiu et al., 2013;
Figure 6A).
The acquisition of enzymes by the Archaeplastida ancestor
through HGT has been proposed as a common phenomenon
in this single-cell phagotrophic organism that allowed the
rapid spreading of the lineage (Keeling and Palmer, 2008;
Ball et al., 2013; Qiu et al., 2013), resulting in a more rapid
change in biochemical diversity and metabolic versatility than
evolution of isoenzymes by gene duplication and subsequent
neofunctionalization (Ghoshroy et al., 2010). Aγ-proteobacterial
origin was proposed for a subgroup of Class II plant glutamine
synthetase (GSII B) and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase
(PEPC) genes (Sanchez and Cejudo, 2003; Ghoshroy et al., 2010).
For GSII B, the timing of the HGT event was estimated when
establishing the Archaeplastida linage (Ghoshroy et al., 2010).
Hence, it is possible that the three genes could have the same
evolutionary history in plants.
It is worth to mention that this is not the only possibility for
the origin of mitochondrial G +R-type ME, as our phylogenetic
results can also be explained by at least other two, albeit less
parsimonious, scenarios ( Figures 6B,C ). Without considering
the model for the evolution of eukaryotes we adopt, “the
archezoa hypothesis” or “the symbiogenesis hypothesis” (Gray,
2012; Archibald, 2015), one other possibility would be that the
G+R-type ME could constitute the original isoform present in
the pre-mitochondrial ancestor ( Figure 6B). Because almost all
the extant non-photosynthetic organisms lack the G +R ME
(Figure 3 ), this isoform must have been lost very early in
eukaryotic evolution, probably involving the Unikot lineage (last
eukaryote common ancestor of Opisthokont and Amoebozoa)
that only kept the A +V ME derived from the EGT. Contrary,
G+R ME was conserved in the Bikont lineage (an early
ancestor of Archaeplastida), and then, their photosynthetic
descendants present both G +R and A +V MEs ( Figure 6B ).
However, the observation that none of the current Archaea
species (the prokaryotes most closely related to eukaryotes)
exhibit Class I-ME reduces the likelihood of this scenario.
The second possibility for the presence of mitochondrial G +R-
type ME in all photosynthetic organisms connects with the
chloroplast evolution; this isoform could have been gained
through EGT between the cyanobacterial progenitor of plastids
and the heterotrophic host ( Figure 6C ). However, the genome
analysis of extant cyanobacteria has not uncovered Class I-MEs
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 10 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565
fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 11
Tronconi et al. Plant Malic Enzime Family Evolution
FIGURE 6 | Different scenarios of acquisition of the R+G clade of Class I-ME in eukaryotes. (A) From bottom left, an extensive EGT from an engulfed
α-proteobacteria-like ancestor (mitochondria precursor) to the nucleus of a unikont (one ﬂagellum) host took place. This resulted in the establishment of eubacterial
ME version in early eukaryotes and the foundation of the A+V clade of ME. After unikont and bikont (two ﬂagella) splitting and prior – or post – plastid setting
(indicated by question marks), an HGT event from one eubacteria (possibly a γ-proteobacteria-like) into the Archaeplastida ancestor established the G+R clade of
Class I-MEs in eukaryotes. This allowed spreading of G+R isoforms in all primary photosynthetic organisms, as well as, in the secondary phototrophs
(Chromalveolata and Rhizaria) via an EGT (green and red horizontal broken line arrows) and in some fungi by an HGT event (black horizontal dotted line arrow).
(B) The G+R ME could be the ancestral isoform that was present in the pre-mitochondrial, and founder of the eukaryotic lineage, ancestor (the “Archezoa,” or an
autotrophic methanogenic archaeon, depending on the model for the evolution of eukaryotes). The establishment of mitochondria in this ancestor allowed the
acquisition of an additional isoform (the type A+V) and this chimeric structure for the MEF was maintained by the bikont lineage. However, only the A+V-type ME was
retained by the unikont ancestor, as it lost the more ancestral isoform in what could have been a genetic replacement.(C) The G+R ME acquisition by
photosynthetic organisms (containing the A+V ME derived from the mitochondria setting) may have taken place in with the plastid genesis, through the extensive
EGT from the engulfed cyanobacteria to the host genome. Hence, the presence of this isoform in secondary phototrophs organisms results from secondary
endosymbiosis processes, as is explained in A. For clarity, the major taxa of eukaryotic organisms were omitted in B and C.
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 11 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565
fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 12
Tronconi et al. Plant Malic Enzime Family Evolution
sequences (Espariz et al., 2011), which argues against this
possibility. Despite their inconsistencies, both scenarios still
maintain a certain degree of plausibility, considering that,
although neither Archaea nor cyanobacteria genomes encode
a G +R-type ME to date, they could have done so in the
past.
Besides, our results also suggest that eukaryotes from other
kingdoms used independent strategies for acquiring the current
set of NAD(P)-ME isoforms. While invertebrates hold a single
nuclear NAD-ME gene, the gene family coding the full set of
the cytosolic and mitochondrial NAD(P)-MEs is derived from a
α-proteobacteria-related ancestral gene in vertebrates (Figure 3).
In this case, modifying cofactor aﬃnity (NADP/NAD) must have
been a highly plausible evolutionary event, given the limited
amino acid determinants required to completely switch the
dinucleotide speciﬁcity (Hsieh et al., 2011). Even in land plants,
the plastidic NADP-ME isoforms were generated by duplications
of genes encoding cytosolic isoforms, which in turn are related to
α-proteobacterial progenitors of mitochondria (Figure 3). On the
other hand, it seems that fungi adopted uncommon mechanisms
for gaining mitochondrial ME, as sequences clustered in several
branches of the phylogenetic tree (Figure 3). Some fungi possibly
duplicated a pre-existing gene or changed the subcellular location
of the genetic product, while others attained it through HGT
events with Eubacteria (Figure 3) or even with red algae, such as
M. circinelloides and R. oryzae (Supplementary Figure S4). This
evolutionary repertoire of fungal MEs is consistent with recently
reported studies (Vorapreeda et al., 2013). Another example of
an independent mitochondrial ME acquisition in eukaryotes is
the case of the amoeba E. histolytica. In this case, it is postulated
that the hydrogenosomal Class II-ME isoform was obtained
from an archaeon related to Archaeoglobus fulgidus (Field et al.,
2000).
Therefore, plant mNAD-ME seems to be unrelated to cNADP-
ME and plNADP-ME counterparts, having been acquired in
an independent evolutionary process. The diﬀerent intron–
exon constitution of NADP-ME and NAD-ME genes is in
good agreement with this notion ( Supplementary Figure S2 ).
If both gene classes had been incorporated into the plant
genome in diﬀerent stages of evolution, then they would have
been subjected to independent intron gain events. A chimeric
structure has also been reported for several gene families
encoding enzymes of the TCA cycle, as citrate synthase,
aconitase, isocitrate dehydrogenase, and malate dehydrogenase
(Cavalcanti et al., 2014). In fact, phylogenetic studies for
the enzymes of the glycolysis, TCA cycle, gluconeogenesis,
and “Calvin–Benson” cycle, among other, indicated that the
pathways evolve as coherent entities of enzymatic activity
rather than as protein associations (Schnarrenberger and
Martin, 2002). Moreover, the pathway-associated genes can be
easily replaced by equivalents through lateral gene transfer
to furnish to the pathway new functions to full ﬁt speciﬁc
physiological demands. This implicates that a gene family,
with several isoforms diﬀering in their subcelluar location
and/or being involved in unrelated processes in diﬀerent
organisms, can exhibit an evolutionary-based organism-speciﬁc
composition.
SDP Residues Could Be Associated to
the OAD Reaction
We found several SPD residues that could determine the
inclusion of an ME sequence into one particular phylogenetic
group ( Figure 5B ). The fact that the more constrained
analysis, limited to embryophytic G +R isoforms, resulted in the
incorporation of only one high z-score SDP (W254) suggests
that signature residues are a footprint of the whole phylogenetic
group. In this regard, residues homologous to W239 and S309
are present in current γ-, but not α-proteobacteria, bolstering
our idea that G +R-type ME origin was not associated with
mitochondrial biogenesis. Regarding S309, this residue as well as
S157 is part of the consensus sequence GXGXXG/A included in
the two phosphate cofactor-binding regions (Figure 2). Members
of the G +R clade show an invariant consensus sequence
GXGSXG/A in both regions, but in the A +V isoforms, the
Ser residue is not present, being mainly substituted by Glu
(Figures 2, 5B).
Interestingly, we observed that six residues with the highest
SDP scores form a cluster of spatial positions surrounding the
active site ( Figure 5B ). Because the evolution-based division
separates those animal and plant MEs able to decarboxylate
OAA (included in the A +V clade) from those that cannot
(plant mNAD-ME in the G +R clade), it is exciting to suppose
that some of these catalytic site-linked SDP residues could
have a role in the ability of the ME to catalyze the secondary
OAD reaction. Also, taking into account the footprint nature of
relevant SDP residues in the G +R clade ( Figure 5A ), the lack
of OAA decarboxylation activity would be an emergent property
of all G +R isoforms positively selected during evolution of the
photosynthetic eukaryotic linage. A site-directed mutagenesis
approach where SDP residues are replaced will shed light on this
sequence-function relationship in plant mNAD-MEs.
CONCLUSION
The MEF exhibits substantial sequence diversity, albeit the
related overall tertiary architecture is conserved in the resolved
crystallographic structures of several ME members. By adopting
a not highly dependence on sequence fold, MEF members have
undergone a sub- and/or neo-functionalization during evolution,
exempliﬁed by the OAD and MLE activities, as well as the lack
of OAD and reverse reaction activities of plant mNAD-MEs.
Also, this ability also accounts for the broad range of kinetic
parameters, cofactor speciﬁcity [NADP(H) and/or NAD(H)],
multimodular conformation (e.g., MaeB from E. coli ), and the
remarkable divergence in the nature of allosteric compounds
regulating enzymatic activity (Teller et al., 1992; Bologna et al.,
2007; Gerrard Wheeler et al., 2008; Tronconi et al., 2010b; Alvarez
et al., 2013). Despite this, certain restrictions were imposed on A
+V MEs sequence evolution that prevented their co-optation
to address the mitochondrial metabolism of photosynthetic
organisms. Hence, as in a “ shuﬄe and deal again ” scheme, the
coupled-photosynthesis evolution molded a particular mNAD-
ME structure with exclusive biochemical characteristics. The
possibility that some SDP residues of G +R MEs are functionally
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 12 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565
fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 13
Tronconi et al. Plant Malic Enzime Family Evolution
connected to the biochemical properties of these isoforms
would be an example of such “tailor-made” mechanisms that
relied on the ﬂexibility of certain sequence folds in the
MEF.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
MT designed the concepts and performed the bioinformatic
approaches of this study. MT and MD were involved in the
analysis and interpretation of the results. MT, in collaboration
with the other authors, drafted the manuscript.
FUNDING
This study was supported by CONICET.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
MT, CA, and MD are members of the Researcher Career
of Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cientíﬁcas y Técnicas
(CONICET, Argentina). We thank Dr. Mariana Saigo for the
helpful discussion on sequence analysis.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online
at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpls.2018.00565/
full#supplementary-material
FIGURE S1 | Reactions catalyzed by MEF proteins. ME and MLE are involved in
the conversion of L-malate into pyruvate and L-lactate, respectively. OAD enzymes
catalyze the decarboxylation of OAA to give pyruvate. In the MLE catalysis, NAD
acts as cofactor removing two electrons from L-malate and transferring them to
pyruvate. Dotted arrow in MLE reaction indicates that the reverse activity has not
been measured to date. The presence of a divalent cation (Me2+) is required in all
cases.
FIGURE S2 | Co-evolutionary residue positions of plant mNAD-MEs. (A) Circos
representation for co-evolutionary residue positions of α and β mNAD-MEs. Labels
in the ﬁrst and second circles indicate the amino acid number of the α-mNAD-ME
from A. thaliana. Colored square boxes of the third circle indicate the multiple
sequence alignment conservation (from red to cyan, red: the most conserved
positions and cyan: the less conserved ones). The fourth circle shows MI scores
as histogram. Lines in the center of the circle connect pairs of positions with MI
score >6.5. Red lines represent the top 5%; black lines are between 70 and 95%,
while gray lines account for the last 70%. Outer red bars indicate regions with the
largest number of MI connections, while sequence insertions A, C, D, and F are
highlighted in blue. (B) Interactive framework showing part of the MI network
between residues surrounding, or located in, the sequence insertions. Ovals with
letters indicate residues located in insertions A, C, D, and F.(C) Interactive
framework showing part of the MI network between residues from different
subunits. Ovals include residues exhibiting MIs that are shown in the Logo panel.
Asterisks indicate the amino acid residue taken as a reference for the exempliﬁed
MI network. Logo panels show the amino acid frequency of occurrence along with
the corresponding MI value.
FIGURE S3 | Exon structure in plant and animal NAD(P)-MEs. (A) Alignment of
the predicted amino acid sequences of all ME family members in H. sapiens,
X. laevis, D. rerio, and C. livia. Fragments encoded by different exons in the amino
acid sequence are shown in colors and numbered from E1 to E14. Highlighted
sequences indicate mitochondrial targeting peptide. (B) Alignment of the
predicted amino acid sequences of all ME family members in P . patens(three
cNADP-ME and one mNAD-ME), S. moellendorfﬁ (two cNADP-ME and one
mNAD-ME), A. thaliana (three cNADP-ME, one plNADP-ME, and two mNAD-ME),
and Z. mays (three cNADP-ME, two plNADP-ME, and two mNAD-ME). Fragments
encoded by different exons in the amino acid sequence are shown in colors and
numbered from E0 to E19 for NADP-ME or from e1 to e19 for NAD-ME.
Highlighted sequences denote plastidic or mitochondrial targeting peptides.
FIGURE S4 | Bayesian 50% majority-rule consensus tree of Class I-ME protein
sequences. Evolutionary history was inferred based on the WAG +G +I model.
The main lineages are compressed and designated by their name. Nodes with
BBP support >0.95 are indicated next to each branch. The area of the triangles
representing collapsed clades is not proportional to the number of taxa within the
clade. The red section in animal clade represents chromist sequence insertion and
the gray section in chromist clade represents fungi sequences.
FIGURE S5 | Genes potentially originated from photosynthetic organisms in
R. oryzae and M. circinelloides. Phylogenetic tree using ML method (WAG model)
of amino acid sequences. In all cases, numerals indicate boostrap support of
branches using 100 replicates. Branch length is proportional to sequence
changes. Color line indicates cyanoacteria, red alga, or fungal sequences. These
genes were selected based on the photosynthesis-related homologous present in
Phytophthora sojae (Tyler et al., 2006).
TABLE S1 | Accession number of MEF sequences used in this work. ∗Indicate
sequences used for identity calculation in Figure 1. The sequences of MEs, MLEs
and OADs were recovered from the National Center for Biotechnology Information
database (http://ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). For plants and algal species with entire
genome information MEs sequences were extracted from www.phytozome.net,
while animal and fungal MEs were retrieved from www.genomesize.com and
http://fungidb.org, respectively.
REFERENCES
Alvarez, C. E., Saigo, M., Margarit, E., Andreo, C. S., and Drincovich, M. F.
(2013). Kinetics and functional diversity among the ﬁve members of the NADP-
malic enzyme family from Zea mays, a C4 species. Photosynth. Res. 115, 65–80.
doi: 10.1007/s11120-013-9839-9
Archibald, J. M. (2015). ENdosymbiosis and eukaryotic cell evolution. Curr. Biol.
25, R911–R921. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.07.055
Ball, S. G., Subtil, A., Bhattacharya, D., Moustafa, A., Weber, A. P. M., Gehre, L.,
et al. (2013). Metabolic eﬀectors secreted by bacterial pathogens; essential
facilitators of plastid endosymbiosis? Plant Cell 25, 7–21. doi: 10.1105/tpc.112.
101329
Bhattacharyya, M., Upadhyay, R., and Vishveshwara, S. (2012). Interaction
signatures stabilizing the NAD(P)-binding Rossmann fold: a structure
network approach. PLoS One 7:e51676. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0051676
Bologna, F. P., Andreo, C. S., and Drincovich, M. F. (2007). Escherichia coli
Malic enzymes: two isoforms with substantial diﬀerences in kinetic properties,
metabolic regulation and structure. J. Bacteriol. 189, 5937–5946. doi: 10.1128/
JB.00428-07
Buslje, C. M., Santos, J., Delﬁno, J. M., and Nielsen, M. (2009). Correction
for phylogeny, small number of observations and data redundancy
improves the identiﬁcation of coevolving amino acid pairs using mutual
information. Bioinformatics 25, 1125–1131. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/
btp135
Cavalcanti, J. H., Esteves-Ferreira, A. A., Quinhones, C. G., Pereira-Lima,
I. A., Nunes-Nesi, A., Fernie, A. R., et al. (2014). Evolution and functional
implications of the tricarboxylic acid cycle as revealed by phylogenetic analysis.
Genome Biol. Evol. 6, 2830–2848. doi: 10.1093/gbe/evu221
Chang, G. G., and Tong, L. (2003). Structure and function of malic enzymes,
a new class of oxidative decarboxylases. Biochemistry 42, 12721–12733.
doi: 10.1021/bi035251+
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 13 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565
fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 14
Tronconi et al. Plant Malic Enzime Family Evolution
Chi, W., Y ang, J., Wu, N., and Zhang, F. (2004). Four rice genes encoding NADP
malic enzyme exhibit distinct expression proﬁles. Biosci. Biotechnol. Biochem.
68, 1865–1874. doi: 10.1271/bbb.68.1865
Claros, M. G., and Vincens, P. (1996). Computational method to predict
mitochondrially imported proteins and their targeting sequences. Eur. J.
Biochem. 247, 779–786. doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1996.00779.x
Curtis, B. A., Tanifuji, G., Burki, F., Gruber, A., Irimia, M., Maruyama, S.,
et al. (2012). Algal genomes revel evolutionary mosaicism and the fate of
nucleomorphs. Nature 492, 59–65. doi: 10.1038/nature11681
Cushman, J. (1992). Characterization and expression of a NADP-malic enzyme
cDNA induced by salt stress from the facultative crassulacean acid metabolism
plant, Mesembryanthemum crystallinum. Eur. J. Biochem. 208, 259–266.
Dolezal, P., Vanacova, S., Tachezy, J., and Hrdý, I. (2004). Malic enzymes of
Trichomonas vaginalis : two enzyme families, two distinct origins. Gene 31,
81–92. doi: 10.1111/j.1432-1033.1992.tb17181.x
Drincovich, M. F., Casati, P., and Andreo, C. S. (2001). NADP-malic enzyme from
plants: a ubiquitous enzyme involved in diﬀerent metabolic pathways. FEBS
Lett. 490, 1–6. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2003.12.022
Drincovich, M. F., Lara, M., Maurino, V. G., and Andreo, C. (2010). “C4
decarboxylases: diﬀerent solutions for the same biochemical problem, the
provision of CO2 in the bundle sheath cells, ” in C4 Photosynthesis and
Related CO2 Concentrating Mechanisms , eds A. Raghavendra and R. F. Sage
(Heidelberg: Springer), 277–300. doi: 10.1016/S0014-5793(00)02331-0
Edgar, R. C. (2004). MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and
high throughput. Nucleic Acids Res. 32, 1792–1797. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkh340
Emanuelsson, O., Brunak, S., Nielsen, H., and von Heijne, G. (2007). Locating
proteins in the cell using TargetP , SignalP and related tools. Nat. Protoc. 2,
953–971. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2007.131
Emanuelsson, O., Nielsen, H., and von Heijne, G. (1999). ChloroP , a neural
network-based method for predicting chloroplast transit peptides and their
cleavage sites. Protein Sci. 8, 978–984. doi: 10.1110/ps.8.5.978
Espariz, M., Repizo, G., Blancato, V., Mortera, P., Alarcon, S., and Magni, C.
(2011). Identiﬁcation of malic and soluble oxaloacetate decarboxylase enzymes
in Enterococcus faecalis. FEBS J. 278, 2140–2151. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.
08131.x
Field, J., Rosenthal, B., and Samuelson, J. (2000). Early lateral transfer of genes
encoding malic enzyme, acetyl-CoA synthetase and alcohol dehydrogenases
from anaerobic prokaryotes to Entamoeba histolytica . Mol. Microbiol. 38,
446–455. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2000.02143.x
Gerrard Wheeler, M. C., Arias, C. L., Tronconi, M. A., Maurino, V. G., Andreo,
C. S., and Drincovich, M. F. (2008). Arabidopsis thaliana NADP-malic enzyme
isoforms: high degree of identity but clearly distinct properties. Plant Mol. Biol.
67, 231–242. doi: 10.1007/s11103-008-9313-9
Ghoshroy, S., Binder, M., Tartar, A., and Robertson, D. L. (2010). Molecular
evolution of glutamine synthetase II: phylogenetic evidence of a non-
endosymbiotic gene transfer event early in plant evolution. BMC Evol. Biol.
10:198. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-198
Goodey, N. M., and Benkovic, S. J. (2008). Allosteric regulation and catalysis
emerge via a common route. Nat. Chem. Biol. 4, 474–482. doi: 10.1038/
nchembio.98
Goodridge, A. G., Klautky, S. A., Fantozzi, D. A., Baillie, R. A., Hodnett, D. W.,
Chen, W., et al. (1996). Nutritional and hormonal regulation of expression
of the gene for malic enzyme. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 52, 89–122.
doi: 10.1016/S0079-6603(08)60965-4
Gray, M. W. (2012). Mitochondrial evolution. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol.
4:a011403. doi: 10.1101/cshperspect.a011403
Hillis, M. D., and Bull, J. J. (1993). An empirical test of bootstrapping as a method
for assessing conﬁdence in phylogenetic analysis. Syst. Biol. 42, 182–192.
doi: 10.1093/sysbio/42.2.182
Hsieh, J. Y., Chen, M. C., and Hung, H. C. (2011). Determinants of nucleotide-
binding selectivity of malic enzyme. PLoS One 6:e25312. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0025312
Kalinina, O. V., Novichkov, P. S., Mironov, A. A., Gelfand, M. S., and
Rakhmaninova, A. B. (2004). SDPpred: a tool for prediction of amino acid
residues that determine diﬀerences in functional speciﬁcity of homologous
proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 32, W424–W428. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkh391
Keeling, P. J., and Palmer, J. D. (2008). Horizontal gene transfer in eukaryotic
evolution. Nat. Rev. Genet. 9, 605–618. doi: 10.1038/nrg2386
Lai, L. B., Lin, W., and Nelson, T. M. (2002). Distinct but conserved functions for
two chloroplastic NADP-malic isoforms in C3 and C4 Flaveria species. Plant
Physiol. 128, 125–139. doi: 10.1104/pp.010448
Laporte, M. M., Shen, B., and Tarczynski, M. C. (2002). Engineering for drought
avoidance: expression of maize NADP-malic enzyme in tobacco results in
altered stomatal function. J. Exp. Bot. 3, 699–705. doi: 10.1093/jexbot/53.369.
699
Mallick, S., Harris, B. G., Cook, P. F. (1991). Kinetic mechanism of NAD:malic
enzyme from Ascaris suum in the direction of reductive carboxylation. J. Biol.
Chem. 266, 2732–2738.
Marino Buslje, C., Teppa, E., Di Domenico, T., Delﬁno, J. M., and Nielsen, M.
(2010). Networks of high mutual information deﬁne the structural proximity
of catalytic sites: implications for catalytic residue identiﬁcation. PLoS Comput.
Biol. 6:e1000978. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000978
Martin, L. C., Gloor, G. B., Dunn, S. D., and Wahl, L. M. (2005). Using information
theory to search for co-evolving residues in proteins. Bioinformatics 21,
4116–4124. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/bti671
Martinoia, E., and Rentsch, D. (1994). Malate compartmentation: responses to a
complex metabolism. Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol. 45, 447–467.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.pp.45.060194.002311
Maurino, V. G., Saigo, M., Andreo, C. S., and Drincovich, M. F. (2001).
Nonphotosynthetic malic enzyme from maize: a constitutively expressed
enzyme that responds to plant defence inducers. Plant Mol. Biol. 45, 409–420.
doi: 10.1023/A:1010665910095
McKeehan, W. L., and McKeehan, K. A. (1982). Changes in NAD(P)-
dependent malic enzyme and malate dehydrogenase activities during
ﬁbroblast proliferation. J. Cell. Physiol. 110, 142–148. doi: 10.1002/jcp.104110
0206
Moreadith, R. W., and Lehninger, A. L. (1984). The pathways of glutamate
and glutamine oxidation by tumor cell mitochondria. Role of mitochondrial
NAD(P)-dependent malic enzyme. J. Biol. Chem. 259, 6215–6221.
Outlaw, W. H., Manchester, J., and Brown, P. H. (1981). High levels of malic
enzyme activities in Vicia fabaL. epidermal tissue. Plant Physiol. 68, 1047–1051.
doi: 10.1104/pp.68.5.1047
Price, D. C., Chan, C. X., Yoon, H. S., Y ang, E. C., Qiu, H., Weber, A. P., et al. (2012).
Cyanophora paradoxa genome elucidates origin of photosynthesis in algae and
plants. Science 33, 843–847. doi: 10.1126/science.1213561
Qiu, H., Yoon, H. S., and Bhattacharya, D. (2013). Algal endosymbionts as vectors
of horizontal gene transfer in photosynthetic eukaryotes.Front. Plant Sci. 4:366.
doi: 10.3389/fpls.2013.00366
Ronquist, F., and Huelsenbeck, J. P. (2003). MRBAYES 3: bayesian phylogenetic
inference under mixed models. Bioinformatics 2003, 1572–1574. doi: 10.1093/
bioinformatics/btg180
Saigo, M., Alvarez, C. E., Andreo, C. S., and Drincovich, M. A. (2013).
Plastidial NADP-malic enzymes from grasses: unraveling the way to the C4
speciﬁc isoforms. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 63, 39–48. doi: 10.1016/j.plaphy.2012.
11.009
Sanchez, R., and Cejudo, F. J. (2003). Identiﬁcation and expression analysis
of a gene encoding a bacterial-type phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase from
Arabidopsis and rice. Plant Physiol. 132, 949–957. doi: 10.1104/pp.102.
019653
Schaaf, J., Walter, M. H., and Hess, D. (1995). Primary metabolism in plant defense
(regulation of a bean malic enzyme gene promoter in transgenic tobacco by
developmental and environmental cues). Plant Physiol. 108, 949–960. doi: 10.
1104/pp.108.3.949
Schnarrenberger, C., and Martin, W. (2002). Evolution of the enzymes of the
citric acid cycle and the glyoxylate cycle of higher plants A case study of
endosymbiotic gene transfer. Eur. J. Biochem. 269, 868–883. doi: 10.1046/j.
0014-2956.2001.02722.x
Simonetti, F. L., Teppa, E., Chernomoretz, A., Nielsen, M., and Buslje, C. M. (2013).
MISTIC: mutual information server to infer coevolution. Nucleic Acids Res. 41,
W8–W14. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt427
Sweetlove, L. J., Beard, K. F. M., Nunes-Nesi, A., Fernie, A. R., and Ratcliﬀe, R. G.
(2010). Not just a circle: ﬂux modes in the plant TCA cycle.Trends Plant Sci. 15,
462–470. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2010.05.006
Swoﬀord, D. L., Olsen, G. L., Waddell, P. J., and Hillis, D. M. (1996). “Phylogenetic
inference, ” inMolecular Systematics, 2nd Edn, eds D. M. Hillis, C. Moritz, and
B. K. Mable (Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates), 407–515.
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 14 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565
fpls-09-00565 May 11, 2018 Time: 11:36 # 15
Tronconi et al. Plant Malic Enzime Family Evolution
Tamura, K., Stecher, G., Peterson, D., Filipski, A., and Kumar, S. (2013). MEGA6:
molecular evolutionary genetics analysis version 6.0. Mol. Biol. Evol. 30,
2725–2729. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mst197
Teller, J. K., Fahien, L. A., and Davis, J. W. (1992). Kinetics and regulation
of hepatoma mitochondrial NAD(P) malic enzyme. J. Biol. Chem. 25,
10423–10432.
Tronconi, M. A., Fahnenstich, H., Gerrard Wheeler, M. C., Andreo, C. S.,
Flügge, U. I., Drincovich, M. F., et al. (2008). Arabidopsis NAD-malic enzyme
functions as a homodimer and heterodimer and has a major impact during
nocturnal metabolism. Plant Physiol. 146, 1540–1552. doi: 10.1104/pp.107.11
4975
Tronconi, M. A., Gerrard Wheeler, M. C., Drincovich, M. F., and Andreo, C. S.
(2012). Diferential fumarate binding to Arabidopsis NAD +-malic enzymes 1
and -2 produces an opposite activity modulation. Biochimie 94, 1421–1430.
doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2012.03.017
Tronconi, M. A., Gerrard Wheeler, M. C., Martinatto, A., Zubimendi, J. P.,
Andreo, C. S., and Drincovich, M. F. (2015). Allosteric substrate inhibition
of Arabidopsis NAD-dependent malic enzyme 1 is released by Fumarate.
Phytochemistry 111, 37–47. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2014.11.009
Tronconi, M. A., Maurino, V. G., Andreo, C. S., and Drincovich, M. F. (2010b).
Three diﬀerent and tissue-speciﬁc NAD-malic enzyme generated by alternative
subunit association in Arabidopsis thaliana. J. Biol. Chem. 285, 11870–11879.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.097477
Tronconi, M. A., Gerrard Wheeler, M. C., Maurino, V. G., Drincovich, M. F., and
Andreo, C. S. (2010a). NAD-malic enzymes of Arabidopsis thaliana display
distinct kinetic mechanisms that support diﬀerences in physiological control.
Biochem. J. 430, 295–303. doi: 10.1042/BJ20100497
Tyler, B. M., Tripathy, S., Zhang, X., Dehal, P., Jiang, R. H., Aerts, A., et al.
(2006). Phytophthora genome sequences uncover evolutionary origins and
mechanisms of pathogenesis. Science 313, 1261–1266. doi: 10.1126/science.
1128796
van der Giezen, M., Rechinger, K. B., Svendsen, I., Durand, R., Hirt, R. P., Fèver, M.,
et al. (1997). A mitochondrial-like targeting signal on the hydrogenosomal
malic enzyme from the anaerobic fungus Neocallimastix frontalis : support
for the hypothesis that hydrogenosomes are modiﬁed mitochondria. Mol.
Microbiol. 23, 11–21. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1997.1891553.x
Vorapreeda, T., Thammarongtham, C., Cheevadhanarak, S., and Laoten, K. (2013).
Repertoire of malic enzymes in yeast and fungi: insight into their evolutionary
functional and structural signiﬁcance. Microbiology 159, 2548–2557. doi: 10.
1099/mic.0.065342-0
Whelan, S., and Goldman, N. (2001). A general empirical model of protein
evolution derived from multiple protein families using a maximum-likelihood
approach. Mol. Biol. Evol. 18, 691–699. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.molbev.
a003851
Willeford, K. O., and Wedding, R. T. (1987). Evidence for a multiple subunit
composition of plant NAD malic enzyme. J. Biol. Chem. 262, 8423–8429.
Y ang, Z., Floyd, D. L., Loeber, G., and Tong, L. (2000). Structure of a closed form
of human malic enzyme and implications for catalytic mechanism. Nat. Struct.
Biol. 7, 251–257.
Y ang, Z., Lanks, C. W., and Tong, L. (2002). Molecular mechanism for the
regulation of human mitochondrial NAD(P)-dependent malic enzyme by ATP
and fumarate. Structure 10, 951–960. doi: 10.1016/S0969-2126(02)00788-8
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
The reviewer SR and handling Editor declared their shared aﬃliation.
Copyright © 2018 Tronconi, Andreo and Drincovich. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner are credited and that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Plant Science | www.frontiersin.org 15 May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 565