ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 25 September 2020
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.561800
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 1 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Edited by:
Ivan A. Berg,
University of Münster, Germany
Reviewed by:
Andreas Schwentner,
University of Ulm, Germany
Erhard Bremer,
University of Marburg, Germany
*Correspondence:
Alberto Marin-Sanguino
a.marin@tum.de
†These authors have contributed
equally to this work
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Microbial Physiology and Metabolism,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Microbiology
Received: 14 May 2020
Accepted: 12 August 2020
Published: 25 September 2020
Citation:
Hobmeier K, Goëss MC, Sehr C,
Schwaminger S, Berensmeier S,
Kremling A, Kunte HJ, Pﬂüger-Grau K
and Marin-Sanguino A (2020)
Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas
elongata: The Role of the Sodium
Gradient. Front. Microbiol. 11:561800.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2020.561800
Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas
elongata: The Role of the Sodium
Gradient
Karina Hobmeier 1†, Marie C. Goëss 1†, Christiana Sehr 1, Sebastian Schwaminger 2,
Sonja Berensmeier 2, Andreas Kremling 1, Hans Jörg Kunte 3, Katharina Pﬂüger-Grau 1 and
Alberto Marin-Sanguino 1*
1 Professorship for Systems Biotechnology, Technical Unive rsity of Munich, Munich, Germany, 2 Bioseparation Engineering
Group, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Technical Un iversity of Munich, Munich, Germany, 3 Division of
Biodeterioration and Reference Organisms, Bundesanstalt Für Materialforschung und -Prüfung (BAM), Berlin, Germany
Salt tolerance in the γ -proteobacterium Halomonas elongata is linked to its ability to
produce the compatible solute ectoine. The metabolism of ec toine production is of great
interest since it can shed light on the biochemical basis of h alotolerance as well as pave
the way for the improvement of the biotechnological product ion of such compatible
solute. Ectoine belongs to the biosynthetic family of aspar tate-derived amino-acids.
Aspartate is formed from oxaloacetate, thereby connecting ectoine production to the
anaplerotic reactions that reﬁll carbon into the tricarbox ylic acid cycle (TCA cycle). This
places a high demand on these reactions and creates the need t o regulate them not
only in response to growth but also in response to extracellu lar salt concentration.
In this work, we combine modeling and experiments to analyze how these different
needs shape the anaplerotic reactions in H. elongata . First, the stoichiometric and
thermodynamic factors that condition the ﬂux distribution s are analyzed, then the
optimal patterns of operation for oxaloacetate production are calculated. Finally, the
phenotype of two deletion mutants lacking potentially rele vant anaplerotic enzymes:
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (Ppc) and oxaloacetate d ecarboxylase (Oad) are
experimentally characterized. The results show that the an aplerotic reactions in H.
elongata are indeed subject to evolutionary pressures that differ fr om those faced
by other gram-negative bacteria. Ectoine producing haloph iles must meet a higher
metabolic demand for oxaloacetate and the reliance of many m arine bacteria on the
Entner-Doudoroff pathway compromises the anaplerotic efﬁ ciency of Ppc, which is
usually one of the main enzymes fulﬁlling this role. The anap lerotic ﬂux in H. elongata
is contributed not only by Ppc but also by Oad, an enzyme that h as not yet been shown
to play this role in vivo . Ppc is necessary for H. elongata to grow normally at low salt
concentrations but it is not required to achieve near maxima l growth rates as long as
there is a steep sodium gradient. On the other hand, the lack o f Oad presents serious
difﬁculties to grow at high salt concentrations. This point s to a shared role of these two
enzymes in guaranteeing the supply of oxaloacetate for bios ynthetic reactions.
Keywords: thermodynamics-based metabolic ﬂux analysis, halo philic bacteria, metabolic modeling, design
principles, biochemistry and metabolism, Halomonas elongata
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
1. INTRODUCTION
The halophilic γ -proteobacterium Halomonas elongata DSM
2581T has a broad salt tolerance and can even grow in salt
saturated brines ( >30% NaCl) (
Vreeland et al., 1980 ) thanks to
the accumulation of the compatible solute ectoine, which can
reach molar concentrations in the cytoplasm without disrupti ng
cellular processes (
Galinski, 1995 ). The synthetic pathway for
ectoine is well-known ( Ono et al., 1999 ). Ectoine is synthesized
from aspartate through aspartate-semialdehyde (ASA), so its
synthesis adds to the amount of carbon withdrawn out of the
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle in the form of oxaloacetate ( OAA).
This carbon must then be replenished by anaplerotic reactions
(
Nelson et al., 2008 ), making the phosphoenolpyruvate-pyruvate-
oxaloacetate (PEP-Pyr-OAA) node, already acknowledged as
a major switching point for carbon metabolism (
Sauer and
Eikmanns, 2005), even more important for this organism.
Figure 1 shows the PEP-Pyr-OAA node and the glyoxylate
shunt in H. elongata as it has been determined by genomic
analysis ( Schwibbert et al., 2011; Pfeiﬀer et al., 2017 ). The
glyoxylate shunt bypasses the two decarboxylation steps of the
TCA cycle and thus enables the replenishment of C4 carbon
skeletons from acetyl coenzyme-A (acetyl-CoA). This pathway
allows an eﬃcient growth on acetate but its operation on gluco se
as a carbon source would result in a loss of one third of the
total carbon in the decarboxylation of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA
by pyruvate dehydrogenase. Anaplerotic reactions enable an
eﬃcient growth on hexoses by replenishing the carbon in the
form of OAA produced directly from PEP or Pyruvate.
There are four enzymes that fulﬁll the stoichiometric
requirements to catalyze anaplerotic reactions:
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (Ppc), malic enzyme (Mae),
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (Pck), and the membrane
bound oxaloacetate decarboxylase (Oad). The ﬁrst of these
enzymes, Ppc, has been known for a long time to carry most
of the anaplerotic ﬂux in Escherichia coli growing on glucose,
glycerol or pyruvate (
Ashworth and Kornberg, 1966; Peng et al.,
2004) and its regulation has been shown to play a critical role
in carbon catabolism ( Xu et al., 2012 ). The second enzyme in
the list, the malic enzyme (Mae), is present in two variants wi th
diﬀerent cofactor speciﬁcities (NADH and NADPH). The third
candidate, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (Pck), is also
an important enzyme in this node and catalyzes a key step for
gluconeogenesis converting of OAA into phosphoenolpyruvate
(PEP). Finally, Oad catalyzes the interconversion of OAA
into pyruvate and deserves special attention in H. elongata .
Cytoplasmic versions of the enzyme are considered to be
irreversible, thermodynamically unable to function in the
anaplerotic sense and usually involved in gluconeogenesis
(
Peters-Wendisch et al., 1997 ). In H. elongata , however, Oad is
a membrane bound sodium pump ( Dimroth et al., 2001 ) and
it has been hypothesized ( Kindzierski et al., 2017 ) that it can
operate as an anaplerotic reaction, thus using the considerab le
sodium gradient available under high salt concentrations t o
drive the carboxylation of pyruvate in H. elongata. To the extent
of our knowledge, such a function has never been observed in
vivo. The diﬀerent physiological roles described so far for Oad
go in the opposite direction, for example, as a sodium-transport
system energized by the decarboxylation of OAA into pyruvate
(
Dimroth, 1980, 1990, 1994; Dimroth and Schink, 1998 ) and as
part of a catabolic pathway in a mutant strain of Lactococcus
lactis (Pudlik and Lolkema, 2011 ).
The aim of this work is to shed light on how anaplerotic
reactions are organized in H. elongata through a combination of
theoretical and experimental methods. Due to their mechanis ms,
the action of two of these enzymes (Oad and Ppc) cannot be
distinguished through labeling experiments (
Pastor et al., 2013 ).
Therefore, we constructed mutant strains lacking each of th e
enzymes (Ppc and Oad) and characterized their phenotypes in
comparison to the wild type. The results of this experiments
are examined under the light of thermodynamic analysis and
simulations of constraint based models that are customized
to deal with the challenge of estimating physico-chemical
magnitudes at high salt concentrations.
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1. Strains, Plasmids, and Growth
Conditions
H. elongata DSM 2581 T and the mutant strains were routinely
grown in minimal medium MM63 (
Larsen et al., 1987 ) or LB
medium ( Miller et al., 1992 ) containing 1 M NaCl at 30 ◦C
under shaking at 220 rpm. All Escherichia coli strains were
grown in LB medium at 37 ◦C amended with the antibiotic
necessary for maintenance of the plasmid. All plasmids and
genetic manipulations were performed in E. coli DH5α or E. coli
DH5α λ -pir.
2.2. Construction of Plasmids
Replacement of the ppc gene with aadA, encoding a streptomycin
resistance cassette was performed by adapting the method
previously reported for Pseudomonas putida (
Martínez-García
and de Lorenzo, 2011 ). The plasmids were assembled by
Gibson Assembly (New England Bioloabs, USA) according
to the suppliers manual. Oligonucleotides used for the gene
ampliﬁcation are shown in Table 1. A DNA fragment containing
about 500 bp of the genomic sequence upstream of the target
gene ( ppc or oad) followed by the sequence of the aadA gene,
encoding the streptomycin resistance cassette, and about 500
bp of the chromosomal region downstream of the target gene,
was inserted into pSEV A212S, carrying the R6K suicide origin
of replication (
Martínez-García et al., 2015 ), which had been
previously linearized with EcoRI (New England Bioloabs, USA).
The plasmid was transformed (
Chung et al., 1989 ) into E. coli
DH5α λ -pir and clones carrying it were selected on LB agar
plates supplemented with 200 µ g/ml streptomycin (Sm 200). The
correct assembly of pSEV A_)Delta1ppc::Sm and pSEV A_)Delta1oad::Sm was
veriﬁed by isolation of the plasmids and sequencing (Euroﬁns
Genomics, Germany).
2.3. Conjugal Transfer of Plasmids Into H.
elongata by Triparental Mating
Plasmids were transferred to H. elongata by a two step
mating procedure. First, plasmid pSW-2 encoding the 1-SceI
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 2 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
FIGURE 1 | Anaplerotic reactions and TCA cycle in Halomonas elongata. Shown are the four enzymes phosphoenolpyruvate carboxyla se (Ppc, blue), oxaloacetate
decarboxylase (Oad, red), malic enzyme (Mae, green), and ph osphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (Pck, orange) that have t he potential to catalyze anaplerotic reactions.
ASA, Aspartate semialdehyde; 2-KG, 2-Keto-glutarate; AcC oa, Acetyl Coenzyme A.
endonuclease ( Martínez-García and de Lorenzo, 2011 ) was
transferred to H. elongata . Therefore, the donor strain E.
coli DH5α λ -pir (pSW-2), the recipient strain H. elongata ,
and the helper strain E. coli HB101 (pRK600) were grown
in LB medium, amended with the antibiotic necessary to
assure plasmid maintenance (pSW-2: 10 µ g/ml gentamycin and
pRK600: 35 µ g/ml chloramphenicol) until the stationary phase
(over night). Optical densities at 600 nm (OD600) were measur ed
and 1 ml of the donor culture was mixed with the amount
of recipient and helper culture to obtain OD ratios of 1:1:1
and 1:2:2, respectively. These suspensions were centrifuged , the
supernatant was discarded by decanting and the cell pellet was
resuspended in the remaining medium rest. This condensed cel l
suspension was pipetted on one spot of a LB agar plate containing
0.5 M NaCl, and incubated for 5 h at 30 ◦C. Afterwards, the cells
were resuspended in 600 µ l of a 1 M NaCl solution, an aliquot
of 100 µ l was plated on LB agar plates containing 0.5 M NaCl,
500 µ g/ml ampicillin and 50 µ g/ml gentamycin and the plates
were incubated for 48 h at 30 ◦C. Colonies were picked and the
presence of pSW-2 was veriﬁed by PCR with pSW-F and pSW-R
(
Martínez-García and de Lorenzo, 2011 ) (Table 1).
Next, pSEV A_ )Delta1ppc::Sm and pSEV A_ )Delta1oad::Sm were
transferred and integrated in the genome of H. elongata (pSW-2)
again by triparental mating. This was performed as described
above but using H. elongata (pSW-2) as recipient, E. coli DH5α
λ-pir (pSEV A_)Delta1ppc::Sm or pSEV A_)Delta1oad::Sm) as donor and E.
coli HB101 (pRK600) as helper. The cointegrates were selected
by plating diﬀerent dilutions of the mating mixture on LB agar
plates containing 0.5 M NaCl, 500 µ g/ml ampicillin, 60 µ g/ml
kanamycin, and 50 µ g/ml gentamycin to obtain single colonies.
2.4. Resolution of Cointegrates to Obtain
Marker Substitution Mutants
To resolve the cointegrates a single colony was picked from th e
selective agar plate and grown in 3 ml LB medium with 1 M NaCl,
500 µ g/ml ampicillin, 200 µ g/ml streptomycin, and 50 µ g/ml
gentamycin over night at 30 ◦C. The next day, cells were pelleted
by centrifugation, washed once in LB medium containing 1 M
NaCl, and subsequently resuspended to an OD600 of 1 with
LB medium with 1 M NaCl, 500 µ g/ml ampicillin, and 50
µ g/ml gentamycin. To four ml of that culture, 80 µ l of 3-
methylbenzoate were added to a ﬁnal concentration of 10 mM to
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 3 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
TABLE 1 | Oligonucleotides used in this work.
Name Sequence 5 ′ –3′ Function
/Delta1ppc::Sm
P_pSEVA212_F atccccgggtaccgagctcgCACCCAACGAAAGCGAGGA GTCAC *Construction of pSEVA_ )Delta1ppc::Sm
P_up/aadA_R gtcaaggttcTGCCCGAAGGGCCGGGCT
P_up/aadA_F ccttcgggcaGAACCTTGACCGAACGCAG
P_down/aadA_R agtctcgatcTTATTTGCCGACTACCTTGG
P_down/aadA_F cggcaaataaGATCGAGACTCTCCTTCTGAC
P_pSEVA212_R agggataacagggtaatctgAGACGCATCAGGTGCATTC
gHe_P_F GTGCTGTCGGTCAATACCCT PCR and sequencing to verify mutant
gHe_P_R CGCATTCCTCAGGACAACCT
/Delta1oad::Sm
O_pSEVA212_F atccccgggtaccgagctcgGACCGAGCATGACATCGC C onstruction of pSEVA_ )Delta1oad::Sm
O_up/aadA_R tcggtcaaggttcGCGGTCTGCTCCTCGTTCG
O_up/aadA_F aggagcagaccgcGAACCTTGACCGAACGCA
O_down/aadA_R gccccatgcagggTTATTTGCCGACTACCTTGG
O_down/aadA_F agtcggcaaataaCCCTGCATGGGGCATCCTTG
O_pSEVA212_R agggataacagggtaatctgACATCTCGCTGGGCAACAT C
gHe_OAD_R CCACGTCCCAGTCGATACAC PCR and sequencing primer for
gHe_OAD_F GTTCATCCACTGCTTTAGTC veriﬁcation of the mutant strain
gHe_OAD_F2 AATTGCAGGTGCACGGGA sequencing primer
General
pSW_F GGACGCTTCGCTGAAAACTA Veriﬁcation of pSW-2 presence
pSW_R AACGTCGTGACTGGGAAAAC
ectC_F ATCATCGAAACCAGCGGTCA Veriﬁcation of H. elongata
ectC_R GCTGCGAACAACGAAAGAGC
neo_F CAGCGATCGTGTGTTTCGTC Veriﬁcation of pSEVA212S presence
neo_R TTTGCAGGCTCGGGCTAAAT
*Sequences complementary to one fragment are shown in lower case an d to the other in upper case. Supplier Euroﬁns Genomics, Germany.
induce the expression of 1-SceI and cells were incubated at 30 ◦C
under shaking.
After 3.5 h, an aliquot of cell suspension was plated on LB
agar with 1 M NaCl, 500 µ g/ml ampicillin, and 200 µ g/ml
streptomycin and incubated at 30 ◦C for 48 h. Single colonies
were picked and gridded on LB plates with 1 M NaCl, 500 µ g/ml
ampicillin, and either 60 µ g/ml kanamycin or 200 µ g/ml of
streptomycin to identify those clones, that lost the kanamyc in
resistance cassette but maintained the streptomycin casset te.
Clones showing the desired phenotype represent the desired
mutants. This was veriﬁed by PCR using primers (gHe_P_F,
gHe_P_R, gHe_OAD_F, gHe_OAD_R, gHe_OAD_F2; Table 1)
that hybridized to sequences outside the 500 bp ﬂanks used in
pSEV A_)Delta1ppc::Sm or pSEV A_ )Delta1oad::Sm and sequencing of the
whole fragment.
The two mutant strains of H. elongata obtained by this
procedure: )Delta1ppc::Sm and )Delta1oad::Sm will be named H. elongata -
PPC and H. elongata-OAD, respectively.
2.5. Growth Experiments in Microplates
The growth experiments were performed in MM63 medium with
27.75 mM glucose or 27 mM acetate, respectively. Initially, a
single colony of each strain was picked per replicate and grown
in 3 ml LB medium with 1 M NaCl. The next day, an aliquot
was used to inoculate 3 ml of MM63 medium with 1 M NaCl.
From this culture, three aliquots were used to inoculate each of
the pre-cultures for the growth experiment in MM63 medium
with either 0.17, 0.5, 1, or 2 M NaCl. Inoculation was always d one
in a way to reach an initial OD600 of 0.01 and incubation was in
all cases at 30 ◦C in the shaker until the late exponential or early
stationary phase. For the growth experiment, 200 µ l of medium
(MM63 with 0.17, 0.5, 1, or 2 M NaCl) were inoculated with 2
µ l of the respective pre-culture adapted to the respective NaCl
concentration in a sterile 96-well microtiter plate with opti cal
bottom (Greiner, Germany) and incubated in an automated
microplate reader (Tecan, Austria) at 30 ◦C. Optical density was
measured every 10 min after vigorous shaking for 3 s over a
period of 16–22 h. In a ﬁrst round of experiments, each conditio n
was measured at least three times, i.e., starting with three diﬀerent
colonies per strain and per carbon source. The maximum growth
rate of each well was deﬁned as the maximum value of linear
regression of the logarithm of the OD along a sliding window
of at least 41 points. In order to ensure that the chosen values
were part of a sustained exponential growth phase, only values
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 4 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
that had a determination coeﬃcient above 0.9 were considere d
eligible. Conditions that yielded signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the ﬁrst
round of screening were analyzed in a second round using four
biological replicates (from diﬀerent colonies) each having t wo
technical replicates (two wells inoculated from the same pre-
culture). Diﬀerences reproduced in both experiments were test ed
in ﬂasks.
2.6. Growth Experiments in Shake Flasks
Growth experiments in shake ﬂasks were performed in MM63
medium with 27.75 mM glucose or 27 mM acetate, as carbon
source in the presence of 0.17 M NaCl. Again, a single colony
of the relevant strain was picked per replicate and grown in LB
medium with 1 M NaCl. From these cultures aliquots were taken
to inoculate the pre-cultures in MM63 medium with 0.17 M
NaCl to an OD600 of 0.01. Pre-cultures of H. elongata wild type
were incubated for about 12 h until they reached an OD600 of
1.5–2.6 on glucose and 0.5–0.8 on acetate, whereas pre-cultu res
of H. elongata -PPC were incubated for ∼48 h to reach an OD
between 4.9 and 6.0 in case of growth on glucose and between 1. 0
and 1.2 in case of acetate grown cells. From theses pre-cultur es
pre-warmed 25 ml of MM63 medium with 0.17 M NaCl and
either glucose or acetate as carbon source were inoculated to an
OD600 of 0.05 and incubated under shaking for 11 h. The OD600
was measured every hour in a spectrophotometer (Eppendorf,
Germany). The experiment was performed in triplicates, i.e.,
starting from three diﬀerent colonies per strain.
2.7. Growth Experiments on Glucose or
Acetate in Shake Flasks, Biomass, and
Ectoine Quantiﬁcation
The cultivations were performed in MM63 minimal medium
with 27.75 mM glucose or acetate as carbon source in the
presence of 2 M NaCl. For each strain (wild type, H. elongata -
PPC and H. elongata -OAD) three single colonies were picked
and grown in 1 M NaCl LB medium. From these pre-cultures
aliquots were taken to inoculate cultures (
Dötsch et al., 2008 )
to an OD600 of 0.01 in MM63 medium with 1 M NaCl
and glucose (or acetate) as sole carbon source. This pre-
culture step was then repeated once more with 2 M NaCl
MM63 minimal medium. From these pre-cultures 50 mL of
MM63 medium with 2 M NaCl and either glucose or acetate
were inoculated to an OD600 of 0.01 and incubated under
shaking 220 rpm for up to 70 h. The OD600 was measured
regularly in a spectrophotometer (Eppendorf, Germany) until
cells were harvested during the exponential phase. To release the
intracellular ectoine a two-phase extraction protocol devel oped
by
Bligh and Dyer (1959) and further modiﬁed by Galinski
and Herzog (1990) was applied. For this, the samples were
centrifuged (15,000 g, 25 ◦C) for 5 min and the supernatant was
removed. The remaining cell pellet was resuspended in 250 µ l
extraction solution (methanol, chloroform, bidest. water in ratios
10:5:4). After an incubation period of 30 min under shaking
(300 rpm, Thermomixer Comfort Typ 5, Eppendorf) at room
temperature 65 µ l chloroform and bidest. water were added and
incubated a second time under shaking (300 rpm, Thermomixer
Comfort Typ 5, Eppendorf, Germany) at room temperature for
10 min. To achieve the desired phase separation the samples
were centrifuged once more at 8,000 × g for 5 min at room
temperature. Then, 100 µ l from the 250 µ l aqueous upper phase
were taken and diluted 1:10 in the mobile phase used for the
subsequent high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
analysis. The ectoine content of the samples was measured by
HPLC using a reverse-phase column (Nucleodur 100-5 NH2-
RP CC 125/4, Macherey & Nagel, Germany) and applying an
acetonitrile/phosphate buﬀer as mobile phase. The absorption
of ectoine was recorded at 210 nm using an UV-detector
(
Kuhlmann and Bremer, 2002 ).
Biomass was quantiﬁed as ash-free dry weight (from now
on DW) to prevent errors due to the variable salt content
of the samples. Samples were taken at diﬀerent values of
OD600 harvested by centrifugation and washed using a 2 M
NaCl solution. The pellets were freeze dried and analyzed
gravimetrically with a simultaneous thermal analysis syst em
(STA) (449C Jupiter, Netzsch Gerätebau GmbH, Germany)
where the samples are heated on a precision balance. The weight
loss and the heat transfer of the solid samples were recorded
at a heating rate of 1 ◦C min −1 (40–1,140◦C) under a synthetic
air (N 2 and O 2) atmosphere. The gas phase was analyzed
by a mass spectrometry system (QMS 403 Aeolos, Netzsch
Gerätebau GmbH, Germany). The following mass signals (amu)
were recorded to identify decomposition fragments: 16 (O and
NH2), 17 (OH and NH 3), 18 (H 2O), 30 (CH 2-NH2), and
44 amu (CO 2). The detection of CO 2 by mass spectrometry
was used to establish the temperature at which combustion
started. Dry biomass samples always retain a certain amount of
water and they tend to absorb more from the atmosphere in
a time scale of minutes (
Gurakan et al., 1990 ). This requires
a desiccation process immediately before the measurements o f
biomass and ash. STA enables all these measurements to be part
of a continuous process. Following heat ﬂow and spectrometric
data, it could be established that the mass loss up to 160 ◦C is due
to water. Since the DW correlates linearly with the OD600 of t he
culture, OD600 were measured and converted to DW using the
calibration curve shown in the Supplementary Material.
2.8. Thermodynamics-Based Metabolic
Flux Analysis (TMFA)
A simple stoichiometric model of the TCA cycle and the
anaplerotic pathways in H. elongata was formulated based
on previous stoichiometric models (
Kindzierski et al., 2017 ).
Stoichiometric information was complemented with addition al
thermodynamic information ( Alberty, 2003; Flamholz et al.,
2011). The stoichiometric and thermodynamic constraints
were combined within the well establish framework of
Thermodynamics-Based Metabolic Flux Analysis (TMFA)
(
Henry et al., 2007; Jol et al., 2010 ). This framework can be used
to explore optimal modes of operation (ﬂux distributions) of the
metabolic network using Mixed Integer Linear Programming
(MILP). Two modiﬁcations were introduced to the standard
TMFA methodology. First, an additional constraint was added
to ensure that the thermodynamic driving forces of all react ions
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 5 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
were higher in magnitude than a pre-established limit. This
becomes the Minimum Driving Force (MDF) as deﬁned
elsewhere (
Noor et al., 2014 ). Second, a necessary step for
thermodynamic calculations is the calculation of metaboli te
activities. The activity of a metabolite is a function of its
concentration ai = γi ci where γi is the activity coeﬃcient.
Activity coeﬃcients in biochemistry are often calculated u sing
the Debye-Hückel equation (
Alberty, 2003), at T = 25◦C.
log10 γi = − z2
i
0.509
√
I
1 + 1.6
√
I
(1)
salt concentrations above 0.3 M, the D-H equations are no long er
able to provide valid estimates for the activity coeﬃcient be cause
short range ion-speciﬁc interactions become signiﬁcant, th e eﬀect
of speciﬁc ion can be accounted for using methods, such as
Speciﬁc ion Interaction Theory (SIT) (
Guggenheim and Turgeon,
1955). This model requires the use of interaction coeﬃcients for
all the relevant ions k = 1 . . . Nk:
log10 γi = − z2
i
0.509
√
I
1 + 1.5
√
I
+
∑
k
ǫ(j, k) xk (2)
At I > 0.25M, we use equation ( Guggenheim and Turgeon,
1955)
cations
ln γi = − ln(10)0.509 z2
i
√
I
1 + 1.5
√
I
+ ln(10) ǫ(i, Cl−) [NaCl]
(3)
anions
ln γi = − ln(10)0.509 z2
i
√
I
1 + 1.5
√
I
+ ln(10) ǫ(Na+, i) [NaCl]
(4)
protons
ln γH = − ln(10)0.509
√
I
1 + 1.5
√
I
+ ln(10) ǫ(H+, Cl−) [NaCl]
(5)
The most relevant coeﬃcients in this case are ǫ(Na+, Cl−) = 0.03
and ǫ(H+, Cl−) = 0.12.
So every calculation involving extracellular species has to b e
performed according to SIT. The usual formula to transform
energies of formation (
Alberty, 2003 ), for instance, has to
be corrected:
cations
)Delta1f Go′
j = )Delta1f Go′
j (I = 0) + NH(j) RT ln (10) pH
− RT 0.509 ln 10
(
z2
j − NH(j)
) √
I
1 + 1.5
√
I
− RT ln 10
[
NH(j) ǫ(H+, Cl−) − ǫ(j, Cl−)
]
(6)
anions
)Delta1f Go′
j = )Delta1f Go′
j (I = 0) + NH(j) RT ln (10) pH
− RT 0.509 ln 10
(
z2
j − NH(j)
) √
I
1 + 1.5
√
I
− RT ln 10
[
NH(j) ǫ(H+, Cl−) − ǫ(Na+, j)
]
(7)
Once the model was formulated, TMFA simulations were
performed at salt concentrations 0.17, 0.5, 1, and 2 M. For
each case, ATP or OAA production were maximized in order
to explore the potential theoretical yields. The simulations were
repeated imposing the additional restriction that the minima l
driving force (MDF) must be higher than diﬀerent thresholds.
We will designate the values of MDF using the notation
)Delta1G5, )Delta1G10, and )Delta1G95 meaning the free energies associated to
eﬃciencies of 5, 10, or 95%, respectively (
Sehr et al., 2015 ).
In other words, a ﬂux distribution obtained for MDF =
)Delta1G99 will have all its enzymes operating at a thermodynamic
eﬃciency of at least 99% while in a ﬂux distribution obtained
for MDF = )Delta1G01, one or more enzymes can be operating
only at 1% even at full saturation. The thresholds for MDF were
chosen to ensure enzyme eﬃciencies ranging from 1 to 99%
at the thermodynamic bottleneck. For simulations maximizi ng
the yield of OAA, a minimum ATP production of 4.5 mmol/g
DW was imposed to obtain a realistic split of the metabolic
ﬂux between OAA synthesis and catabolic TCA cycle of roughly
1:2 (
Pramanik and Keasling, 1997 ). This choice does not
aﬀect the absolute diﬀerences in OAA yield between diﬀerent
solutions, but ﬁlters out wasteful solutions in terms of ATP. See
Supplementary Material for more details.
3. RESULTS
3.1. Ectoine Accumulation Dramatically
Increases the Demand for OAA
The concentration of ectoine in the cytoplasm is known to be
tightly regulated as a function of the salinity of the medium
(
Dötsch et al., 2008 ). Keeping the high concentration of ectoine
that is necessary to balance the osmotic pressure of salt imposes
the cost of maintaining a ﬂux of ectoine synthesis equal to it s
dilution by growth. Thus, an exponentially growing culture mu st
synthesize ectoine at a rate equal to its concentration time s its
growth rate. To evaluate the impact of ectoine synthesis on
the central metabolic pathways, we have to compare the ﬂux
dedicated to ectoine production with other biosynthetic ﬂuxe s.
As can be seen in Figure 1, ectoine is synthesized from aspartate;
therefore its synthesis results in a demand for OAA in additi on
to that required for amino acid synthesis. The necessary data
to estimate these ﬂuxes is readily available in the literatu re.
Growth rates and intracellular ectoine concentrations, ha ve been
consistently measured for the wild type (
Dötsch et al., 2008 ),
and it is widely assumed that the cell composition provided
by
Neidhardt and Umbarger (1996) is representative for gram-
negative cells. Thus, the demand for OAA in H. elongata growing
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 6 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
FIGURE 2 | Estimated demand of OAA for ectoine and amino acid synthesis during exponential growth at different salt concentration s. The demand for amino
acids is based on protein content and amino acid frequencies measured for E. coli. Ectoine demand based on reported values for H. elongata (see text and
Supplementary Material for details). Vertical dashed lines mark salt concentratio ns of 0.17, 0.5, 1, and 2 M.
FIGURE 3 | Thermodynamics of anaplerotic reactions. As a reference fo r in
vivo conditions, cytoplasmic Na + was ﬁxed at 10 mM and external was varied
from 0 to 3.5 M, CO 2(total) = 10 µ M P = 7.5 mM cofactor ratios NADH/NAD =
0.1; NADPH/NADP = 10; ATP/ADP = 10. All other metabolites were ﬁx ed at 1
mM. MaeA and MaeB are the NAP- and NADP-dependent malic enzym es,
respectively. Ppc, PEP carboxylase; Oad, OAA decarboxylas e; Pck, PEP
carboxy-kinase. Malic dehydrogenase (Mdh) has been added f or comparison
since it is known to catalyze a thermodynamically challengi ng reaction ( Noor
et al., 2014 ).
at diﬀerent salinities can be estimated as explained in the
Supplementary Material.
The estimate shown in Figure 2 reveals that the metabolic
demand for OAA in H. elongata is similar to that of other bacteria
at low salt concentrations (0.17 M NaCl) but the pattern quick ly
diverges as salt concentration increases. At the optimal int erval
for growth between 0.5 and 1 M NaCl, OAA demand reaches
its peak and the cell dedicates up to 40% of the production to
synthesize ectoine. As salt concentration increases even f urther
and growth rates decline, the majority of OAA produced is
destined to ectoine synthesis, thus keeping a high demand for
OAA under growth rates at which other bacteria barely need an y.
3.2. Only Ppc Is Thermodynamically
Favorable, Oad Becomes Viable at High
Salt
In order to meet this higher than usual demand of OAA,
H. elongata has four enzymes that can potentially catalyze
anaplerotic reactions. Only one of these four enzymes,
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (Ppc), usually plays this
role in other bacteria. The three remaining candidates,
oxaloacetate decarboxylase (Oad), malic enzyme (Mae), and
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxy-kinase (Pck) are normally
considered to be thermodynamically unfavorable and thus no t
able to operate in the right direction within physiologically
feasible concentrations of their reactants. In order to evalu ate
how the diﬀerent environment and needs of H. elongata may lead
to diﬀerent roles for this enzymes, it is important to assess ho w
these diﬀerences have an impact on the thermodynamics of the
reactions involved. As discussed above, the high concentra tions
of electrolytes involved in the habitat of H. elongata result
in solutions so far from ideality that the Debbye-Huckel
corrections traditionally used in biochemical thermodyna mics
are insuﬃcient. This obstacle was overcome by using Speciﬁc
ion Interaction Theory (SIT) to account for the speciﬁc eﬀects of
Na+ and Cl − ions on the activity coeﬃcients, rather than using
a generic correction based only on ionic strength. This is cr itical
since for an enzyme to be able to operate in vivo, its free energy of
reaction must be not only negative, but high enough in absolu te
value that it results in an eﬃcient use of the enzyme (
Noor et al.,
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 7 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
FIGURE 4 | A stoichiometric model of TCA anaplerosis and related proce sses in H. elongata. Oad, OAA decarboxylase; Ppc, PEP carboxylase; Pck, PEP
carboxy-kinase; MaeAB, malic enzyme A and B; Pps, PEP syntha se; Na-Nqr, ubiquinone oxidoreductase.
2014). Standard free energies for the diﬀerent reactions are ofte n
helpful to determine this, but can also be misleading in this c ase,
since standard conditions do not account for gradients acro ss
the membrane. In Figure 3 we show orientative reference values
for the free energies at diﬀerent extracellular salt concentr ations
based on Equation (6) and the usual rules for thermodynamic
calculations of reaction-transport processes (
Jol et al., 2010 ). The
salt dependence was calculated using physiologically realis tic
concentrations for intracellular sodium, phosphate and CO 2, as
well as realistic ratios for co-factors ( Vojinovi´c and von Stockar,
2009; Noor et al., 2014 ). All other substrates were assumed
to be 1 mM. Of course, only the free energy of Oad changes
with extracellular sodium concentration but the free energ ies
of all potential anaplerotic enzymes are shown for comparison.
Additionally a known thermodynamic bottleneck of the TCA
cycle (
Noor et al., 2014 ), malic dehydrogenase (Mdh), has been
added as a reference. All free energies are calculated in the
direction that leads to OAA production. The default anaplerot ic
reaction Ppc, shows an unsurprisingly negative free energy.
Pck, which is known to be able to operate anaplerotically under
extreme conditions (
Zhang et al., 2009 ) albeit very ineﬃciently
due to unfavorable thermodynamics, provides a counterexampl e
with a very high, positive value. It is also noteworthy that bo th
malic enzymes have even larger positive values, so they are ve ry
unlikely candidates for anaplerosis. Oad evolves from being
very unfavorable in the absence of a sodium gradient to an
enzyme able to work anaplerotically in saline environments.
Interestingly, Oad is always less thermodynamically favor able
than Ppc, regardless of the sodium gradient. Actually, even at
high salt concentrations, Oad is still less favorable than Mdh .
It is noteworthy that all enzymes are reversible within
physiological concentrations of their substrates, so there
is no basis to discard any of them solely due to their
thermodynamic properties.
3.3. Contributions by Pck and Mae to
Anaplerotic Flux Are Severely Hindered by
Distributed Thermodynamic Effects
Although all four enzymes can operate in the right direction
when working in isolation, it remains to be seen whether they can
carry the ﬂux in vivo. In order to combine the stoichiometric and
thermodynamic aspects in an integrated analysis of the relev ant
pathways, a model based on stoichiometric and thermodynamic
constraints was formulated (see Supplementary Material).
Although focused on the TCA cycle and the anaplerotic reactio ns,
this model includes other relevant processes, such as the
respiratory chain, ATPase and other processes related to sodi um
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 8 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
FIGURE 5 | Flux distributions for optimal OAA yield with Oad inactive i ndicated on the layout of Figure 4 . All ﬂuxes are normalized per unit of glucose input. In this ﬂux
distribution, the glyoxylate shunt prevents a fraction of t he carbon ﬂowing into the TCA cycle from being lost as CO 2, thus enabling a net production of OAA in
the cycle.
transport. As can be seen in Figure 4, sodium plays multiple
roles in this metabolic network beyond driving Oad. The elec tron
transport chain of H. elongata has a sodium translocating NADH
ubiquinone oxidoreductase (Na-Nqr) ( Kindzierski et al., 2017 )
which couples respiration to the sodium export. Moreover, as
many other halophilic and halotolerant bacteria, H. elongata
has a high number of sodium-proton antiporters that can be
used to built a proton gradient or to use one to pump sodium
out of the cell. The diﬀerent stoichiometries of the antiporte rs
provide diﬀerent degrees of coupling between proton and sodium
transport just like the gears in a gearbox.
Calculating the optimal ﬂux distributions to maximize the
production of OAA points at Pck and Mae as the most
advantageous anaplerotic reactions from a stoichiometric po int
of view, as has already been pointed out (
Schwibbert et al., 2011;
Kindzierski et al., 2017 ). In spite of their reversibility within
the established in vivo ranges for metabolite concentrations no
thermodynamically viable ﬂux distributions could be obtai ned
where Pck or the malic enzymes played an anaplerotic role.
In order to operate in the carboxylating direction, these
enzymes require concentration ratios between their substr ates
and products that are incompatible with the requirements of
other reactions in the network. This can be clearly seen for
the malic enzyme since the low malate concentration needed t o
enable anaplerotic ﬂux through Mae is incompatible with the
high concentration required to drive the next enzyme in the
sequence, Mdh, toward OAA production.
It is worth mentioning that computer simulations of this
system often exhibit the simultaneous action of both malic
enzymes in opposite directions, which results in a net transfer
of electrons from NADPH to NADH. These chemically feasible
solutions point to the risk faced by the cell if these two enzyme s
were simultaneously active. Only a strict control of the expr ession
and/or activity of this enzymes can prevent them from destroy ing
the carefully balanced redox state of the two electron curren cies
in H. elongata . Enzyme assays with cell free extract have shown
very low activities for Mae using NADP as cofactor (
Kindzierski
et al., 2017 ). No activity could be detected using NAD (personal
communication, Irina Bagyan).
3.4. Ppc Is Stoichiometrically as Inefﬁcient
as the Glyoxylate Shunt
The type of glycolysis presumed to be active in H. elongata
is the Entner-Doudoroﬀ (ED) pathway (
Klingner et al., 2015;
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 9 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
FIGURE 6 | Flux distributions for optimal OAA yield with Oad inactive i ndicated on the layout of Figure 4 . All ﬂuxes are normalized per unit of glucose input. This ﬂux
distribution channels anaplerotic ﬂux through Ppc. The need to produce ATP to convert PEP into pyruvate leads to a higher c atabolic ﬂux in the TCA cycle that results
in some carbon being channeled to the catabolic part of the TC A cycle.
Kindzierski et al., 2017 ). This pathway splits glucose into
pyruvate and PEP in a 1:1 proportion which poses a diﬃculty
to channel ﬂux through Ppc. Recovering PEP for anaplerosis
would require phosphorylating pyruvate back to PEP. This is a
diﬃcult reaction that consumes two ATP equivalents and redu ces
the OAA yield due to the need to increase metabolic ﬂux to
catabolism for ATP production. This can be seen quantitative ly
by blocking all sodium related processes in the model, and
therefore Oad, and then calculating the optimal ﬂux distribu tion
for OAA production. This simulation results in two equivalen t
solutions. On the one hand, the ﬂux can proceed through the
glyoxylate shunt as shown in Figure 5. The loss of one carbon in
three in the decarboxylation of pyruvate to Acetyl-CoA, resul ts in
a low yield of 0.3. On the other hand, the ﬂux distribution sho wn
in Figure 6 avoids the decarboxylation step but requires a higher
ATP production due to the need to produce PEP from pyruvate,
which results in exactly the same low yield. Thus, having Ppc a s
the only anaplerotic enzyme is stoichiometrically equivale nt to
having no anaplerotic enzymes at all.
Whenever the sodium gradient allows it, Oad can carboxylate
pyruvate directly to obtain higher yields of OAA as shown
in Figure 7. Beyond providing a stoichiometrically eﬃcient
solution, Oad ties central metabolism together with the
respiratory chain and membrane transport systems into the
sodium economy in the cell. The sodium inﬂux through Oad
can be a counterbalance to the sodium export by the ubiquinone
oxidoreductase (Na-Nqr) or, when there is a net inﬂux of sodi um,
be compensated with the Na +/H+ antiporters or ATP dependent
Na+ exporters.
3.5. Anaplerotic Flux Is Distributed
Between Ppc and Oad With a Sodium
Dependent Ratio
In order to establish the roles of Ppc and Oad, growth
experiments were done with the two mutant strains described
above: H. elongata -PPC and H. elongata -OAD. The phenotype
associated to the deletions was characterized by cultivatin g the
wild type H. elongata and each of the mutants at diﬀerent salt
concentrations on both glucose and acetate. Growth on aceta te
here serves as a control in which anaplerotic ﬂux becomes
irrelevant because the incorporation of carbon into the TCA c ycle
occurs through the glyoxylate shunt. Therefore, any phenoty pe
caused by an insuﬃciency of the anaplerotic reactions, should
disappear when cells grow on acetate.
A ﬁrst screening using a microtiter plate reader enabled to
test a wide variety of media spanning salt concentrations fro m
0.17 to 2 M for each strain growing on glucose and acetate.
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 10 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
FIGURE 7 | Flux distributions for optimal OAA yield at 1 M NaCl indicate d on the layout of Figure 4 . All ﬂuxes are normalized per unit of glucose input. In this ﬂux
distribution, Oad carries the anaplerotic ﬂux achieving a hi gher OAA yield.
Figure 8 summarizes the maximal growth rates observed in
one such experiments. Inspection of the ﬁgure and the growth
curves for this and similar experiments (all collected in the
Supplementary Material) draws attention to two conditions that
lead to very clear phenotypes: First, H. elongata -PPC at low
salt (0.17 M NaCl) grows as well as the wild type on acetate
(Figure 8B) but it grows much slower on glucose ( Figure 8B).
Second, H. elongata -PPC at high salt (2 M NaCl) also shows
normal growth on acetate ( Figure 8D) while having diﬃculties
on glucose ( Figure 8C).
A selection of the experimental setups surveyed in the
microtiter plate experiments, including the two cases alread y
mentioned, was analyzed in shake ﬂask experiments that allow
a more accurate and reproducible quantitative treatment (se e
Supplementary Material). In most cases, the ﬂask experiments
yielded a more accurate picture of what was already indicated by
the previous screening. H. elongata -PPC growing in a medium
with 0.17 M salt exhibited similar growth rates as the wild type
when growing on acetate (0.16 ± 0.02 h−1 vs. 0.19 ± 0.004 h−1)
but experienced diﬃculties when growing on glucose (0.06 ±
0.04 h−1 vs. 0.28 ± 0.007 h−1). Comparison of growth rates on
glucose at high salt, however, provide a ﬁner comparison betwe en
the three strains. Besides the dramatic drop from a growth ra te
of 0.25 ± 0.01 h−1 in the wild type to 0.09 ± 0.004 h−1 in
H. elongata -OAD, a smaller decrease to a growth rate of 0.13
± 0.01 h−1 is shown in the Ppc lacking strain. Increased lag
phases for both mutant strains on glucose were often observed
in the pre-cultures, especially during growth in their respecti ve
inhibitory salt condition. Furthermore, the deletion of ppc seems
to have a higher impact on metabolism characterized by higher
ﬂuctuations in growth rate. This can be seen in the growth dat a
of the ﬂask experiments shown in the Supplementary Material
where exponential phases for the wild type and H. elongata-OAD
could be ﬁtted with determination coeﬃcients of 0.99 while th ose
for the H. elongata-PPC strain could be as low as 0.8.
3.6. Robustness of Ectoine Levels at High
Salt
The ectoine content was determined in cells of H. elongata
wild type and the two mutant strains H. elongata -PPC and H.
elongata-OAD growing at high salt (2 M NaCl). Cells growing at
low salt (0.17 M NaCl) were not included in this analysis beca use
under such conditions the ectoine concentration is too low t o
be measured reliably. Figure 9 shows the ectoine content of the
samples against their biomass. The linear trend is quite consist ent
regardless of strain or carbon source and also agrees well with
values reported in the literature. Only H. elongata-OAD growing
on glucose consistently show lower ectoine contents. This st rain
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 11 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
FIGURE 8 | Growth of H. elongata on acetate. Cells of each of the mutant H. elongata strains were grown at 30 ◦C in mineral salt medium (MM63) with NaCl (salt) at a
concentration of 0.17, 0.5, 1, and 2 M, respectively, and wit h glucose ( A,C on the left) or acetate ( B,D on the right) as sole carbon source. Each of the experiments
compared maximum growth rates of a mutant strain ( H. elongata-PPC in blue and H. elongata-OAD in red) in comparison to the wild type (WT black).
grew roughly 30% slower ( µ = 0.09 h−1) in such conditions
compared to H. elongata wild type ( µ = 0.25 h−1).
The experimental data shown in Figure 10 can be used to
estimate the demand of OAA for these strains as was done in
the previous section. Without Oad the anaplerotic ﬂux reaches
only 30% and without Ppc only 50% of the ﬂux calculated for the
wild type employing both, Oad and Ppc. These results point to a
shared anaplerotic role between Oad and Ppc even at fairly high
salt concentrations.
Accurate determination of the biomass in terms of ash-free
dry weight was made possible by using simultaneous thermal
analysis (STA) up to a temperature of 1,140 ◦C. Figure 11 shows
an extract of the data for a sample up to 200 ◦C, the full
curve can be seen in the Supplementary Material. At lower
temperatures, the heat ﬂow is negative due to the predominance
of endothermic processes. For all temperatures below 160 ◦C the
mass spectrometry detects the presence of water (mass 18 Da)
and the absence of CO 2 (44 Da). This temperature is taken as
the initiation point for decomposition due to the appearance of
CO2 in the gas phase. Thus, the loss of mass before reaching
160◦C is taken to be the evaporation of the moisture in the sample
(
Gurakan et al., 1990 ) and the mass remaining at the end of the
process is the ash content, with any loss in-between being the
proper biomass. The water content of the samples was between
6 and 10%.
FIGURE 9 | Biomass vs. ectoine for different strains of H. elongata: WT, OAD,
and PPC growing on glucose (Glc) and acetate (Ac). The data in cludes
samples taken at two different time points from three cultur es for each
combination of strain and carbon source. Dashed lines show t he predicted
expected ectoine content calculated from data available in the literature
(Dötsch et al., 2008 ).
4. DISCUSSION
The need to synthesize ectoine alters the metabolic demand fo r
OAA in H. elongata . This demand is not only higher but also
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 12 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
FIGURE 10 | Ectoine content (•) and OAA demand for amino acid (•) and ecto ine synthesis (•) in different strains at 2 M salt. Growth rat es indicated on top of OAA
demand bars. The growth rates were calculated from the shake ﬂask experiments described above. A table summarizing these results including standard deviations
can be found in the Supplementary Material .
tuned to diﬀerent stimuli. While the demand for OAA in similar
bacteria is directly proportional to the growth rate, that of H.
elongata also depends on the salinity of the medium. Growth rates
at 0.17 M NaCl and 2 M NaCl, for instance, are very similar but
as can be seen in Figure 2, the demand for ectoine is noticeably
higher in the second case. Diﬀerent needs lead to diﬀerent
selection pressures that condition how this organism produce s
OAA. The results of this study clearly indicate that Oad can
operate as an anaplerotic enzyme as was previously hypothesized
by
Kindzierski et al. (2017). Moreover, the anaplerotic ﬂux is
shared between this enzyme and Ppc under a wide range of
salt concentrations. Ppc is thermodynamically more favorab le
than Oad but this comes at the cost of lower stoichiometric
yields. When the salt concentrations is high enough, Oad can
carry most of the necessary ﬂux for normal growth and ectoine
production, even in the absence of Ppc. The diﬃculties of
the strain H. elongata -OAD to grow at a salt concentrations
of 0.17 M, show that Oad can no longer operate eﬃciently
at this concentration. For the model simulations to reﬂect
this phenotype, it is necessary that the minimum intracellular
sodium concentration be ﬁxed at 10 mM. Allowing lower values
results in simulations where Oad can operate eﬃciently under
such conditions.
The intracellular sodium concentration is the variable thr ough
which the cell can modulate the sodium gradient to a certain
extent. The architecture of the metabolic network implies th at
the sodium concentration gradient across the membrane must
respect a balance between two opposing forces. It must be steep
enough to let Oad operate anaplerotically but not so steep
that it prevents the correct operation of the electron transpor t
chain. But cytoplasmic sodium is diﬃcult to measure, due to th e
impossibility to distinguish between its free and bound form s.
Total sodium in E. coli has been reported to be 5 mM (
Shabala
et al., 2009; Milo et al., 2010 ) while for H. elongata a wide
range of values has been reported between 40 and 630 mM
for extracellular salt concentrations between 0.05 and 3.4 M
(
Vreeland et al., 1983 ). Free sodium at high concentration exerts
a cytotoxic eﬀect so it is to be expected that a large fraction of
this sodium is bound to cell structures. This is supported by the
fact that some of this structures become more acidic at highe r
salt concentrations to increase its binding capacity for cat ions
(
Vreeland et al., 1984 ). This is indeed an issue of importance for
the survival of the cell, which has developed methods to protec t
itself against excessive sodium concentrations. H. elongata and
other halophilic bacteria are equipped with a number of diﬀerent
sodium eﬄux pumps. In H. elongata at least 10 diﬀerent
genes and gene clusters, respectively, can be found that code
for putative sodium exporters belonging to seven diﬀerent
transporter families (
Schwibbert et al., 2011; Pfeiﬀer et al., 2017 ).
The sodium export transporters comprise various Na +/H+
antiporters (NahA, NahC, NahP), a respiratory-dependent
sodium translocating NADH ubiquinone oxidoreductase (Na-
Nqr) and a H + transporting two sector ATPase. In comparison,
E. coli has only four systems to extrude sodium, namely NahA,
NahB, ChaA, and a respiratory-dependent exporter (
Shijuku
et al., 2002 ).
But extrusion is not the only mechanism available to H.
elongata to protect its cytoplasmic interior against the adverse
eﬀects of sodium. Compatible solutes like ectoine are consider ed
water-structure makers or kosmotropes, while ions like Na +
are water-structure breakers or chaotropes. Kosmotropes are
often seen as stabilizers of biological molecules (for inst ance
proteins) and chaotropes as their denaturants (
Baldwin, 1996;
Galinski et al., 1997; Zhang and Cremer, 2010 ). Employing
Raman spectroscopy, ( Hahn et al., 2016 ) could show that ectoine
enhances water populations with stronger hydrogen bonding,
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 13 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
FIGURE 11 | Simultaneous thermal analysis of dry weight from H. elongata (OD 1.2). The mass is detected with a precision balance over a temperature range from 32
to 200 ◦C with a heating rate of 1 K/min under air atmosphere. The heat u ptake is compared to an empty crucible and the heat ﬂow is plott ed over the whole
temperature range. Furthermore, different mass traces cor responding to water (18) and CO 2 (44) are recorded for the decomposition process with a quadr upole mass
spectrometer which is coupled to the STA (see Supplementary Material for graph over the full temperature range).
while sodium is increasing water populations with weaker
hydrogen bonding. The formation of strongly bound water
around ectoine totally compensate the eﬀect of sodium up to
a salt concentration that was 40% of the ectoine concentrati on.
Because of this behavior it may be justify calling ectoine a “ NaCl
compensatory solute.” All in all, the combination of simulat ions
and indirect experimental evidence seems to back up the idea t hat
intracellular free sodium concentration in the cytoplasm of H.
elongata may be higher than that of other gram-negative bacteria.
For now, no exact value can be given for these concentrations but
the range shown by the model provides a ballpark estimate that i s
coherent with the information we have.
A coexistence of parallel pathways as happens with the
anaplerotic reactions described in this study, is frequent a mong
bacteria (
Sauer and Eikmanns, 2005 ). This can be understood
in evolutionary terms as a source of robustness through
redundancy, a way to ensure ﬂexibility by providing alternat ives
that work well under diﬀerent conditions. An example of this
are the high and low aﬃnity pathways for ammonia assimilation ,
which guarantee an eﬃcient incorporation of nitrogen into
amino acids regardless of the concentration of ammonia (
van
Heeswijk et al., 2013; Sehr et al., 2015 ). But metabolic alternatives
can also be a regulatory necessity as is the case with some
isoenzymes. The parallel operation of several enzymes at the
beginning of a branched pathway, e.g., amino acid synthesis—
enables the independent inhibition of each by a diﬀerent end-
product. The unusual architecture of the anaplerotic reactio ns
in H. elongata seems to obey to a combination of all of the
above. Ppc and Oad oﬀer alternative pathways to guarantee
an anaplerotic ﬂux under diﬀerent conditions. That these
conditions overlap is shown by the fact that a mutant lacking
either enzyme can achieve the same growth rate as the wild
type at some salt concentrations. Moreover, as this work
shows, low salt concentrations render Oad as an inviable or
very ineﬃcient option, so the presence of Ppc widens the
range of salinities in which H. elongata can thrive. Finally,
the anaplerotic reactions are a critical part of two diﬀerent
metabolic functions providing the basis for both amino acid
synthesis and salt tolerance. The environmental factors tha t
condition these two functions can be independent from one
another, e.g., a change in carbon source would result in a
large change in amino acid demand for growth but would
not alter the set concentration for ectoine. The coexistence of
diﬀerent enzymes enables a more ﬂexible regulatory scheme
where diﬀerent enzymes can be modulated by diﬀerent factors.
The sodium dependence of Oad guarantees an increase in
anaplerotic ﬂux to support increased ectoine production at
higher salt while Ppc can respond to an increased demand of
OAA for amino acid biosynthesis. Further investigations on
this topic will surely provide valuable insights and improve our
understanding of the design principles that shape this part of
bacterial metabolism.
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 14 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will be
made available by the authors, without undue reservation.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
AM-S, HK, SB, and AK obtained the funding. HK and AM-S
conceptualized the research. AM-S and KP-G supervised the
work. KH, MG, and SS carried out the experiments. CS
and AM-S wrote the software and conducted the computer
simulations. AM-S wrote the ﬁrst draft of the manuscript. KH,
KP-G, and HK participated in the elaboration of subsequent
versions. All authors read and approved the ﬁnal version of the
manuscript. All authors contributed to the article and approve d
the submitted version.
FUNDING
This work has been funded by the German Federal Ministry
of Education and Research (BMBF) through projects OpHeLIA
(0316197) and HOBBIT (031B03).
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.338 9/fmicb.
2020.561800/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Alberty, R. A. (2003). Thermodynamics of Biochemical Reactions . Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons.
Ashworth, J., and Kornberg, H. L. (1966). The anaplerotic ﬁxation o f carbon
dioxide by Escherichia coli . Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 165, 179–188.
doi: 10.1098/rspb.1966.0063
Baldwin, R. L. (1996). How hofmeister ion interactions aﬀect prote in stability.
Biophys. J. 71, 2056–2063. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3495(96)79404-3
Bligh, E. G., and Dyer, W. J. (1959). A rapid method of total lipid ext raction and
puriﬁcation. Can. J. Biochem. Physiol. 37, 911–917. doi: 10.1139/o59-099
Chung, C., Niemela, S. L., and Miller, R. H. (1989). One-step preparati on
of competent Escherichia coli : transformation and storage of bacterial
cells in the same solution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 86, 2172–2175.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.86.7.2172
Dimroth, P. (1980). A new sodium-transport system energized by
the decarboxylation of oxaloacetate. FEBS Lett. 122, 234–236.
doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(80)80446-7
Dimroth, P. (1990). Mechanisms of sodium transport in bacteria. Philos. Trans. R.
Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 326, 465–477. doi: 10.1098/rstb.1990.0025
Dimroth, P. (1994). Bacterial sodium ion-coupled energetics. Antonie Van
Leeuwenhoek 65, 381–395. doi: 10.1007/BF00872221
Dimroth, P., Jockel, P., and Schmid, M. (2001). Coupling mechanism o f the
oxaloacetate decarboxylase Na + pump. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1505, 1–14.
doi: 10.1016/S0005-2728(00)00272-3
Dimroth, P., and Schink, B. (1998). Energy conservation in the decarboxylation
of dicarboxylic acids by fermenting bacteria. Archiv. Microbiol. 170, 69–77.
doi: 10.1007/s002030050616
Dötsch, A., Severin, J., Alt, W., Galinski, E. A., and Kreft, J.-U. (2008). A
mathematical model for growth and osmoregulation in halophilic bacteri a.
Microbiology 154, 2956–2969. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.2007/012237-0
Flamholz, A., Noor, E., Bar-Even, A., and Milo, R. (2011). Equilib rator—the
biochemical thermodynamics calculator. Nucleic Acids Res. 40, D770–D775.
doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr874
Galinski, E. A. (1995). Osmoadaptation in bacteria. Adv. Microb. Physiol. 37,
273–328. doi: 10.1016/S0065-2911(08)60148-4
Galinski, E. A., and Herzog, R. M. (1990). The role of trehalose as a su bstitute
for nitrogen-containing compatible solutes ( Ectothiorhodospira halochloris ).
Archiv. Microbiol. 153, 607–613. doi: 10.1007/BF00245273
Galinski, E. A., Stein, M., Amendt, B., and Kinder, M. (1997). T he kosmotropic
(structure-forming) eﬀect of compensatory solutes. Compar. Biochem. Physiol.
A Physiol. 117, 357–365. doi: 10.1016/S0300-9629(96)00275-7
Guggenheim, E., and Turgeon, J. (1955). Speciﬁc interaction of ions. Trans.
Faraday Soc. 51, 747–761. doi: 10.1039/tf9555100747
Gurakan, T., Marison, I., Von Stockar, U., Gustafsson, L., and G naiger, E. (1990).
Proposals for a standardized sample handling procedure for the determinat ion
of elemental composition and enthalpy of combustion of biological mat erial.
Thermochim. Acta 172, 251–266. doi: 10.1016/0040-6031(90)80580-R
Hahn, M. B., Uhlig, F., Solomun, T., Smiatek, J., and Sturm, H. (2016) . Combined
inﬂuence of ectoine and salt: spectroscopic and numerical evidenc e for
compensating eﬀects on aqueous solutions. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 18,
28398–28402. doi: 10.1039/C6CP05417J
Henry, C. S., Broadbelt, L. J., and Hatzimanikatis, V. (2007).
Thermodynamics-based metabolic ﬂux analysis. Biophys. J. 92, 1792–1805.
doi: 10.1529/biophysj.106.093138
Jol, S. J., Kümmel, A., Hatzimanikatis, V., Beard, D. A., and Heineman n, M. (2010).
Thermodynamic calculations for biochemical transport and reaction proc esses
in metabolic networks. Biophys. J. 99, 3139–3144. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2010.
09.043
Kindzierski, V., Raschke, S., Knabe, N., Siedler, F., Scheﬀe r, B., Pﬂüger-Grau,
K., et al. (2017). Osmoregulation in the halophilic bacterium Halomonas
elongata: a case study for integrative systems biology. PLoS ONE 12:e0168818.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0168818
Klingner, A., Bartsch, A., Dogs, M., Wagner-Döbler, I., Jahn, D ., Simon, M.,
et al. (2015). Large-scale 13c ﬂux proﬁling reveals conservation of the entner-
doudoroﬀ pathway as a glycolytic strategy among marine bacteria that u se
glucose. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 81, 2408–2422. doi: 10.1128/AEM.03157-14
Kuhlmann, A. U., and Bremer, E. (2002). Osmotically regulated synthesi s of the
compatible solute ectoine in Bacillus pasteurii and related Bacillus spp. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 68, 772–783. doi: 10.1128/AEM.68.2.772-783.2002
Larsen, P., Sydnes, L., Landfald, B., and Strøm, A. (1987). Osmore gulation in
Escherichia coli by accumulation of organic osmolytes: betaines, glutamic acid,
and trehalose. Archiv. Microbiol. 147, 1–7. doi: 10.1007/BF00492896
Martínez-García, E., Aparicio, T., Goñi-Moreno, A., Fraile, S., a nd de Lorenzo, V.
(2015). Seva 2.0: an update of the standard european vector archi tecture for
de-/re-construction of bacterial functionalities. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, D1183–
D1189. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1114
Martínez-García, E., and de Lorenzo, V. (2011). Engineering mult iple genomic
deletions in gram-negative bacteria: analysis of the multi-resista nt antibiotic
proﬁle of Pseudomonas putida kt2440. Environ. Microbiol. 13, 2702–2716.
doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02538.x
Miller, J., Schuler, C., Ward, J., Wylie, F., Frea, T., Delbene, R., e t al. (1992). A Short
Course. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Lab Press.
Milo, R., Jorgensen, P., Moran, U., Weber, G., and Springer, M. (20 10).
Bionumbers—the database of key numbers in molecular and cell biolog y.
Nucleic Acids Res. 38, D750–D753. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp889
Neidhardt, F. C., and Umbarger, H. E. (1996). Escherichia coli and Salmonella
typhimurium; Cellular and Molecular Biology Chapter Chemic al Composition of
Escherichia coli. 2nd Edn . Washington, DC: American Society for Microbiology
Publishers.
Nelson, D. L., Lehninger, A. L., and Cox, M. M. (2008). Lehninger Principles of
Biochemistry. New York, NY: Macmillan.
Noor, E., Bar-Even, A., Flamholz, A., Reznik, E., Liebermeister, W.,
and Milo, R. (2014). Pathway thermodynamics highlights kinetic
obstacles in central metabolism. PLoS Comput. Biol. 10:e1003483.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003483
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 15 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800
Hobmeier et al. Anaplerotic Pathways in Halomonas elongata
Ono, H., Sawada, K., Khunajakr, N., Tao, T., Yamamoto, M., Hiramoto , M., et al.
(1999). Characterization of biosynthetic enzymes for ectoine as a compatible
solute in a moderately Halophilic eubacterium, Halomonas elongata. J. Bacteriol.
181, 91–99. doi: 10.1128/JB.181.1.91-99.1999
Pastor, J. M., Bernal, V., Salvador, M., Argando na, M., Vargas, C., Csonka, L., et al.
(2013). Role of central metabolism in the osmoadaptation of the halo philic
bacterium Chromohalobacter salexigens . J. Biol. Chem. 288, 17769–17781.
doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.470567
Peng, L., Arauzo-Bravo, M. J., and Shimizu, K. (2004). Metabolic ﬂux analysis
for a ppc mutant Escherichia coli based on 13c-labelling experiments together
with enzyme activity assays and intracellular metabolite measurement s. FEMS
Microbiol. Lett. 235, 17–23. doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6968.2004.tb09562.x
Peters-Wendisch, P. G., Wendisch, V. F., Paul, S., Eikmanns, B . J., and Sahm,
H. (1997). Pyruvate carboxylase as an anaplerotic enzyme in Corynebacterium
glutamicum. Microbiology 143, 1095–1103. doi: 10.1099/00221287-143-4-1095
Pfeiﬀer, F., Bagyan, I., Alfaro-Espinoza, G., Zamora-Lagos, M.- A., Habermann,
B., Marin-Sanguino, A., et al. (2017). Revision and reannotati on of
the Halomonas elongata DSM 2581T genome. Microbiol. Open 6:e00465.
doi: 10.1002/mbo3.465
Pramanik, J., and Keasling, J. (1997). Stoichiometric model of Escherichia coli
metabolism: incorporation of growth-rate dependent biomass compositio n
and mechanistic energy requirements. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 56, 398–421.
doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-0290(19971120)56:4<398::AID-BIT6>3.0.CO;2-J
Pudlik, A. M., and Lolkema, J. S. (2011). Mechanism of citrate meta bolism by
an oxaloacetate decarboxylase-deﬁcient mutant of Lactococcus lactis IL1403. J.
Bacteriol. 193, 4049–4056. doi: 10.1128/JB.05012-11
Sauer, U., and Eikmanns, B. J. (2005). The pep—pyruvate—oxaloaceta te node as
the switch point for carbon ﬂux distribution in bacteria. FEMS Microbiol. Rev.
29, 765–794. doi: 10.1016/j.femsre.2004.11.002
Schwibbert, K., Marin-Sanguino, A., Bagyan, I., Heidrich, G., L entzen, G., Seitz,
H., et al. (2011). A blueprint of ectoine metabolism from the genome of t he
industrial producer Halomonas elongata DSM 2581t. Environ. Microbiol. 13,
1973–1994. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2010.02336.x
Sehr, C., Kremling, A., and Marin-Sanguino, A. (2015). Design prin ciples as a guide
for constraint based and dynamic modeling: towards an integrative workﬂow.
Metabolites 5, 601–635. doi: 10.3390/metabo5040601
Shabala, L., Bowman, J., Brown, J., Ross, T., McMeekin, T., and S habala,
S. (2009). Ion transport and osmotic adjustment in Escherichia coli in
response to ionic and non-ionic osmotica. Environ. Microbiol. 11, 137–148.
doi: 10.1111/j.1462-2920.2008.01748.x
Shijuku, T., Yamashino, T., Ohashi, H., Saito, H., Kakegawa, T. , Ohta, M., et al.
(2002). Expression of CHAA, a sodium ion extrusion system of Escherichia
coli, is regulated by osmolarity and pH. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1556, 142–148.
doi: 10.1016/S0005-2728(02)00345-6
van Heeswijk, W. C., Westerhoﬀ, H. V., and Boogerd, F. C. (2013).
Nitrogen assimilation in Escherichia coli : putting molecular data
into a systems perspective. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 77, 628–695.
doi: 10.1128/MMBR.00025-13
Vojinovi´c, V., and von Stockar, U. (2009). Inﬂuence of uncertainties in pH,
PMG, activity coeﬃcients, metabolite concentrations, and oth er factors on the
analysis of the thermodynamic feasibility of metabolic pathways. Biotechnol.
Bioeng. 103, 780–795. doi: 10.1002/bit.22309
Vreeland, R., Litchﬁeld, C., Martin, E., and Elliot, E. (1980). Halomonas elongata,
a new genus and species of extremely salt-tolerant bacteria. Int. J. Syst. Evol.
Microbiol. 30, 485–495. doi: 10.1099/00207713-30-2-485
Vreeland, R. H., Anderson, R., and Murray, R. (1984). Cell wall and
phospholipid composition and their contribution to the salt tolerance of
Halomonas elongata. J. Bacteriol. 160, 879–883. doi: 10.1128/JB.160.3.879-883.
1984
Vreeland, R. H., Mierau, B. D., Litchﬁeld, C. D., and Martin, E. L. (1 983).
Relationship of the internal solute composition to the salt toleranc e of
Halomonas elongata. Can. J. Microbiol. 29, 407–414. doi: 10.1139/m83-066
Xu, Y.-F., Amador-Noguez, D., Reaves, M. L., Feng, X.-J., and Ra binowitz, J. D.
(2012). Ultrasensitive regulation of anapleurosis via allosteric acti vation of pep
carboxylase. Nat. Chem. Biol. 8, 562–568. doi: 10.1038/nchembio.941
Zhang, X., Jantama, K., Moore, J. C., Jarboe, L. R., Shanmugam, K. T ., and Ingram,
L. O. (2009). Metabolic evolution of energy-conserving pathwa ys for succinate
production in Escherichia coli. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 20180–20185.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0905396106
Zhang, Y., and Cremer, P. S. (2010). Chemistry of hofmeister
anions and osmolytes. Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem. 61, 63–83.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.physchem.59.032607.093635
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be c onstrued as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Hobmeier, Goëss, Sehr, Schwaminger, Berensmeie r, Kremling,
Kunte, Pﬂüger-Grau and Marin-Sanguino. This is an open-acc ess article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, p rovided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that th e original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academ ic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not co mply with these terms.
Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 16 September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 561800