Matters arising https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39510-5
Potential contribution of PEP carboxykinase-
dependent malate dismutation to the
hypoxia response inC. elegans
Rosina Comas-Ghierra1,3,L a u r aR o m a n e l l i - C e d r e z1,3 &G u s t a v oS a l i n a s1,2
ARISING FROMM. Vora et al.Nature Communicationshttps://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-022-33849-x(2022)
Oxygen is vital for animals, driving energy production through oxi-
dative phosphorylation. Humans, for instance, cannot survive more
than a few minutes without respiring. Yet, animals face hypoxia, either
environmental (low oxygen availability), functional (e.g., during
extreme exertion) or as a result of pathological processes such as
cancer or infection. Thus, metabolic adaptations to changes in oxygen
levels are key for animal survival. These adaptations require oxygen
sensors that trigger a complex rewiring of gene expression and cellular
metabolism. In animals, changes in gene expression in response to
hypoxia are driven by the transcription factor HIF (hypoxia-inducible
factor, HIF-1 inC. elegans)
1. HIF-1 stability and activity are controlled by
the oxygen sensor HIF-prolyl hydroxylase EGLN (EGL-9 inC. elegans).
In aerobiosis, EGL-9 hydroxylates HIF-1, using oxygen as a substrate,
targeting HIF-1 for VHL-1-mediated proteasomal degradation2.I n
hypoxia, no hydroxylation occurs, and VHL-1 does not recognize HIF-1,
which remains intact and activates the hypoxia-induced response. In
humans, the reprogramming of metabolism driven by HIF-1 leads to a
metabolic shift towards glycolysis and lactate production, as oxygen-
dependent oxidative phosphorylation is reduced
1.
In a recent article, Vora et al. capitalized on this mechanism of
action and analyzedC. elegansmutants lackingegl-9 (and therefore
HIF-1 is constitutively active) orhif-1 under aerobic conditions. They
used RNA-seq and ChIP-seq to analyze the gene expression in these
mutants3. The authors found that HIF-1 upregulates the expression of
hundreds of genes. The striking upregulation of the cytosolic PEP
carboxykinase,pck-1, and cytosolic malate dehydrogenase,mdh-1,l e d
the authors to suggest that hypoxia promotes gluconeogenesis. This
metabolic pathway converts pyruvate to glucose through an opposite
but not identical chain of reactions to that of glycolysis. A key gluco-
neogenesis detour is catalyzed by cytosolic PEP carboxykinase, which
converts oxaloacetate into PEP, coupled to GTP hydrolysis. Cytosolic
malate dehydrogenase, on the other hand, generates oxaloacetate
from malate.
In addition to the interpretation that hypoxia promotes gluco-
neogenesis, we put forward a complementary explanation for the
observed increase inpck-1 and mdh-1 expression. Worms, including
C. elegans, annelids, and bivalves subject to hypoxic conditions harvest
energy through an alternative abbreviated electron transport chain
(ETC) in which fumarate, not oxygen, is theﬁnal electron acceptor
and rhodoquinone, instead of ubiquinone, is the lipidic electron
transporter
4,5 (Fig. 1). In this alternative ETC, complex I oxidizes NADH
and reduces rhodoquinone while pumping protons to drive ATP
synthesis by the mitochondrial ATP synthase (complex V)
6.I nc o n t r a s t
to the conventional complex II, which functions as succinate dehy-
drogenase, in this ETC the standardredox potential of the rhodoqui-
none/rhodoquinol pair facilitates complex II activity as fumarate
reductase, leading to rhodoquinol oxidation. This ETC is sustained by
malate dismutation, a mitochondrial pathway adapted to anaerobic
functioning
7.
Malate dismutation involves a reductive branch from malate to
succinate, and an oxidative branch that converts malate to acetate
(Fig. 1). In the reductive branch, malate is converted to fumarate by
the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle) enzyme fumarase, and then
to succinate, by the alternative complex II, both working in reverse
to the conventional TCA cycle. Succinate could be excreted or; in
some worms, further decarboxylated to propionate, which is then
excreted
7,8. In the oxidative branch, malate is decarboxylated to
pyruvate by the malic enzyme, generating NADPH, and then pyruvate
is decarboxylated yielding Acetyl-CoA, which isﬁnally converted to
acetate by acetyl-succinyl CoA transferase (ASCT) and excreted. The
NADH generated in the oxidative reactions can be oxidized to NAD
+ by
complex I. The key metabolite of this pathway is malate, which derived
from incomplete glycolysis that generates PEP and then uses PCK-1 and
MDH-1. In this pathway, MDH-1 and PCK-1 function in the opposite
direction to gluconeogenesis
7,9.
In several parasitic worms, e.g.,Fasciola hepatica, Hymenolepis
spp., andAscarisspp., malate dismutation is the main glucose catabolic
pathway in hypoxia, although lactic acid fermentation has also been
described
10,11. In these organisms, the PEP carboxykinase/pyruvate
kinase ratio is highest in the adult worm, the lifecycle stage subject to
the host gut environmental hypoxia. This increase is accompanied
by the excretion of organic acids derived from malate dismutation.
Received: 27 December 2022
Accepted: 16 June 2023
Check for updates
1Worm Biology Lab, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Montevideo, Uruguay.2Department of Biosciences, Facultad de Química, Universidad de la República,
Montevideo, Uruguay.3These authors contributed equally: Rosina Comas-Ghierra, Laura Romanelli-Cedrez.e-mail: gsalin@fq.edu.uy
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:3938 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
More recently, the transcriptomic analysis ofHymenolepis microstoma
transition from the cysticercoid to the adult stage revealed a sig-
niﬁcant increase in transcriptomic abundances of genes coding for key
enzymes of malate dismutation, cytosolic PEP carboxykinase, and
cytosolic malate dehydrogenase, revealing a major metabolic shift in
the normoxia/hypoxia transition
12. The metabolomic analysis pre-
sented by Vora et al. indicated an increase in metabolites shared by
both gluconeogenesis and malate dismutation pathways, such as
malate and fumarate. The exometabolome would provide further
insights to discern which of the pathways were activated by HIF-1. Vora
et al. also infer that the glyoxylate cycle would be used to synthesize
oxaloacetate to feed the gluconeogenesis pathway. The glyoxylate
cycle requires theβ-oxidation of fully reduced fatty acids, which in turn
demands oxygen. Yet, it is possible that low levels of oxygen may be
sufﬁcient to temporarily promote a baseline of fatty acid oxidation for
the glyoxylate cycle.
Mutants lackinghif-1 or pck-1 showed reduced hypoxia-starvation
survival, which could be partially restored by PEP, but not by pyruvate.
This would argue for a role of PEP carboxykinase in gluconeogenesis,
but PEP is also a direct source of ATP since can be converted to
pyruvate, releasing an ATP. In any case, this does not exclude the
importance of PCK-1 in malate dismutation. New experiments using
oxaloacetate and different labeled metabolites would be informative
to dissect the complexity of the intermediary metabolism in wild-type
and mutant strains.
It is important to note that the RNA-seq and ChIP-seq were
performed in aerobic conditions, which is a different context from
hypoxia, and corresponds to the whole organism. Tissue-speciﬁc
pathway compartmentalization has not been extensively explored in
C. elegans. It is possible that some tissues may require gluconeogenesis
for generating reducing power through the pentose phosphate path-
way while other tissues may need malate dismutation for harvesting
energy from glucose, particularly under hypoxic conditions. Rhodo-
quinone, whose biosynthesis was recently elucidated
13,14,i sak e ye v o -
lutionary innovation to harvest energy in animals that face hypoxia,
doubling the energy obtained by lactic acid fermentation. The alter-
native ETC that functions with rhodoquinone consumes fumarate,
which as far as it is known from well-studied organisms, derives from
malate dismutation, and requires PEP carboxykinase and malate
dehydrogenase to sustain malate synthesis. These enzymes could have
been co-opted for malate dismutation and serve additional roles to the
conventional one in gluconeogenesis. Nevertheless, the interplay
between PEP carboxykinases (neural/muscle PCK-1 and epidermal/
intestinal/muscle PCK-2) and ETC could be complex inC. elegans.
A recent article has shown that genetic mutations in complex II subunit
A upregulate the protein accumulation of PCK-2 and PCK-1
15,s u g -
gesting potential metabolic redirection away from the conventional
mitochondrial ETC.
Finally, it is important to note that stabilization of HIF-1 under
aerobic conditions byegl-9 or vhl-1 mutants, although having over-
lapping effects with hypoxia, may not fully mimic the conditions of
hypoxia. This is something to be aware of while interpreting the ori-
ginal manuscript by Vora et al. and this viewpoint. To sum up, we
wanted to highlight other relevant metabolic adaptations to hypoxia
absent in mammals.
References
1. Semenza, G. L. Regulation of mammalian O2 homeostasis by
hypoxia-inducible factor 1.A n n u .R e v .C e l lD e v .B i o l .14,5 5 1– 578
(1999).
2. Ohh, M. et al. Ubiquitination of hypoxia-inducible factor requires
direct binding to theβ-domain of the von Hippel– Lindau protein.
Nat. Cell. Biol.2,4 2 3– 427 (2000).
3. Vora, M. et al. The hypoxia response pathway promotes PEP car-
boxykinase and gluconeogenesis inC. elegans. Nat. Commun.13,
6168 (2022).
4 . V a nH e l l e m o n d ,J .J . ,K l o c k i e w i c z ,M . ,G a a s e n b e e k ,C .P .H . ,R o o s ,M .
H. & Tielens, A. G. M. Rhodoquinone and complex II of the electron
transport chain in anaerobically functioning eukaryotes.J. Biol.
Chem. 270,3 1 0 6 5– 31070 (1995).
Malate
Pyruvate Acetyl-CoA Acetate
H+H+
H+
H+H+H+
MEN-1
PDH
FUM-1
ADP
ATP
H+
H+
NADHNAD+
H+
Fumarate
SuccinateMalate
Oxaloacetate
PEP
Glucose
Glycolytic
enzymes
PCK-1
MDH-1
II Complex I V
NADPH
NADP+
ASCT
Complex
H+
RQH2
RQ
Fig. 1 | Energy metabolism under hypoxia.Several animal lineages such as worms,
bivalves, and annelids harvest energy from malate dismutation under hypoxia. In
this pathway malate is generated from glucose through glycolytic enzymes up to
phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP), which is converted to oxaloacetate by PEP carbox-
ykinase (PCK-1) and then to malate by malate dehydrogenase (MDH-1). Malate
enters the mitochondria and undergoes dismutation, resulting in the production of
succinate and acetate. The oxidative branch converts malate to pyruvate catalyzed
by the malic enzyme (MEN-1), and pyruvate to acetyl-CoA by pyruvate dehy-
drogenase (PDH-1). Acetyl-CoA is then converted to acetate by acetyl-succinyl-CoA
transferase (ASCT). The reductive branch converts malate to fumarate, catalyzed
by fumarase (FUM-1), and fumarate is subsequently reduced to succinate by
complex II. These two reactions function in reverse to the conventional TCA. Thus,
in the absence of oxygen, fumarate is theﬁnal electron acceptor. The reversal
of complex II is facilitated by the lipidic electron transporter rhodoquinone
(RQ, rhodoquinone, oxidized form; RQH
2, rhodoquinol, reduced form) whose
redox potential is intermediate between the redox potential of fumarate/succinate
and NAD
+/NADH, allowing electrons toﬂow from NADH to fumarate in an alter-
native electron transport chain that pumps protons, keeps the redox balance and
drives ATP synthesis by ATP synthase (complex V). Acetate and succinate are
excreted as end products of malate dismutation; in some organisms, succinate can
be further decarboxylated to propionate. The rounded rectangles correspond to
the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes.
Matters arising https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39510-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:3938 2
5. Takamiya, S. et al. Free-living nematodesCaenorhabditis elegans
possess in their mitochondria an additional rhodoquinone, an
essential component of the eukaryotic fumarate reductase system.
Arch. Biochem. Biophys.371,2 8 4– 289 (1999).
6. Salinas, G., Langelaan, D. N. & Shepherd, J. N. Rhodoquinone in
bacteria and animals: Two distinct pathways for biosynthesis of this
key electron transporter used in anaerobic bioenergetics.Biochim.
Biophys. Acta Bioenerg.1861, 148278 (2020).
7. Müller, M. et al. Biochemistry and evolution of anaerobic energy
metabolism in eukaryotes.Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev.76,
444– 495 (2012).
8. Saz, H. J. & Vidrine, A. J. R. The mechanism of formation of succinate
and propionate byAscaris lumbricoidesmuscle.J. Biol. Chem.234,
2001– 2005 (1959).
9. Saz, H. J. & Lescure, O. L. The functions of phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase and malic enzyme in the anaerobic formation of
succinate byAscaris lumbricoides. Comp. Biochem. Physiol.30,
49– 60 (1969).
10. Rahman, S. M. & Mettrick, D. F. Carbohydrate intermediary meta-
bolism inHymenolepis microstoma(Cestoda).Int. J. Parasitol.12,
155– 162 (1982).
11. Martin, W. F., Tielens, A. G. M. & Mentel, M. L.Mitochondria and
Anaerobic Energy Metabolism in EukaryotesChs. 18 and 19 (Walter
de Gruyter GmbH, 2021).
12. Preza, M. et al. Stage-speciﬁc transcriptomic analysis of the model
cestode Hymenolepis microstoma. Genomics113,6 2 0– 632 (2021).
13. Roberts Buceta, P. M. et al. The kynurenine pathway is essential for
rhodoquinone biosynthesis inCaenorhabditis elegans. J. Biol.
Chem. 294, 11047– 11053 (2019).
14. del Borrelo, S. et al. Rhodoquinone biosynthesis inC. elegans
requires precursors generated by the kynurenine pathway.Elife 8,
e48165 (2019).
15. Goncalves, J. et al. Succinatedehydrogenase-regulated phos-
phoenolpyruvate carboxykinase sustains copulationﬁtness in
aging C. elegansmales. iScience23,1 0 0 9 9 0( 2 0 2 0 ) .
Author contributions
R.C., L.R., and G.S: conceptualization, discussion, and writing.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Gustavo Salinas.
Peer review informationNature Communicationsthanks L. Rene Garcia
and Shijiao Huang for their contribution to the peer review of this work.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open AccessThis article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this license, visithttp://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2023
Matters arising https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-39510-5
Nature Communications|         (2023) 14:3938 3