Citation: Kong, J.; Yao, Z.; Chen, J.;
Zhao, Q.; Li, T.; Dong, M.; Bai, Y.; Liu,
Y.; Lin, Z.; Xie, Q.; et al. Comparative
Transcriptome Analysis Unveils
Regulatory Factors Influencing Fatty
Liver Development in Lion-Head
Geese under High-Intake Feeding
Compared to Normal Feeding. Vet.
Sci. 2024, 11, 366. https://doi.org/
10.3390/vetsci11080366
Academic Editors: Ianni Andrea
and Guillermo Tellez-Isaias
Received: 19 May 2024
Revised: 13 July 2024
Accepted: 1 August 2024
Published: 11 August 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
veterinary
sciences
Article
Comparative Transcriptome Analysis Unveils Regulatory Factors
Influencing Fatty Liver Development in Lion-Head Geese under
High-Intake Feeding Compared to Normal Feeding
Jie Kong 1,2,3,4 , Ziqi Yao 1,2,3,4 , Junpeng Chen 5, Qiqi Zhao 1,2,3,4 , Tong Li 1,2,3,4 , Mengyue Dong 1,2,3,4 ,
Yuhang Bai 1,2,3,4 , Yuanjia Liu 6, Zhenping Lin 5, Qingmei Xie 1,2,3,4, * and Xinheng Zhang 1,2,3,4, *
1 State Key Laboratory of Swine and Poultry Breeding Industry & Heyuan Branch, Guangdong Provincial
Laboratory of Lingnan Modern Agricultural Science and Technology, College of Animal Science, South China
Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China; dreamgirl0623@stu.scau.edu.cn (J.K.);
ziqiy@stu.scau.edu.cn (Z.Y.); qiqi-zhao@stu.scau.edu.cn (Q.Z.); ngwjsm@stu.scau.edu.cn (T.L.);
20223139018@stu.scau.edu.cn (M.D.); 20223139001@stu.scau.edu.cn (Y.B.)
2 Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of AgroAnimal Genomics and Molecular Breeding, College of Animal
Science, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China
3 Guangdong Engineering Research Center for Vector Vaccine of Animal Virus, Guangzhou 510642, China
4 Zhongshan Innovation Center, South China Agricultural University, Zhongshan 528400, China
5 Shantou Baisha Research Institute of Original Species of Poultry and Stock, Shantou 515000, China;
chenjunpeng02@scau.edu.cn (J.C.); linzp02@scau.edu.cn (Z.L.)
6 College of Coastal Agricultural Sciences, Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang 524088, China;
liuyuanjia@gdou.edu.cn
* Correspondence: qmx@scau.edu.cn (Q.X.); xhzhang@scau.edu.cn (X.Z.)
Simple Summary: The study’s findings on differential gene expression in lion-head geese under
high-energy intake conditions could guide future research on the genetic basis of fatty liver. The
identification of differentially expressed genes, including mRNAs, circRNAs, and lncRNAs, provides
a foundation for understanding the molecular underpinnings of energy metabolism and fat deposition
in the goose species. Understanding these genetic factors may inform targeted interventions for
improved health and breeding strategies, with potential applications in poultry husbandry and
comparative genomics.
Abstract: The lion-head goose is the only large goose species in China, and it is one of the largest
goose species in the world. Lion-head geese have a strong tolerance for massive energy intake and
show a priority of fat accumulation in liver tissue through special feeding. Therefore, the aim of
this study was to investigate the impact of high feed intake compared to normal feeding conditions
on the transcriptome changes associated with fatty liver development in lion-head geese. In this
study, 20 healthy adult lion-head geese were randomly assigned to a control group (CONTROL,
n = 10) and high-intake-fed group (CASE, n = 10). After 38 d of treatment, all geese were sacrificed,
and liver samples were collected. Three geese were randomly selected from the CONTROL and
CASE groups, respectively, to perform whole-transcriptome analysis to analyze the key regulatory
genes. We identified 716 differentially expressed mRNAs, 145 differentially expressed circRNAs,
and 39 differentially expressed lncRNAs, including upregulated and downregulated genes. GO
enrichment analysis showed that these genes were significantly enriched in molecular function.
The node degree analysis and centrality metrics of the mRNA–lncRNA–circRNA triple regulatory
network indicate the presence of crucial functional nodes in the network. We identified differentially
expressed genes, including HSPB9, Pgk1, Hsp70, ME2, malic enzyme, HSP90, FADS1, transferrin,
FABP, PKM2, Serpin2, and PKS, and we additionally confirmed the accuracy of sequencing at the
RNA level. In this study, we studied for the first time the important differential genes that regulate
fatty liver in high-intake feeding of the lion-head goose. In summary, these differentially expressed
genes may play important roles in fatty liver development in the lion-head goose, and the functions
and mechanisms should be investigated in future studies.
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366. https://doi.org/10.3390/vetsci11080366 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/vetsci
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 2 of 17
Keywords: lion-head goose; transcriptome; high intake; feeding; fatty liver
1. Introduction
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is one of the most common chronic liver
diseases, with a prevalence rate of around 25% globally [ 1]. A study spanning nearly
30 years has showed that the disease burden of NAFLD in the Chinese population has been
rising significantly in recent years and is associated with multiple risk factors [2,3]. Research
on fatty liver mainly consists of observing the clinical characteristics of mice after specific
gene editing or studying the safety and efficacy of specific drugs for patients with NAFLD.
Currently, clinical research on fatty liver patients is limited to mild symptoms and late-stage
studies and, because of the complex, multidirectional pathophysiology involved in NAFLD,
the perfect animal model representing the complete NAFLD spectrum in a workable time
frame does not exist [ 4,5]. Interestingly, geese have a special fat deposition pattern and
have a very high capacity for accumulating fat, which can cause the size of the liver to
increase several times after overfeeding with a high-energy diet rich in carbohydrates.
This distinctive genetic characteristic of the goose has been taken advantage of to produce
foie gras. Research suggests that the fatty livers of geese produced by overfeeding have
similar characteristics to human non-alcoholic fatty liver, and their serum enzyme levels
are close to those of patients with NAFLD [6]. Other studies have shown that compared
to other mammals, the inflammatory reaction and endoplasmic reticulum stress of geese
are suppressed to some extent, indicating that geese may have protection for the liver and
prevent serious diseases [7]. Therefore, through artificially controlling the filling feed, the
growth of the liver can be controlled, which has good potential for research into the severity
of fatty liver and as a model for human NAFLD [8].
At the same time, the nutritional value of fattened goose liver is very high. With
the improvement of people’s living standards, the demand for fattened goose liver will
gradually increase. The variety of goose is an important factor affecting fatty goose liver.
Among different breeds of geese, lion-head geese, due to their large size and strong
digestive capacity, are very conducive to feeding and producing liver, making them one of
the most ideal varieties for producing fatty goose liver [9–11]. France is the world’s largest
producer of foie gras. During the fattening process, breeders use artificial methods to insert
a 15-cm-long tube into the goose’s esophagus, repeatedly filling it with feed and force-
feeding, which rapidly increases the liver’s weight, size, and fat content. The production
of foie gras, especially the force-feeding method, has long been a focal point of animal
welfare controversy. This practice has been legally restricted or banned in some countries
and regions. As public awareness of animal welfare increases and technology advances,
the foie gras industry may continue to develop, and it is necessary to continuously improve
production methods to reduce the negative impact on animals.
The ancestor of lion-head goose is the lion-head wild goose, which is the world’s
largest goose species with the beautiful name of “World Goose King” [12,13]. It has a large
head and tubercles so it is called the lion-head goose. At present, the main producing area
of the lion-head goose is Chenghai District, Shantou City, Guangdong Province. After
continuous selection and breeding, the current lion-head goose has the characteristics of fast
growth, rough feeding, strong adaptability, and low environmental requirements [14]. The
adult domestic geese from similar regions vary greatly in weight and size. The lion-head
goose in Shantou, Guangdong Province, has a large body, a deep and wide head, and five
large sarcomas on the front and side of the face [ 15]. The adult weight of the lion-head
goose is 9~10 kg for males and 7.5~9 kg for females, and it grows rapidly and has rich
muscles [16]. At present, there is no relevant research on the fatty liver of the lion-head
goose. Therefore, the research on the fatty liver of the lion-head goose can not only find the
key regulatory gene for the fatty liver of the lion-head goose when preserving the original
excellent traits from breeding but also can effectively improve its economic benefits. The
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 3 of 17
lion-head goose can become a good research model for different degrees of fatty liver in
humans, providing a reference for the study of fat metabolism disorders in humans.
In this study, the lion-head geese populations in Shantou were selected for whole-
transcriptome sequencing from their liver tissues. First, 716 differentially expressed mRNAs
of liver between high-intake and normal feeding were identified by RNA-seq. Second, the
relative expression differences between high-intake and normally fed geese of different
mRNAs were analyzed by qRT-PCR. HSPB9, Pgk1, Hsp70, ME2, malic enzyme, HSP90, and
FADS1were highly expressed in geese with high intake. Third, the critical lncRNA–mRNA–
circRNA regulatory network of livers was constructed in the high-intake-fed and normally
fed lion-head geese. This will help us to understand the molecular mechanism of fatty liver
development in lion-head geese from transcriptomic perspectives.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Animal Samples
The lion-head geese were treated in accordance with the South China Agricultural
University Committee of Animal Experiments and this was approved by the bioethics
committee of ULPGC (SYXK2019-0136).
2.2. Animal Handling and Sample Collection
Twenty healthy adult lion-head geese at 120 days of age, which were purebred, were
obtained from the Shantou Baisha Research Institute of Original Species of Poultry and
Stock. Ten lion-head geese were randomly selected as the high-intake-fed group (labeled as
CASE), while another ten lion-head geese were selected as the control group (labeled as
CONTROL). The lion-head geese chosen for this study were raised in enclosed enclosures
under the same environmental conditions, with each group in a separate dedicated isolator.
After more than 10 generations of selective breeding, the lion-head geese involved in this
study belonged to the same original population, with consistent body size and health
status. All of the lion-head geese had free access to water at all times [ 17]. All of the
geese were provided with the same diet consisting of 10% crude protein, 12% coarse fiber,
0.33~1% calcium, 0.25~0.8% water-soluble oxide, 0.55% lysine, 1.5% crude fat, 12% crude
ash, 0.3~0.9% methionine, and 0.2% total phosphorus. However, the two groups differed
in terms of daily feeding times. The control group had free access to the diet throughout
the day and consumed an average of 356 g (energy level 5.08 MJ/Kg) of feed per day. The
feeding procedure for the high-intake-fed group was similar to what is used in the industry
to produce foie gras. The diet included rice boiled for 60 min and more. The birds were
artificially force-fed twice a day for days 1~3, three times a day for days 4~6, four times
a day for days 7~25, and three times on day 26. The meals were 200 g for days 1~3. The
meals on day 4 were 300 g and fed every day until the end. On day 38, the day before the
birds were sacrificed, all geese were deprived of feed overnight. There was a difference
of 81.44 MJ in energy intake between the two groups for each goose. The geese at the end
of the study were euthanized by the intravenous administration of sodium pentobarbital
(100 mg/kg body weight). The body weight of each goose was recorded prior to euthanasia,
including 10 female and 10 male lion-head geese. Liver weight and size were also recorded
for each goose after euthanasia.
2.3. Total RNA-Seq and Quality Control
Liver sample extracts from high-intake-fed lion-head geese and normally fed lion-head
geese were randomly selected to make the libraries (3 biorepeats per group), and each
library originated from the RNA of a single individual. Total RNA was extracted using
the TRIzol reagent kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) in accordance with the manufac-
turer’s protocol. The concentration and purity of RNA were measured using the NanoDrop
2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA), based on the OD
ratio of 260/280, while the RNA concentration was quantified by fluorescence spectroscopy
(Qubit 2.0) [18]. Subsequently, RNA integrity was evaluated using the Bioanalyzer 2100 sys-
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 4 of 17
tem (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) [ 19]. Samples with an average RNA
integrity number (RIN) value of 7.59 (ranging from 7 to 8.6) were then sent to MingLead
Gene (Guangzhou, China) for the generation of paired-end libraries [ 20]. All libraries
were sequenced following Illumina’s protocols by MingLead Gene. MingLead Gene also
performed standard quality control and filtering to remove low-quality reads, providing
clean reads for subsequent analysis.
2.4. Preparing and Constructing cDNA Library
Total RNA was utilized as the input material for the RNA sample preparations. For the
lncRNA libraries, mRNA was purified from total RNA using probes to remove rRNA [21].
Fragmentation was carried out using divalent cations under elevated temperature in First
Strand Synthesis Reaction Buffer (5×). First-strand cDNA synthesis was performed using a
random hexamer primer and M-MuLV Reverse Transcriptase (RNase H) [22]. Subsequently,
second-strand cDNA synthesis was carried out using DNA Polymerase I and RNase H [22].
Any remaining overhangs were converted into blunt ends through exonuclease/polymerase
activities. Following the adenylation of 3′ ends of DNA fragments, NEBNext Adaptor with
a hairpin loop structure was ligated to prepare for hybridization [23]. To selectively isolate
cDNA fragments ranging from 370~420 base pairs (bp) in length, library fragments were
purified using the AMPure XP system (Beckman Coulter, Beverly, MA, USA). Subsequently,
3 µL of USER Enzyme (NEB, Ipswich, MA, USA) was used with the size-selected, adaptor-
ligated cDNA at 37 ◦C for 15 min, followed by 5 min at 95 ◦C before PCR amplification.
PCR was performed with Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase, universal PCR primers,
and Index (X) Primer. Finally, PCR products were purified (AMPure XP system), and the
library quality was assessed using the Agilent Fragment Analyzer 5400 system [24].
2.5. Transcriptome Sequence Data Analysis
For sequencing, the Illumina HiSeqTM 4000 platform was employed, and the samples
were sent to MingLead Gene Technology Co., Ltd. (Guangzhou, China). The raw data
underwent quality filtering. Initially, reads containing adapters were excluded, followed
by the exclusion of reads with N ratio exceeding 10%, reads with A bases, and low-quality
reads (where the number of bases with a mass value Q ≤ 20 constituted more than 50%
of the whole read) [25]. Subsequently, the short-read alignment tool Bowtie2 was utilized
to classify and compare the reads with ribosomes. Unmapped reads were retained for
subsequent transcriptome analysis [26]. Comparative analysis based on the goose genome
was performed using the HISAT2 software [27]. Sample expression levels were determined
using fragments per kilobase of transcript per million fragments mapped (FPKM), and the
sample repeatability was assessed through principal component analysis [28,29].
2.6. lncRNA and Circular RNA Identification
To identify lncRNAs, quality control is performed using Fastp to ensure that the RNA
sequencing data meet specified standards, including Q20 ≥ 40%, N bases <5, and read
length ≥50. Subsequently, rRNA is removed from the data using Bowtie2, with RNA-
Central serving as the rRNA database. Following this, the processed data are aligned
to the corresponding reference genome using Hisat2 to determine the position of RNA
fragments on the genome [30]. Stringtie is then employed to assemble transcripts from the
aligned data, identifying and stitching together all potential transcripts. To integrate tran-
script information from multiple samples, the merge parameter of Stringtie is applied for
consolidation. Gffcompare is utilized to compare the assembled GTF file with the GTF an-
notation file of the reference genome, assessing the consistency of the assembled transcripts
with known annotations. Ultimately, transcripts with potential lncRNA characteristics are
identified through further analysis and filtering.
Following this, CIRIquant is utilized for alignment to the reference genome using
Hisat2 and gene-level quantification is performed using Stringtie [ 31]. Simultaneously,
circRNA identification is conducted by aligning with the reference genome using bwa-mem,
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 5 of 17
and a circRNA reference sequence is constructed. The constructed circRNA sequence is then
employed as the reference genome for another round of alignment with Hisat2, allowing
the filtering of high-confidence reads originating from circular RNA. Subsequently, cir-
cRNA expression levels are quantified, and circRNA information is annotated. Differential
analysis of circRNAs is carried out to select circRNAs with significant differences.
2.7. Analysis of Differentially Expressed Genes
Gene expression levels were quantified using FPKM. By comparing the FPKM values
of genes, expression differences between the two groups were examined for both genes and
transcripts [32]. Screening of differentially expressed gene condition was carried out based
on a fold change >2 and a p-value <0.05 [33]. The sequencing data from the two groups
were compared, and the differentially expressed mRNAs were visualized using the ggplot2
software package to generate volcano plots [34]. These plots illustrated the magnitude of
expression differences and the statistical significance, providing an intuitive representation
of the gene distribution.
2.8. Function Enrichment Analysis of DEGs
Gene Ontology analysis was conducted to assess the differential expression data using
the HTseq software [35]. The R package edgeR was employed for the analysis of differential
expression [36]. The identification of differentially expressed and target genes was carried
out using KOBAS v2.0, employing a hypergeometric test [ 37,38]. Significantly enriched
gene sets were determined based on a p-value threshold of <0.05.
2.9. Quantitative Real-Time PCR (qRT-PCR) Verification
RNAs were extracted from liver tissue samples of the 3 CASE groups and 3 CON-
TROL groups for qRT-PCR verification. cDNA synthesis was performed using a Takara
reverse transcriptase kit (Takara, Dalian, China) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
Subsequently, qRT-PCR was carried out in a 20 µL reaction system comprising 10 µL of
SYBR Green Master Mix (Vazyme, Nanjing, China), 0.5 µL of PCR forward primer (10 µM),
0.5 µL of PCR reverse primer (10 µM), 1 µL of cDNA, and 8 µL of enzyme-free water. The
reaction system began to react at 95 ◦C for 3 min and then reacted at 95 ◦C (5 s) and 60 ◦C
(34 s) for a total of 40 cycles. The reaction was carried out in three separate wells, with
GAPDH as an internal reference, and the relative RNA expression level was calculated
using the 2−∆∆Ct value [39]. A t-test was performed to determine statistical significance,
and the results were presented as mean ± standard deviation. For validation, we randomly
selected 11 differentially expressed mRNAs from the sequencing group, including 7 up-
regulated mRNAs (Gene ID: HSPB9, Pgk, Hsp70, ME2, malic enzyme, HSP90, FADS1) and
4 downregulated mRNAs (Gene ID: transferrin,FABP, PKS, Serpin2). The primer sequences
for these 11 genes are provided in Table 1.
Table 1. The primer sequences of gene for RT-qPCR.
Gene ID Regulation Forward Primer 5 ′→3′ Reverse Primer 5′→3′
Transferrin Down GCCTTATTCTGGATATTCTG CTCATACTCGTCCTTCTC
FABP Down GAGATATTAAGCCTGTTGTTG TTGCCGTCCTAGTAGTA
PKS Down AAGAGGAGAAGCAATATC CTGTGATGATGTAGACT
Serpin2 Down GAAGAGGAGGAGGAAGAG GAGCAGCGTCATAATGT
HSPB9 Up AGGAAGGTGGTGCTGGTG CTCGTACTTGTAGAAGG
Pgk Up CATTATTGGTGGTGGGATACA GTGCTGACATGGCTAACTT
Hsp70 Up TACCTCAGATTGAAGTAACCT CTTGCCAGTGCTCTTATC
ME2 Up CAACTGCTGAGGTAATAG GTGCTGAATTGTGACTAA
Malic enzyme Up ATAGCAAACCTCATTGTCAT CGAGTCAACCATCCATATC
HSP90 Up GCATTCTCAGTTCATTGG TTCTTCAGCCTCATCATC
FADS1 Up CCTGGTACTTCTGGAATGA TTGAGCCCTATGGTGTAG
GAPDH / GGTGGTGCTAAGCGTGTCAT CCCTCCACAATGCCAAAGTT
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 6 of 17
2.10. Statistical Analysis
GraphPad Prism 8.0 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA) was used for statistical
analysis. Paired Student’s t-tests were performed between normally fed livers and high-
intake-fed livers. The statistical significance was defined as p < 0.05.
3. Results
3.1. Phenotypic Changes in the Liver of Lion-Head Geese Following High-Intake Feeding
To comprehensively analyze the whole-transcriptome of livers in lion-head geese,
we collected liver data (10 geese per group) from different treatment groups including
high-intake-fed and normally fed lion-head geese at the same time. The liver phenotype,
weights, and size, as well as body weight of high-intake-fed lion-head geese, exhibited
significant differences compared to those of normally fed lion-head geese at the end of the
fattening process (Figure 1A). Tissues associated with lipid metabolism showed increased
weight after the fattening period, with the liver exhibiting the highest relative weight
increase of 1.8-fold (p < 0.01) (Figure 1B), thereby contributing significantly to the overall
weight gain in high-intake-fed lion-head geese (p < 0.05) (Figure 1D). Additionally, upon
assessing the liver and body weight, we observed a substantial increase in liver size of
high-intake-fed compared to normally fed lion-head geese (Figure 1C).
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 18 
 
 
Transferrin Down GCCTTATTCTGGATATTCTG CTCATACTCGTCCTTCTC 
FABP Down GAGATATTAAGCCTGTTGTTG TTGCCGTCCTAGTAGTA 
PKS Down AAGAGGAGAAGCAATATC CTGTGATGATGTAGACT 
Serpin2 Down GAAGAGGAGGAGGAAGAG GAGCAGCGTCATAATGT 
HSPB9 Up AGGAAGGTGGTGCTGGTG CTCGTACTTGTAGAAGG 
Pgk Up CATTATTGGTGGTGGGATACA GTGCTGACATGGCTAACTT 
Hsp70 Up TACCTCAGATTGAAGTAACCT CTTGCCAGTGCTCTTATC 
ME2 Up CAACTGCTGAGGTAATAG GTGCTGAATTGTGACTAA 
Malic enzyme Up ATAGCAAACCTCATTGTCAT CGAGTCAACCATCCATATC 
HSP90 Up GCATTCTCAGTTCATTGG TTCTTCAGCCTCATCATC 
FADS1 Up CCTGGTACTTCTGGAATGA TTGAGCCCTATGGTGTAG 
GAPDH / GGTGGTGCTAAGCGTGTCAT CCCTCCACAATGCCAAAGTT 
2.10. Statistical Analysis 
GraphPad Prism 8.0 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA, USA) was used for statistical 
analysis. Paired Student’s t-tests were performed between normally fed livers and high-
intake-fed livers. The statistical signiﬁcance was deﬁned as p < 0.05. 
3. Results 
3.1. Phenotypic Changes in the Liver of Lion-Head Geese Following High-Intake Feeding  
To comprehensively analyze the whole-transcriptome of livers in lion-head geese, we 
collected liver data (10 geese per group) from diﬀerent treatment groups including high-
intake-fed and normally fed lion-head geese at the same time. The liver phenotype, 
weights, and size, as well as body weight of high-intake-fed lion-head geese, exhibited 
signiﬁcant diﬀerences compared to those of normally fed lion-head geese at the end of the 
fattening process (Figure 1A). Tissues associated with lipid metabolism showed increased 
weight after the fattening period, with the liver exhibiting the highest relative weight in-
crease of 1.8-fold (p < 0.01) (Figure 1B), thereby contributing signi ﬁcantly to the overall 
weight gain in high-intake-fed lion-head geese (p < 0.05) (Figure 1D). Additionally, upon 
assessing the liver and body weight, we observed a substantial increase in liver size of 
high-intake-fed compared to normally fed lion-head geese (Figure 1C). 
 
Figure 1. Phenotypic changes in liver and body weight after high-intake feeding in lion-head geese.
(A) Goose liver in the groups of high-intake feeding and normal feeding. ( B) The weight of liver.
(C) The size of the goose liver. (D) The weight of goose (** p < 0.01; * p < 0.05).
3.2. Characterization of the Liver Tissue Transcriptome Data in Lion-Head Geese
We obtained a total of 125,417,714 raw reads for the liver tissue libraries of high-intake-
fed lion-head geese (n = 3) and 126,982,352 raw reads for the libraries from normally fed
lion-head geese (n = 3) through RNA-seq analysis. After filtering and removal of sequence
reads with adapters and low quality, we obtained 39,277,879 and 40,199,239 clean reads
for high-intake-fed and normally fed lion-head geese. The rates of clean reads mapped
were 93.94% and 94.97%. The Q20 and Q30 values exceeded 97% and 93%, respectively,
and the GC content was above 45% [40]. Finally, 71.53 Gb of clean data were obtained, with
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 7 of 17
each sample averaging around 11 Gb. Detailed analysis data of the sequencing samples are
presented in Table 2.
Table 2. Summary of read mapping of the sample genome.
Groups CONTROL1 CONTROL3 CONTROL5 CASE2 CASE6 CASE7
Raw Reads 41,742,960 43,317,885 41,921,507 40,449,692 41,793,874 43,174,148
Clean Reads 39,528,644 41,176,548 39,892,524 37,758,464 39,236,814 40,838,358
Raw Base (G) 12.52 13.0 12.58 12.13 12.54 12.95
Clean Base (G) 11.86 12.35 11.97 11.33 11.77 12.25
Effective Rate (%) 94.70 95.06 95.16 93.35 93.88 94.59
Error Rate (%) 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03 0.03
Q20 (%) 97.77 97.84 97.67 97.79 97.69 97.77
Q30 (%) 93.90 94.06 93.59 93.97 93.78 93.94
GC Content (%) 45.99 46.62 45.69 47.66 48.03 46.73
3.3. Overview of Whole-Transcriptome Sequencing in Lion-Head Geese
To obtain whole and accurate mRNA transcripts of the goose liver, we constructed
six cDNA libraries (CASE2, CASE6, CASE7, CONTROL1, CONTROL3, and CONTROL)
from liver tissue of lion-head geese. Using RNA-seq, we detected 21,008 mRNA transcripts,
3549 lncRNA transcripts, and 10,284 circRNA transcripts. Transcript expression was quan-
tified using FPKM value [41]. The FPKM distribution of mRNAs is shown in Figure 2A,
while the expression of different samples is displayed as a violin chart (Figure 2B). To effec-
tively identify the most significant element and structures in the data, we represented the
complex composition relationship of samples using horizontal and vertical coordinates [42].
This approach facilitated the exploration of the distance relationship between samples.
The six samples were divided into two groups, which showed satisfactory repeatability
(Figure 2C). Furthermore, we generated a hierarchical clustering diagram to visually depict
the relationships between samples. Unsupervised clustering also confirmed the distinct
expression patterns among liver tissues (Figure 2D). Sequences showed a reliable clustering
effect, which ensured the veracity of the subsequent analysis [43].
3.4. Differential Expression of mRNA, lncRNA, and circRNA between Liver Samples from
High-Intake-Fed and Normally Fed Lion-Head Geese
A total of 716 differentially expressed mRNAs, 39 differentially expressed lncRNAs,
and 145 differentially expressed circRNAs were identified in livers by comparing sequenc-
ing results between high-intake-fed lion-head geese and normally fed lion-head geese.
Among these, 335 mRNAs were upregulated and 381 mRNAs were downregulated in the
group of high-intake-fed lion-head geese compared to the group of normally fed lion-head
geese (Figure 3A). Additionally, 16 lncRNAs were upregulated and 23 lncRNAs were
downregulated (Figure 3B), while 91 circRNAs were upregulated and 54 circRNAs were
downregulated in livers between the group of high-intake-fed lion-head geese and the
group of normally fed lion-head geese (Figure 3C). These results indicate a significant
difference in the transcriptome level between high-intake-fed lion-head geese and nor-
mally fed lion-head geese in the volcano plot, in which each point represents a transcript,
with the x-axis representing the log2 fold change in transcript expression between the
two groups and the y-axis representing the negative logarithm of the p-value associated
with the transcript changes. A larger absolute value on the x-axis indicates a greater
difference in expression between the two groups, while a higher y-axis value indicates a
more significant difference.
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 8 of 17
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Overview of whole-transcriptome sequencing. (A) The density distribution of transcrip-
tome was according to log10 (FPKM), original gene read counts were normalized using the FPKM 
method. (B) The 6 −sample expression violin plot. ( C) The principal component analysis (PCA) is 
useful for exploring the distance relationship between the 6 samples. (D) Pearson’s correlation ma-
trix for mRNA, lncRNA, and circRNA proﬁles. 
3.4. Diﬀerential Expression of mRNA, lncRNA, and circRNA between Liver Samples from High-
Intake-Fed and Normally Fed Lion-Head Geese  
A total of 716 diﬀerentially expressed mRNAs, 39 diﬀerentially expressed lncRNAs, 
and 145 diﬀerentially expressed circRNAs were identiﬁed in livers by comparing sequenc-
ing results between high-intak e-fed lion-head geese and normally fed lion-head geese. 
Among these, 335 mRNAs were upregulated and 381 mRNAs were downregulated in the 
group of high-intake-fed lion-head geese comp ared to the group of normally fed lion-
head geese (Figure 3A). Additionally, 16 lncRNAs were upregulated and 23 lncRNAs were 
Figure 2. Overview of whole-transcriptome sequencing. (A) The density distribution of transcriptome
was according to log10 (FPKM), original gene read counts were normalized using the FPKM method.
(B) The 6 −sample expression violin plot. ( C) The principal component analysis (PCA) is useful
for exploring the distance relationship between the 6 samples. (D) Pearson’s correlation matrix for
mRNA, lncRNA, and circRNA profiles.
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 9 of 17
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 18 
 
 
downregulated (Figure 3B), while 91 circRNAs were upregulated and 54 circRNAs were 
downregulated in livers between the group of high-intake-fed lion-head geese and the 
group of normally fed lion-head geese (Figure 3C). These results indicate a signi ﬁcant 
diﬀerence in the transcriptome level between high-intake-fed lion-head geese and nor-
mally fed lion-head geese in the volcano plot, in which each point represents a transcript, 
with the x-axis representing the log2 fold change in transcript expression between the two 
groups and the y-axis representing the negative logarithm of the p-value associated with 
the transcript changes. A larger absolute value on the x-axis indicates a greater diﬀerence 
in expression between the two groups, while a higher y-axis value indicates a more sig-
niﬁcant diﬀerence.  
 
Figure 3. Identiﬁcation and analysis of mRNA, lncRNA, and circRNA associated with fa tty liver. 
(A) Volcano plots of DEGs in mRNA. ( B) Volcano plots of DEGs in lncRNA. ( C) Volcano plots of 
DEGs in circRNA. Each dot in the plot represents a gene with its corresponding log2 fold change 
(FC) on the x-axis and p-value (log10) on the y-axis. The ho rizontal line indicates the signi ﬁcance 
threshold (false discovery rate <5%), whereas the vertical line segregates genes with logFC >1.5. 
Gray represents no signi ﬁcant diﬀerence between the two groups, red indicates the upregulated 
genes, and blue indicates the downregulated genes. 
3.5. Functional Enrichment by GO Analysis  
To gain a better understanding of the functions of these DEGs, we performed addi-
tional Gene Ontology (GO) analyses between  high-intake-fed lion-head geese and nor-
mally fed lion-head geese [44]. The KOBAS to ols were used to conduct GO enrichment 
analysis for the DEGs [45]. Our analysis revealed a signiﬁcant enrichment of DEGs in the 
oxidation–reduction process. In brief, we initially identiﬁed the DEGs, followed by a func-
tional enrichment analysis of these genes in the liver of high-intake-fed lion-head geese. 
Notably, the most enriched GO terms were  oxidation–reduction process (GO.0005576) 
and DNA-binding transcription factor acti vity (GO.0003700). We employed the same 
methodology to predict the functions of the lncRNAs and circRNAs. The top three enrich-
ment terms of the DEGs are oxidation–reduction process, DNA-binding transcription fac-
tor activity, and extracellular region. The top eight enrichment terms are presented in Fig-
ure 4, including oxidation–reduction process, DNA-binding transcription factor activity, 
Figure 3. Identification and analysis of mRNA, lncRNA, and circRNA associated with fatty liver.
(A) Volcano plots of DEGs in mRNA. ( B) Volcano plots of DEGs in lncRNA. ( C) Volcano plots of
DEGs in circRNA. Each dot in the plot represents a gene with its corresponding log2 fold change
(FC) on the x-axis and p-value (log10) on the y-axis. The horizontal line indicates the significance
threshold (false discovery rate <5%), whereas the vertical line segregates genes with logFC >1.5. Gray
represents no significant difference between the two groups, red indicates the upregulated genes,
and blue indicates the downregulated genes.
3.5. Functional Enrichment by GO Analysis
To gain a better understanding of the functions of these DEGs, we performed addi-
tional Gene Ontology (GO) analyses between high-intake-fed lion-head geese and normally
fed lion-head geese [44]. The KOBAS tools were used to conduct GO enrichment analysis
for the DEGs [45]. Our analysis revealed a significant enrichment of DEGs in the oxidation–
reduction process. In brief, we initially identified the DEGs, followed by a functional
enrichment analysis of these genes in the liver of high-intake-fed lion-head geese. Notably,
the most enriched GO terms were oxidation–reduction process (GO.0005576) and DNA-
binding transcription factor activity (GO.0003700). We employed the same methodology
to predict the functions of the lncRNAs and circRNAs. The top three enrichment terms of
the DEGs are oxidation–reduction process, DNA-binding transcription factor activity, and
extracellular region. The top eight enrichment terms are presented in Figure 4, including
oxidation–reduction process, DNA-binding transcription factor activity, extracellular re-
gion, extracellular space, heme binding, growth factor activity, and collagen-containing
extracellular matrix.
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 10 of 17
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 18 
 
 
extracellular region, extracellular space, heme binding, growth factor activity, and colla-
gen-containing extracellular matrix.  
 
Figure 4. Functional analyses of signi ﬁcantly enriched trends. The top 8 signi ﬁcant terms at the 
mRNA level. The size of dots shows the number of DEGs clustered in the same terms. The color of 
dots indicates the p-value. 
3.6. Construction and Visualization of lncRNA–mRNA–circRNA Network  
Subsequently, we constructed a critical  lncRNA–mRNA–circRNA regulatory net-
work of livers in the high-intake-fed and normally fed lion-head geese (Figure 5). In Figure 
5A, a triple regulatory network involving mRNA–lncRNA–circRNA is illustrated. The au-
gustus node represents mRNA, the Contig node represents circRNA, and the MSTRG 
node represents lncRNA. From the network, it is evident that there is a close interconnec-
tion among diﬀerent RNAs, indicating the presence of intricate regulatory relationships 
among the three. The x-axis of the betweenne ss centrality graph represents RNA types, 
while the y-axis represents the betweenness centrality values corresponding to various 
RNAs. Betweenness centrality measures a node’s ability to act as an intermediary in the 
network. In Figure 5B, it is observed that lncRNAs exhibit relatively high betweenness 
centrality, indicating that these lncRNAs may play crucial bridging roles in the network, 
possessing key regulatory functions. 
Figure 4. Functional analyses of significantly enriched trends. The top 8 significant terms at the
mRNA level. The size of dots shows the number of DEGs clustered in the same terms. The color of
dots indicates the p-value.
3.6. Construction and Visualization of lncRNA–mRNA–circRNA Network
Subsequently, we constructed a critical lncRNA–mRNA–circRNA regulatory network
of livers in the high-intake-fed and normally fed lion-head geese (Figure 5). In Figure 5A, a
triple regulatory network involving mRNA–lncRNA–circRNA is illustrated. The augus-
tus node represents mRNA, the Contig node represents circRNA, and the MSTRG node
represents lncRNA. From the network, it is evident that there is a close interconnection
among different RNAs, indicating the presence of intricate regulatory relationships among
the three. The x-axis of the betweenness centrality graph represents RNA types, while
the y-axis represents the betweenness centrality values corresponding to various RNAs.
Betweenness centrality measures a node’s ability to act as an intermediary in the network.
In Figure 5B, it is observed that lncRNAs exhibit relatively high betweenness centrality,
indicating that these lncRNAs may play crucial bridging roles in the network, possessing
key regulatory functions.
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 11 of 17
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Construction and visualization of  lncRNA–mRNA–circRNA network. ( A) lncRNA–
mRNA–circRNA network structure. ( B) The betweenness centrality di ﬀerence among lncRNAs, 
mRNAs, and circRNAs. (C) The closeness centrality diﬀerence among lncRNAs, mRNAs, and circR-
NAs. (D) The degree centrality diﬀerence among lncRNAs, mRNAs, and circRNAs. (E) Node degree 
of the lncRNAs, mRNAs, and circRNAs. 
The closeness centrality graph illustrates the closeness centrality measure, which as-
sesses the average distance of a node to other nodes in the network. In Figure 5C, it is 
observed that the closeness centrality of the three RNA types is relatively high, with no 
signiﬁcant diﬀerences. This suggests the potential presence of close interactions and reg-
ulatory relationships among the three RNA ty pes. Figure 5D represents the degree cen-
trality graph, where degree centrality measures the number of direct connections a node 
has with other nodes. In the graph, mRNA exhibits the highest average degree centrality, 
Figure 5. Construction and visualization of lncRNA–mRNA–circRNA network. (A) lncRNA–mRNA–
circRNA network structure. ( B) The betweenness centrality difference among lncRNAs, mRNAs,
and circRNAs. ( C) The closeness centrality difference among lncRNAs, mRNAs, and circRNAs.
(D) The degree centrality difference among lncRNAs, mRNAs, and circRNAs. (E) Node degree of the
lncRNAs, mRNAs, and circRNAs.
The closeness centrality graph illustrates the closeness centrality measure, which
assesses the average distance of a node to other nodes in the network. In Figure 5C, it
is observed that the closeness centrality of the three RNA types is relatively high, with
no significant differences. This suggests the potential presence of close interactions and
regulatory relationships among the three RNA types. Figure 5D represents the degree
centrality graph, where degree centrality measures the number of direct connections a node
has with other nodes. In the graph, mRNA exhibits the highest average degree centrality,
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 12 of 17
followed by lncRNA, and circRNA shows the lowest. This indicates that mRNA may have
a greater regulatory potential in the network. And Figure 5E presents the results of the node
degree analysis of the network. The x-axis represents the degree of nodes, while the y-axis
represents the number of nodes. The results conform to a power-law distribution, indicating
that the majority of “ordinary” nodes have few connections, while a minority of “hub”
nodes have a significantly higher number of connections. This observation suggests that
the network exhibits typical characteristics of a biological scale-free network. In general, the
presence of a scale-free distribution and modular characteristics in this network indicates
the existence of functional nodes associated with fatty liver in lion-head geese.
3.7. Validation of Candidate Genes by qRT-PCR
To validate the consistency of mRNA expression levels with the sequencing analysis
data, we randomly selected seven upregulated genes and four downregulated genes from
liver tissue for qRT-PCR. Based on the FPKM value, we observed significantly higher
expression levels of FADS1, HSP70, HSP90, M2, ME, PgK, and HSPB9 in high-intake-fed
lion-head geese, whereas the expression levels of FABP , PKS, Serpin2, and transferrin in liver
tissues were significantly lower than those in normally fed lion-head geese (Figure 6B,D).
The expression trend of the mRNA, as determined by qRT-PCR, was consistent with those
observed in the RNA-seq based on FPKM values (Figure 6A,C), partially supporting the
high reliability of our RNA-seq data.
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 18 
 
 
followed by lncRNA, and circRNA shows the lowest. This indicates that mRNA may have 
a greater regulatory potential in the network.  And Figure 5E presents the results of the 
node degree analysis of the network. The x-axis represents the degree of nodes, while the 
y-axis represents the number of nodes. The results conform to a power-law distribution, 
indicating that the majority of “ordinary” nodes have few connections, while a minority of 
“hub” nodes have a significantly higher number of connections. This observation suggests 
that the network exhibits typical characteristics of a biological scale-free network. In general, 
the presence of a scale-free distribution and modular characteristics in this network indi-
cates the existence of functional nodes associated with fatty liver in lion-head geese. 
3.7. Validation of Candidate Genes by qRT-PCR 
To validate the consistency of mRNA expression levels with the sequencing analysis 
data, we randomly selected seven upregulated genes and four downregulated genes from 
liver tissue for qRT-PCR. Based on the FPKM value, we observed signiﬁcantly higher ex-
pression levels of FADS1, HSP70, HSP90, M2, ME, PgK, and HSPB9 in high-intake-fed 
lion-head geese, whereas the expression levels of FABP, PKS, Serpin2, and transferrin in 
liver tissues were signiﬁcantly lower than those in normally fed lion-head geese (Figure 
6B,D). The expression trend of the mRNA, as  deter mined by  qRT-PCR, w as  c onsistent 
with those observed in the RNA-seq based on FPKM values (Figure 6A,C), partially sup-
porting the high reliability of our RNA-seq data. 
 
Figure 6. Comparison and identiﬁcation of diﬀerentially expressed RNAs in high-intake feeding in 
lion-head geese liver tissue by qRT-PCR. ( A) The RNA-seq results revealed the upregulated genes 
by FPKM. (B) Veriﬁcation of the upregulated genes by RT-qPCR. (C) The RNA-seq results revealed 
the downregulated genes by FPKM. (D) Veriﬁcation of the downregulated genes by RT-qPCR. Log2 
FC is expressed as mean ± SD. n = 3. The statistical signiﬁcance of all genes reached p < 0.05 (*** p < 
0.001; ** p < 0.01; * p < 0.05). 
4. Discussion 
Foie gras, cherished for its unique texture and rich fat content, is a beloved delicacy 
and a culinary choice for many. It is abundant in high-quality fats, primarily monounsatu-
rated fatty acids, which contribute to its status as a high-energy food source [46,47]. Fats 
play a signiﬁcant role in foie gras, primarily deriving from the liver’s metabolic processes 
Figure 6. Comparison and identification of differentially expressed RNAs in high-intake feeding in
lion-head geese liver tissue by qRT-PCR. (A) The RNA-seq results revealed the upregulated genes by
FPKM. (B) Verification of the upregulated genes by RT-qPCR. (C) The RNA-seq results revealed the
downregulated genes by FPKM. (D) Verification of the downregulated genes by RT-qPCR. Log2 FC is
expressed as mean ± SD. n = 3. The statistical significance of all genes reached p < 0.05 (*** p < 0.001;
** p < 0.01; * p < 0.05).
4. Discussion
Foie gras, cherished for its unique texture and rich fat content, is a beloved delicacy
and a culinary choice for many. It is abundant in high-quality fats, primarily monoun-
saturated fatty acids, which contribute to its status as a high-energy food source [ 46,47].
Fats play a significant role in foie gras, primarily deriving from the liver’s metabolic pro-
cesses [48]. Geese are fed substantial amounts of feed, which contains a high proportion of
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 13 of 17
carbohydrates and other energy, stimulating the synthesis and storage of fat in the liver
cells to artificially increase the fat content [49,50]. The large amounts of feed are artificially
introduced directly into the geese’s stomachs to ensure they receive adequate energy. Due
to this high energy intake, the liver cells of the geese accelerate the synthesis and storage of
fat, leading to a significant enlargement of the liver size.
In this study, we conducted transcriptome analysis of gene regulatory networks to
compare the phenotypic changes in liver development between the high-intake-fed lion-
head goose and the normally fed goose. Simply put, we compared the differences in
lncRNA, circRNA, and mRNA expression in the livers of the two groups of geese, further
elucidating the molecular regulation that influences lipid accumulation in the liver of the
lion-head goose. Comparing the growth and hepatic fat traits between high-intake-fed
and normally fed lion-head geese will help us understand two distinct phenotypes with
similar genetic backgrounds [ 51]. Next, we identified differentially expressed genes in
the liver tissue transcriptomes of the high-intake-fed and normally fed lion-head geese.
Our analysis revealed 716 differentially expressed mRNAs, 145 differentially expressed
circRNAs, and 39 differentially expressed lncRNAs in livers, demonstrating significant
expression differences between the high-intake-fed and normally fed lion-head geese.
Specifically, compared to the normally fed geese, the liver tissue of the high-intake-fed
lion-head geese exhibited upregulation of 335 mRNA genes and downregulation of 381
mRNA genes. These results suggest that these differentially expressed genes may play
crucial roles in determining the developmental differences in the liver between the two
groups of geese.
Furthermore, we conducted the functional enrichment analysis to study the significant
differences between high-intake-fed and normally fed lion-head geese. GO enrichment
analysis revealed significant enrichment in the oxidative–reduction processes and DNA-
binding transcription factor activity. It has been suggested that mitochondrial oxidative
function plays a crucial role in the development of NAFLD, and hepatic steatosis may
not be a result of reduced mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation caused by mitochondrial
damage [52,53]. In this process, NAFLD can induce an elevation in mitochondrial function,
compensating for the increased demand for carbon intermediates and ATP caused by ele-
vated lipogenesis and gluconeogenesis [54]. The liver is a vital metabolic organ responsible
for the synthesis, breakdown, and regulation of various biomolecules, primarily achieved
through gene transcription [55,56]. The liver contains numerous specific DNA-binding
transcription factors, such as liver X receptors (LXRs), hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs),
and progesterone receptors [ 57]. These factors can bind to specific DNA sequences in
the promoter regions, recruiting co-activators or co-repressors to regulate the initiation
and rate of gene transcription [58]. The specificity of the transcription factors binding to
DNA provides a mechanism for precise regulation of gene expression in liver cells, thereby
enabling control and adaptation of metabolic processes.
Next, we selected a series of upregulated and downregulated mRNA to validate the
reliability and accuracy of the sequencing data. Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are a class of
widely expressed proteins in cells that play a vital role in protecting cells from damage and
promoting cellular recovery and repair processes under various stress conditions [59]. HSPs
play an important protective role in the liver of animals, particularly in the regulation of
intracellular lipid metabolism and oxidative stress [60]. This can also scientifically explain
why overfeeding can lead to upregulation of HSP expression in the lion-head goose. An
upregulated expression can be considered as an adaptive response of liver cells to stressful
conditions, aiming to protect liver cells from damage and maintain their function. PgK
is one of the key enzymes in the glycolytic pathway and participates in glycolysis [ 61].
After high-intake feeding, the glycolytic pathway in the liver may be affected, leading
to changes in the activity or expression levels of PgK in liver tissue, thereby influencing
lipid metabolism. Malic enzyme, a crucial enzyme in cellular energy and lipid metabolism,
plays a pivotal role in the metabolism of pyruvate and the generation of nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) [62]. Specifically, it catalyzes the conversion of
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 14 of 17
malate to pyruvate, simultaneously producing NADPH from NADP . Research indicates
that in instances of liver lipid accumulation disrupting hepatic lipid metabolism, there is a
significant increase in the activity or expression levels of malic enzyme. This underscores the
enzyme’s vital contribution as a primary provider of NADPH, essential for lipogenesis [63].
In the sequencing data of the lion-head goose, we simultaneously validated the expres-
sion of a subset of downregulated genes. Real-time quantitative PCR results showed
that the expression trends of differentially expressed RNAs were consistent with the
whole-transcriptome sequencing data. Hepatic steatosis is often accompanied by increased
inflammation and oxidative stress, indicating an imbalance in intracellular redox home-
ostasis [64,65]. Serpin2 possesses anti-inflammatory and antioxidant properties [66], and
the expression levels of Serpin2 may be negatively regulated due to the interplay between
inflammatory responses and disrupted lipid metabolism. FABPs belong to the lipocalin
family and participate in the transport and metabolism of fatty acids [ 67]. In the case
of hepatic lipid accumulation, abnormal expression or functional defects of FABPs may
disrupt intracellular lipid metabolism. Studies have indicated that FABPs are involved
in regulating inflammation-related signaling pathways and cytokine expression, thereby
affecting the severity of inflammatory responses and the progression of liver fibrosis [68].
Although there is a lack of direct research evidence on the relationship between fatty liver
and PKS, we validated that the expression of PKS in the liver of lion-head geese was lower
than in the liver of normally fed geese. Some studies suggest that PKS is involved in the
synthesis of polyketide compounds, and certain polyketides may play a role in regulating
lipid metabolism [69–71]. Further research is needed to confirm and explore the specific
relationship between fatty liver and PKS. The verification of the selected genes will help us
to understand the molecular mechanism of high-intake lion-headed goose liver from the
perspective of the transcriptome.
5. Conclusions
We utilized RNA-seq analysis to compare transcriptome of liver tissues between high-
intake-fed and normally fed lion-head geese. The expression of these differential genes
causes weight, size, and mass differences of liver observed between the high-intake-fed
lion-head goose and the normal goose. Meanwhile, we constructed the critical lncRNA–
mRNA–circRNA regulatory network of livers in the high-intake-fed and normally fed
lion-head geese. Conducting transcriptome analysis of the livers of lion-head geese in
Shantou is essential for gaining insights into gene expression regulation, liver development,
and cell function. This approach will aid in understanding the molecular mechanisms
behind fatty liver development in lion-head geese from a transcriptomic perspective. In the
future, comparative studies of liver transcriptomes across different goose species will be
instrumental in revealing the variations in liver tissue characteristics among these species.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.K., Z.Y. and J.C.; methodology, J.K., Z.Y. and J.C.; formal
analysis, J.K., Z.Y. and J.C.; investigation, Z.L. and Q.Z.; data curation, J.K.; supervision, T.L., Y.B. and
M.D.; writing—original draft preparation, J.K.; writing—review and editing, Y.L. and X.Z.; funding
acquisition, Q.X. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the STI 2030-Major Project (2023ZD04072), the Guangdong
Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (2023A1515010584), Heyuan Branch, Guangdong
Laboratory for Lingnan Modern Agriculture Project (DT20220003), the Natural Science Foundation of
Guangzhou (2023A04J1461), China Agriculture Research System of MOF and MARA (CARS-42-13),
Guangdong Provincial Key R&D Program (2020B020222001, 2019B020218004), the Construction
Project of Modern Agricultural Science and Technology Innovation Alliance in Guangdong Province
(2023KJ128, 2022KJ128, 2021KJ128, 2020KJ128) and the Special Project of the National Modern
Agricultural Industrial Technology System (CARS-41), the Science and Technology Program of
Guangdong Province, China (2020B1212060060) and the Provincial Science and Technology Special
Fund Project for Zhongshan City (Major Special Project + Task List Management Mode) (2021sdr003).
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 15 of 17
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki, and the animal study was reviewed and approved by South China Agricultural University
Committee of Animal Experiments, approval ID: SYXK2019-0136. Written informed consent was
obtained from the owners for the participation of their animals in this study.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in this study .
Data Availability Statement: All data generated or analyzed during this study were deposited in the
Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under accession number GSE243829.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors have no potential conflicts of interest with this manuscript.
References
1. Powell, E.E.; Wong, V .W.; Rinella, M. Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease. Lancet 2021, 397, 2212–2224. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Younossi, Z.; Tacke, F.; Arrese, M.; Chander Sharma, B.; Mostafa, I.; Bugianesi, E.; Wai-Sun Wong, V .; Yilmaz, Y.; George, J.; Fan, J.;
et al. Global Perspectives on Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease and Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis. Hepatology 2019, 69, 2672–2682.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Guo, X.; Yin, X.; Liu, Z.; Wang, J. Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD) Pathogenesis and Natural Products for Prevention
and Treatment. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 15489. [CrossRef]
4. Van Herck, M.A.; Vonghia, L.; Francque, S.M. Animal Models of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver Disease-A Starter’s Guide.Nutrients
2017, 9, 1072. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Santhekadur, P .K.; Kumar, D.P .; Sanyal, A.J. Preclinical models of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.J. Hepatol. 2018, 68, 230–237.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Geng, T.; Zhao, X.; Xia, L.; Liu, L.; Li, F.; Yang, B.; Wang, Q.; Montgomery, S.; Cui, H.; Gong, D. Supplementing dietary sugar
promotes endoplasmic reticulum stress-independent insulin resistance and fatty liver in goose. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
2016, 476, 665–669. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Tang, B.; Qiu, J.; Hu, S.; Li, L.; Wang, J. Role of stearyl-coenzyme A desaturase 1 in mediating the effects of palmitic acid on
endoplasmic reticulum stress, inflammation, and apoptosis in goose primary hepatocytes. Anim. Biosci. 2021, 34, 1210–1220.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Katz, D.L. Ducks, geese, faith, and fatty livers. Child. Obes. (Print) 2014, 10, 373–374. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Song, Z.; Shao, D.; Sun, X.X.; Niu, J.W.; Gong, D.Q. Molecular characterization, tissue expression, and polymorphism analysis of
liver-type fatty acid binding protein in Landes geese. Genet. Mol. Res. GMR 2015, 14, 389–399. [CrossRef]
10. Mourot, J.; Guy, G.; Lagarrigue, S.; Peiniau, P .; Hermier, D. Role of hepatic lipogenesis in the susceptibility to fatty liver in the
goose (Anser anser). Comp. Biochem. Physiology. Part B Biochem. Mol. Biol. 2000, 126, 81–87. [CrossRef]
11. Hong, L.; Sun, Z.; Xu, D.; Li, W.; Cao, N.; Fu, X.; Huang, Y.; Tian, Y.; Li, B. Transcriptome and lipidome integration unveils
mechanisms of fatty liver formation in Shitou geese. Poult. Sci. 2024, 103, 103280. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Zhao, Q.; Lin, Z.; Chen, J.; Xie, Z.; Wang, J.; Feng, K.; Lin, W.; Li, H.; Hu, Z.; Chen, W.; et al. Chromosome-level genome assembly
of goose provides insight into the adaptation and growth of local goose breeds. GigaScience 2022, 12, 1–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Fu, Z.; Ao, N.; Liang, X.; Chen, J.; Wang, Y.; Wang, Q.; Fu, J.; Liu, C.; Lu, L. Effects of fermented feed on growth performance,
serum biochemical indexes, antioxidant capacity, and intestinal health of lion-head goslings. Front. Vet. Sci. 2023, 10, 1284523.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Lu, L.; Chen, Y.; Wang, Z.; Li, X.; Chen, W.; Tao, Z.; Shen, J.; Tian, Y.; Wang, D.; Li, G.; et al. The goose genome sequence leads to
insights into the evolution of waterfowl and susceptibility to fatty liver. Genome Biol. 2015, 16, 89–99. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Zhao, Q.; Chen, J.; Zhang, X.; Xu, Z.; Lin, Z.; Li, H.; Lin, W.; Xie, Q. Genome-Wide Association Analysis Reveals Key Genes
Responsible for Egg Production of Lion Head Goose. Front. Genet. 2019, 10, 1391–1400. [CrossRef]
16. He, C.; Wu, H.; Lv, Y.; You, H.; Zha, L.; Li, Q.; Huang, Y.; Tian, J.; Chen, Q.; Shen, Y.; et al. Gastrointestinal Development and
Microbiota Responses of Geese to Honeycomb Flavonoids Supplementation. Front. Vet. Sci. 2021, 8, 739237. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Gumułka, M.; Połtowicz, K. Comparison of carcass traits and meat quality of intensively reared geese from a Polish genetic
resource flock to those of commercial hybrids. Poult. Sci. 2020, 99, 839–847. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Deben, C.; Zwaenepoel, K.; Boeckx, C.; Wouters, A.; Pauwels, P .; Peeters, M.; Lardon, F.; Baay, M.; Deschoolmeester, V . Expression
analysis on archival material revisited: Isolation and quantification of RNA extracted from FFPE samples. Diagn. Mol. Pathol. Am.
J. Surg. Pathol. Part B 2013, 22, 59–64. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Fleige, S.; Pfaffl, M.W. RNA integrity and the effect on the real-time qRT-PCR performance. Mol. Asp. Med. 2006, 27, 126–139.
[CrossRef]
20. Puchta, M.; Boczkowska, M.; Groszyk, J. Low RIN Value for RNA-Seq Library Construction from Long-Term Stored Seeds: A
Case Study of Barley Seeds. Genes 2020, 11, 1190. [CrossRef]
21. Rio, D.C.; Ares, M., Jr.; Hannon, G.J.; Nilsen, T.W. Removal of ribosomal subunits (and rRNA) from cytoplasmic extracts before
solubilization with SDS and deproteinization. Cold Spring Harb. Protoc. 2010, 2010, 5442. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Nardon, E.; Donada, M.; Bonin, S.; Dotti, I.; Stanta, G. Higher random oligo concentration improves reverse transcription yield of
cDNA from bioptic tissues and quantitative RT-PCR reliability.Exp. Mol. Pathol. 2009, 87, 146–151. [CrossRef]
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 16 of 17
23. Emerman, A.B.; Bowman, S.K.; Barry, A.; Henig, N.; Patel, K.M.; Gardner, A.F.; Hendrickson, C.L. NEBNext Direct: A Novel,
Rapid, Hybridization-Based Approach for the Capture and Library Conversion of Genomic Regions of Interest. Curr. Protoc. Mol.
Biol. 2017, 119, 1–24. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Lopez, J.P .; Diallo, A.; Cruceanu, C.; Fiori, L.M.; Laboissiere, S.; Guillet, I.; Fontaine, J.; Ragoussis, J.; Benes, V .; Turecki, G.; et al.
Biomarker discovery: Quantification of microRNAs and other small non-coding RNAs using next generation sequencing. BMC
Med. Genom. 2015, 8, 35–52. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Zhang, W.; Huang, N.; Zheng, J.; Liao, X.; Wang, J.; Li, H.D. A Sequence-Based Novel Approach for Quality Evaluation of
Third-Generation Sequencing Reads. Genes 2019, 10, 44. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Barbitoff, Y.A.; Abasov, R.; Tvorogova, V .E.; Glotov, A.S.; Predeus, A.V . Systematic benchmark of state-of-the-art variant calling
pipelines identifies major factors affecting accuracy of coding sequence variant discovery. BMC Genom. 2022, 23, 155–171.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Kim, D.; Paggi, J.M.; Park, C.; Bennett, C.; Salzberg, S.L. Graph-based genome alignment and genotyping with HISAT2 and
HISAT-genotype. Nat. Biotechnol. 2019, 37, 907–915. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28. Zhao, S.; Ye, Z.; Stanton, R. Misuse of RPKM or TPM normalization when comparing across samples and sequencing protocols.
RNA 2020, 26, 903–909. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Selek, M.B.; Yesilkaya, B.; Egeli, S.S.; Isler, Y. The effect of principal component analysis in the diagnosis of congestive heart failure
via heart rate variability analysis. Proc. Inst. Mech. Engineers. Part H J. Eng. Med. 2021, 235, 1479–1488. [CrossRef]
30. Chen, Q.; Wu, C.; Yao, Z.; Cai, L.; Ni, Y.; Mao, S.; Zhao, R. Whole transcriptome analysis of RNA expression profiles reveals the
potential regulating action of long noncoding RNA in lactating cows fed a high concentrate diet. Anim. Nutr. (Zhongguo Xu Mu
Shou Yi Xue Hui) 2021, 7, 1315–1328. [CrossRef]
31. Li, Y.; Zhang, J.; Huo, C.; Ding, N.; Li, J.; Xiao, J.; Lin, X.; Cai, B.; Zhang, Y.; Xu, J. Dynamic Organization of lncRNA and Circular
RNA Regulators Collectively Controlled Cardiac Differentiation in Humans. EBioMedicine 2017, 24, 137–146. [CrossRef]
32. Suo, J.; Xu, X.; Xu, H.; Hou, N.; Zhang, J.; Han, X.; Zheng, Y.; Wang, X.; Han, X. Transcriptomic Analysis of circRNAs in the
Peripheral Blood of Nonarteritic Anterior Ischemic Optic Neuropathy. BioMed Res. Int. 2020, 2020, 5732124. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Zhang, C.; Shen, B.; Chen, X.; Gao, S.; Ying, X.; Dong, P . Identification of a prognostic 4-mRNA signature in laryngeal squamous
cell carcinoma. J. Cancer 2021, 12, 5807–5816. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Zhao, Z.; Yang, H.; Ji, G.; Su, S.; Fan, Y.; Wang, M.; Gu, S. Identification of hub genes for early detection of bone metastasis in
breast cancer. Front. Endocrinol. 2022, 13, 1018639. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Anders, S.; Pyl, P .T.; Huber, W. HTSeq—A Python framework to work with high-throughput sequencing data.Bioinformatics 2015,
31, 166–169. [CrossRef]
36. Anders, S.; Huber, W. Differential expression analysis for sequence count data. Genome Biol. 2010, 11, R106–R117. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
37. Xie, C.; Mao, X.; Huang, J.; Ding, Y.; Wu, J.; Dong, S.; Kong, L.; Gao, G.; Li, C.Y.; Wei, L. KOBAS 2.0: A web server for annotation
and identification of enriched pathways and diseases. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011, 39, W316–W322. [CrossRef]
38. Kanehisa, M.; Goto, S.; Sato, Y.; Furumichi, M.; Tanabe, M. KEGG for integration and interpretation of large-scale molecular data
sets. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012, 40, D109–D114. [CrossRef]
39. Mansour, R.N.; Enderami, S.E.; Ardeshirylajimi, A.; Fooladsaz, K.; Fathi, M.; Ganji, S.M. Evaluation of hypoxia inducible factor-1
alpha gene expression in colorectal cancer stages of Iranian patients. J. Cancer Res. Ther. 2016, 12, 1313–1317. [CrossRef]
40. Zhou, X.; Guo, W.; Yin, H.; Chen, J.; Ma, L.; Yang, Q.; Zhao, Y.; Li, S.; Liu, W.; Li, H. Whole Exome Sequencing Study in a Family
with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus. Int. J. Gen. Med. 2021, 14, 8217–8229. [CrossRef]
41. Zhao, Y.; Li, M.C.; Konaté, M.M.; Chen, L.; Das, B.; Karlovich, C.; Williams, P .M.; Evrard, Y.A.; Doroshow, J.H.; McShane, L.M.
TPM, FPKM, or Normalized Counts? A Comparative Study of Quantification Measures for the Analysis of RNA-seq Data from
the NCI Patient-Derived Models Repository. J. Transl. Med. 2021, 19, 269–283. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Agazaryan, N.; Solberg, T.D.; DeMarco, J.J. Patient specific quality assurance for the delivery of intensity modulated radiotherapy.
J. Appl. Clin. Med. Phys. 2003, 4, 40–50. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Wei, D.; Jiang, Q.; Wei, Y.; Wang, S. A novel hierarchical clustering algorithm for gene sequences. BMC Bioinform. 2012, 13,
174–188. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Ge, Y.; Zhou, L.; Chen, Z.; Mao, Y.; Li, T.; Tong, P .; Shan, L. Identification of differentially expressed genes, signaling pathways and
immune infiltration in rheumatoid arthritis by integrated bioinformatics analysis. Hereditas 2021, 158, 5–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Song, Z.; Lv, S.; Wu, H.; Qin, L.; Cao, H.; Zhang, B.; Ren, S. Identification of foam cell biomarkers by microarray analysis.BMC
Cardiovasc. Disord. 2020, 20, 211–219. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Yu, J.; Yang, H.M.; Lai, Y.Y.; Wan, X.L.; Wang, Z.Y. The body fat distribution and fatty acid composition of muscles and adipose
tissues in geese. Poult. Sci. 2020, 99, 4634–4641. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Wołoszyn, J.; Haraf, G.; Okruszek, A.; Were ´ nska, M.; Goluch, Z.; Teleszko, M. Fatty acid profiles and health lipid indices in the
breast muscles of local Polish goose varieties. Poult. Sci. 2020, 99, 1216–1224. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Theron, L.; Fernandez, X.; Marty-Gasset, N.; Pichereaux, C.; Rossignol, M.; Chambon, C.; Viala, D.; Astruc, T.; Molette, C.
Identification by proteomic analysis of early post-mortem markers involved in the variability in fat loss during cooking of mule
duck “foie gras”. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2011, 59, 12617–12628. [CrossRef]
Vet. Sci. 2024, 11, 366 17 of 17
49. Orkusz, A.; Wola ´ nska, W.; Krajinska, U. The Assessment of Changes in the Fatty Acid Profile and Dietary Indicators Depending
on the Storage Conditions of Goose Meat. Molecules 2021, 26, 5122. [CrossRef]
50. Liu, J.; Song, R.; Su, S.; Qi, N.; Li, Q.; Xie, Z.; Yu, S. Betaine Promotes Fat Accumulation and Reduces Injury in Landes Goose
Hepatocytes by Regulating Multiple Lipid Metabolism Pathways. Animals 2022, 12, 1530. [CrossRef]
51. Wang, J.; Guan, J.; Yixi, K.; Shu, T.; Chai, Z.; Wang, J.; Wang, H.; Wu, Z.; Cai, X.; Zhong, J.; et al. Comparative transcriptome
analysis of winter yaks in plateau and plain. Reprod. Domest. Anim. = Zuchthyg. 2022, 57, 64–71. [CrossRef]
52. Verma, A.K.; Sharma, A.; Subramaniyam, N.; Gandhi, C.R. Augmenter of liver regeneration: Mitochondrial function and
steatohepatitis. J. Hepatol. 2022, 77, 1410–1421. [CrossRef]
53. Paradies, G.; Paradies, V .; Ruggiero, F.M.; Petrosillo, G. Oxidative stress, cardiolipin and mitochondrial dysfunction in nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease. World J. Gastroenterol. 2014, 20, 14205–14218. [CrossRef]
54. Shum, M.; Ngo, J.; Shirihai, O.S.; Liesa, M. Mitochondrial oxidative function in NAFLD: Friend or foe? Mol. Metab. 2021, 50,
101134. [CrossRef]
55. Oh, K.J.; Han, H.S.; Kim, M.J.; Koo, S.H. Transcriptional regulators of hepatic gluconeogenesis. Arch. Pharmacal Res. 2013, 36,
189–200. [CrossRef]
56. Clayton, D.F.; Darnell, J.E., Jr. Changes in liver-specific compared to common gene transcription during primary culture of mouse
hepatocytes. Mol. Cell. Biol. 1983, 3, 1552–1561. [CrossRef]
57. Crestani, M.; De Fabiani, E.; Caruso, D.; Mitro, N.; Gilardi, F.; Vigil Chacon, A.B.; Patelli, R.; Godio, C.; Galli, G. LXR (liver X
receptor) and HNF-4 (hepatocyte nuclear factor-4): Key regulators in reverse cholesterol transport. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 2004, 32,
92–96. [CrossRef]
58. Li, X.; Wang, J.; Gong, X.; Zhang, M.; Kang, S.; Shu, B.; Wei, Z.; Huang, Z.S.; Li, D. Upregulation of BCL-2 by acridone derivative
through gene promoter i-motif for alleviating liver damage of NAFLD/NASH. Nucleic Acids Res. 2020, 48, 8255–8268. [CrossRef]
59. Archer, A.E.; Von Schulze, A.T.; Geiger, P .C. Exercise, heat shock proteins and insulin resistance.Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London. Ser.
B Biol. Sci. 2018, 373, 20160529. [CrossRef]
60. Weng, S.W.; Wu, J.C.; Shen, F.C.; Chang, Y.H.; Su, Y.J.; Lian, W.S.; Tai, M.H.; Su, C.H.; Chuang, J.H.; Lin, T.K.; et al. Chaperonin
counteracts diet-induced non-alcoholic fatty liver disease by aiding sirtuin 3 in the control of fatty acid oxidation. Diabetologia
2023, 66, 913–930. [CrossRef]
61. Kumar, R.; Ahmad, F.; Rathaur, S. Characterization of filarial phosphoglycerate kinase. Biochimie 2019, 165, 258–266. [CrossRef]
62. Simmen, F.A.; Alhallak, I.; Simmen, R.C.M. Malic enzyme 1 (ME1) in the biology of cancer: It is not just intermediary metabolism.
J. Mol. Endocrinol. 2020, 65, R77–R90. [CrossRef]
63. Zhang, B.; Xue, C.; Hu, X.; Xu, J.; Li, Z.; Wang, J.; Yanagita, T.; Xue, Y.; Wang, Y. Dietary sea cucumber cerebroside alleviates orotic
acid-induced excess hepatic adipopexis in rats. Lipids Health Dis. 2012, 11, 48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Muriel, P .; L ópez-Sánchez, P .; Ramos-Tovar, E. Fructose and the Liver.Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 6969. [CrossRef]
65. Mohammed, S.; Nicklas, E.H.; Thadathil, N.; Selvarani, R.; Royce, G.H.; Kinter, M.; Richardson, A.; Deepa, S.S. Role of necroptosis
in chronic hepatic inflammation and fibrosis in a mouse model of increased oxidative stress. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2021, 164,
315–328. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Mirpuri, E.; García-Trevijano, E.R.; Castilla-Cortazar, I.; Berasain, C.; Quiroga, J.; Rodriguez-Ortigosa, C.; Mato, J.M.; Prieto, J.;
Avila, M.A. Altered liver gene expression in CCl4-cirrhotic rats is partially normalized by insulin-like growth factor-I. Int. J.
Biochem. Cell Biol. 2002, 34, 242–252. [CrossRef]
67. Huang, H.; McIntosh, A.L.; Martin, G.G.; Landrock, K.K.; Landrock, D.; Gupta, S.; Atshaves, B.P .; Kier, A.B.; Schroeder, F.
Structural and functional interaction of fatty acids with human liver fatty acid-binding protein (L-FABP) T94A variant. FEBS J.
2014, 281, 2266–2283. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. Wu, X.; Shu, L.; Zhang, Z.; Li, J.; Zong, J.; Cheong, L.Y.; Ye, D.; Lam, K.S.L.; Song, E.; Wang, C.; et al. Adipocyte Fatty Acid Binding
Protein Promotes the Onset and Progression of Liver Fibrosis via Mediating the Crosstalk between Liver Sinusoidal Endothelial
Cells and Hepatic Stellate Cells. Adv. Sci. 2021, 8, 2–16. [CrossRef]
69. Ramakrishnan, S.; Serricchio, M.; Striepen, B.; Bütikofer, P . Lipid synthesis in protozoan parasites: A comparison between
kinetoplastids and apicomplexans. Prog. Lipid Res. 2013, 52, 488–512. [CrossRef]
70. Li, Z.; Chen, X.; Li, J.; Meng, T.; Wang, L.; Chen, Z.; Shi, Y.; Ling, X.; Luo, W.; Liang, D.; et al. Functions of PKS Genes in Lipid
Synthesis of Schizochytrium sp. by Gene Disruption and Metabolomics Analysis. Mar. Biotechnol. 2018, 20, 792–802. [CrossRef]
71. Chalut, C. MmpL transporter-mediated export of cell-wall associated lipids and siderophores in mycobacteria. Tuberculosis2016,
100, 32–45. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.