Citation: Lan, H.; Wang, C.; Yang, Z.;
Zhu, J.; Fang, W.; Yin, Y. The Impact of
Lighting Treatments on the
Biosynthesis of Phenolic Acids in
Black Wheat Seedlings. Foods 2024, 13,
2499. https://doi.org/10.3390/
foods13162499
Received: 6 July 2024
Revised: 30 July 2024
Accepted: 4 August 2024
Published: 9 August 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
foods
Article
The Impact of Lighting Treatments on the Biosynthesis of
Phenolic Acids in Black Wheat Seedlings
Hongjie Lan †, Chunping Wang †, Zhengfei Yang, Jiangyu Zhu, Weiming Fang and Yongqi Yin *
College of Food Science and Engineering, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 210095, China;
mz120232122@yzu.edu.cn (H.L.); mz120211961@yzu.edu.cn (C.W.); yzf@yzu.edu.cn (Z.Y.);
008051@yzu.edu.cn (J.Z.); wmfang@yzu.edu.cn (W.F.)
* Correspondence: yqyin@yzu.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-514-89786551
† These authors contributed equally to the work.
Abstract: Light, as a crucial environmental determinant, profoundly influences the synthesis of
secondary metabolites in plant metabolism. This study investigated the impacts of the red light
combined with ultraviolet-A (UV-A) and ultraviolet-B (UV-B) treatments on phenolic acid biosyn-
thesis in black wheat seedlings. The results demonstrate that the red light combined with UV-A
and UV-B treatments significantly enhanced the levels of phenolic acids in black wheat seedlings, at
220.4 µg/seedling and 241.5 µg/seedling, respectively. The content of bound phenolic acids in black
wheat seedlings increased by 36.0% under the UV-B treatment. The application of the UV-A/UV-B
treatments markedly enhanced the activities of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase, 4-coumarate CoA lig-
ase, and cinnamate 4-hydroxylase in black wheat seedlings while also promoting the expression levels
of genes related to phenolic acid synthesis. The expression levels of fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase
and NADP-malic enzyme related to photosynthesis were significantly upregulated. This resulted in an
augmentation in the chlorophyll content, thereby enhancing photosynthesis in black wheat seedlings.
Nevertheless, the UV-A and UV-B treatments also had a significant constraining effect on the growth
and development of black wheat seedlings. In addition, the UV-A and UV-B treatments increased the
activity and gene expression levels of antioxidant enzymes while significantly increasing the contents
of total flavonoids and anthocyanins, activating the antioxidant system. The findings reveal that
light-source radiation serves as an effective method for promoting the biosynthesis of phenolic acids
in black wheat seedlings.
Keywords: phenolic acid; black wheat; red light; ultraviolet; germination
1. Introduction
Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.), an ancient food crop, is a significant source of energy
for humans, accounting for 20% of the global dietary intake [1]. Wheat is not only rich in
protein, vitamins, and a variety of mineral elements but, more importantly, its phenolic
acid content is higher than that of other grain crops [2]. Phenolic acids represent a category
of plant secondary metabolites distinctively marked by the attachment of hydroxyl to
aromatic rings. This class encompasses compounds such as caffeic acid, vanillic acid, and
ferulic acid. They exhibit numerous diverse physiological effects on the human body,
such as anti-oxidation, anticancer, anti-inflammatory, and antihypertension [3]. Extensive
clinical research has validated that the inclusion of whole-grain wheat in one’s diet can
notably decrease the risk of developing chronic diseases, including cancer and hypertension.
This beneficial effect is primarily ascribed to the abundant presence of phenolic acid in
wheat [4,5]. Amidst the escalating interest in the nutritional merits of food, there is great
market potential in enhancing the contents of phenolic acids in wheat and developing
foods rich in phenolic acids.
Foods 2024, 13, 2499. https://doi.org/10.3390/foods13162499 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/foods
Foods 2024, 13, 2499 2 of 14
Phenolic acids in plants manifest in the following three distinct forms: free, bound, and
conjugated. They mainly rely on the phenylpropanoid pathway to synthesize and metabo-
lize [6]. Studies have demonstrated that wheat exhibits substantial elevations in the levels
of ferulic acid and caffeic acid under drought treatment and heat treatment, respectively [7].
Similarly, low-temperature [8], salicylic acid [ 9], and methyl jasmonate [ 10] treatments
also promoted the enrichment of phenolic acids in plants. This research substantiates that
environmental conditions have an important impact on the biosynthesis of phenolic acids
in plants. The phenylpropanoid pathway encompasses numerous pivotal enzymes that
facilitate phenolic acid synthesis, with their activity and relative gene expression intricately
tied to the content of phenolic acids [11]. NaCl treatment notably elevated the content of
phenolic acids in barley by increasing the activities of phenylalanine ammonia-lyase (PAL),
4-coumarate-CoA ligase (4CL), and cinnamic acid 4-hydroxylase (C4H) and upregulating
the expression levels of P AL, 4CL, C4H, and p-coumarate-3-hydroxylase (C3H) [12]. Under a
treatment of prohydrojasmon, the relative expressions of P ALand flavanone 3-hydroxylase
(F3H) in lettuce increased, which promoted the enrichment of phenolic acids [13]. Exoge-
nous salicylic acid treatment significantly enhanced the activities of PAL, 4CL, and C4H in
kiwifruit and increased the relative expression of P ALand 4CL, promoting the biosynthesis
of phenolic acids [ 14]. The outcomes showed that environmental factors augment the
enrichment of phenolic acids in plants by modulating the enzymatic activity and gene
expression levels associated with phenolic acid biosynthesis.
As a crucial environmental factor in the life cycle of plants, light not only influences
plant growth but also serves a critical function in modulating the production of secondary
metabolites within plants. Research indicates that red light can promote the generation of
phenolic acids in various vegetables, such as radish, wheat, and lentils [ 15]. Ultraviolet-
A (UV-A) treatment notably increased the levels of phenols in strawberries [ 16] and
broccoli [17]. Soybean sprouts exposed to ultraviolet-B (UV-B) irradiation significantly
increased the isoflavone content [18]. In recent years, plants have been treated with light
during germination, and changes in the content of secondary metabolites, especially phe-
nols, have attracted people’s attention. Red light treatment significantly promoted the
biosynthesis of ferulic acid and p-coumaric acid during wheat germination [ 19]. The
phenolic acid content of kale was significantly increased by blue light treatment during
germination [20]. The UV-B treatment markedly augmented the biosynthesis of phenolic
acids in wheat [21] and barley [22] sprouts. This indicates that light treatment of germi-
nated plants is a viable means to promote the biosynthesis of phenolic compounds in
plants. Our prior investigations demonstrated that the red light combined with ultravio-
let light treatment notably enhanced the progressive buildup of phenolic acids in wheat
seedlings. Nevertheless, the underlying molecular mechanism responsible for the accumu-
lation of phenolic acids in wheat seedlings, triggered by a treatment combining red light
and ultraviolet light, remains poorly understood.
In this paper, the changes in physiology and active oxygen and phenolic acid contents
during black wheat germination were analyzed by the red light combined with UV-A and
UV-B treatments. The activities and gene expression changes of key enzymes in the phenolic
acid synthesis pathway, antioxidant system, and photosynthetic system were investigated.
This study elucidated the molecular mechanism for phenolic acid accumulation in black
wheat seedlings induced by the combined treatment of red light and ultraviolet light. This
study expands perspectives on the regulation of light in the phenolic metabolism of plants.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Germination Process and Experimental Design
The black wheat seeds (Triticum aestivum (L.) cultivar black vajra) were provided by
Fuchun Seed Industry Co., Ltd., Qingdao, China. The seeds underwent sterilization in
a 1% (v/v) sodium hypochlorite (NaClO) solution for 15 min, followed by rinsing with
deionized water until neutrality was achieved. Subsequently, they were immersed in
distilled water and maintained at 25 ◦C for a duration of 6 h. Following this, they were
Foods 2024, 13, 2499 3 of 14
transferred onto germination plates and incubated at 25 ◦C in an incubator (PGX-150,
Ningbo Haishu Saifu Experimental Instrument Co., Ltd., Ningbo, China). After 2 days
of germination, according to our previous research, the following treatment groups were
set: (1) CK—red light tubes were placed one foot above the germination tray (at 655 nm
and with an intensity of 400 µmol·m−2·s−1, Shandong Guixiang photoelectric Co., Ltd.,
Shandong, China), cycled through 18 h of light and 6 h of darkness, and deionized water
was sprayed. (2) UV-A—UV-A treatment (at 340 nm and with intensity of 40µmol·m−2·s−1,
Beijing Electronic Resource, Inc., Beijing, China) was applied on the basis of the red light
treatment, cycled through 18 h of light and 6 h of darkness, and distilled water was sprayed.
(3) UV-B—UV-B treatment (at a wavelength of 313 nm and intensity of 40µmol·m−2·s−1,
Beijing Electronic Resource, Inc., China) was applied on the basis of the red light treatment,
cycled through 18 h of light and 6 h of darkness, and deionized water was sprayed. During
the germination phase of the aforementioned treatment, deionized water was sprayed in
40 mL increments every 12 h. On the second and fourth days of the treatment, seedlings
were gathered for subsequent biochemical examination. Figure 1 summarizes the treatment
schematic diagram of the effects of red light combined with UV-A and UV-B on black
wheat seedlings.
Foods 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 15 
 
 
(v/v) sodium hypochlorite (NaClO) solution for 15 min, followed by rinsing with deionized 
water until neutrality was achieved. Subsequently, they were immersed in distilled water 
and maintained at 25 °C for a duration of 6 h.  Following this, they were transferred onto 
germination plates and incubated at 25 °C in an incubator (PGX-150, Ningbo Haishu Saifu 
Experimental Instrument Co., Ltd., Ningbo, China). After 2 days of germination, according 
to our previous research, the following treatment groups were set: (1) CK—red light tubes 
were placed one foot above the germination tray (at 655 nm and with an intensity of 400 
µmol·m
−2·s−1, Shandong Guixiang photoelectric Co., Ltd., Shandong, China), cycled 
through 18 h of light and 6 h of darkness, and deionized water was sprayed. (2) UV-A—
UV-A treatment (at 340 nm and with intensity of 40 µmol·m −2·s−1, Beijing Electronic Re-
source, Inc., Beijing, China) was applied on th e basis of the red light treatment, cycled 
through 18 h of light and 6 h of darkness, and distilled water was sprayed. (3) UV-B—UV-
B treatment (at a wavelength of 313 nm and intensity of 40 µmol·m−2·s−1, Beijing Electronic 
Resource, Inc., China) was applied on the basis of the red light treatment, cycled through 
18 h of light and 6 h of darkness, and deio nized water was sprayed. During the germina-
tion phase of the aforementioned treatment, deionized water was sprayed in 40 mL incre-
ments every 12 h. On the second and fourth days of the treatment, seedlings were gathered 
for subsequent biochemical examination. Figure 1 summarizes the treatment schematic di-
agram of the effects of red light combined with UV-A and UV-B on black wheat seedlings. 
 
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the treatments used to study the e ﬀects of the red light combined 
with UV-A and UV-B on black wheat seedlings. 
2.2. Determination of Seedling Length and Fresh Weight 
Thirty black wheat seedlings were randomly selected from each treatment group. Pre-
cise measurements of seedling length were obtained using a vernier caliper, while their 
fresh weights were accurately determined using an analytical balance. 
2.3. Determination of Chlorophyll Content 
The approach outlined by Zhang et al. [23]  was utilized to measure the chlorophyll 
content in black wheat seedlings. Black wheat seedlings were homogenized with calcium 
carbonate powder and ethanol. Subsequently, acetone was added to the homogenate, and 
the mixture was shaken. The sample underwent centrifugation, resulting in the collection 
of the supernatant. The absorbances were then gauged at 645 nm and 663 nm. 
2.4. Determination of Phenolic acid Content 
The approach outlined by Chen et al. [21]  was utilized. The samples were ground 
with methanol, centrifuged after ultrasonication, and the supernatant was taken. The ex-
traction was repeated three times. The su pernatant was combined, dried, and dissolved 
in methanol to a constant volume as a free phenolic acid extract. The remaining residue 
was added to n-hexane, centrifuged to remove  the supernatant, added to a sulfuric acid 
water bath, and then added to ethyl acetate for extraction. The extraction was repeated 
three times. After the extraction phase was combined, rotary evaporation was performed, 
and the residue was diluted with methanol as a bound phenolic acid extract. The mixture 
of phenolic acid extract and sodium dodecyl sulfate in a ferric chloride–potassium ferri-
cyanide solution was diluted with methanol. The resulting mixture was incubated in the 
Figure 1. Schematic diagram of the treatments used to study the effects of the red light combined
with UV-A and UV-B on black wheat seedlings.
2.2. Determination of Seedling Length and Fresh Weight
Thirty black wheat seedlings were randomly selected from each treatment group.
Precise measurements of seedling length were obtained using a vernier caliper, while their
fresh weights were accurately determined using an analytical balance.
2.3. Determination of Chlorophyll Content
The approach outlined by Zhang et al. [23] was utilized to measure the chlorophyll
content in black wheat seedlings. Black wheat seedlings were homogenized with calcium
carbonate powder and ethanol. Subsequently, acetone was added to the homogenate, and
the mixture was shaken. The sample underwent centrifugation, resulting in the collection
of the supernatant. The absorbances were then gauged at 645 nm and 663 nm.
2.4. Determination of Phenolic Acid Content
The approach outlined by Chen et al. [21] was utilized. The samples were ground with
methanol, centrifuged after ultrasonication, and the supernatant was taken. The extraction
was repeated three times. The supernatant was combined, dried, and dissolved in methanol
to a constant volume as a free phenolic acid extract. The remaining residue was added to
n-hexane, centrifuged to remove the supernatant, added to a sulfuric acid water bath, and
then added to ethyl acetate for extraction. The extraction was repeated three times. After
the extraction phase was combined, rotary evaporation was performed, and the residue
was diluted with methanol as a bound phenolic acid extract. The mixture of phenolic acid
extract and sodium dodecyl sulfate in a ferric chloride–potassium ferricyanide solution
was diluted with methanol. The resulting mixture was incubated in the dark, then a
hydrochloric acid solution was added and further incubated in the dark. Subsequently,
the absorbance was measured at 760 nm, and the content of phenolic acid was determined
according to the standard curve of gallic acid.
Foods 2024, 13, 2499 4 of 14
2.5. Determination of Total Phenolic, Total Flavonoid, and Anthocyanin Contents
The total phenolic content was determined following the protocols outlined by Mencin
et al. [24]. The black wheat seedlings were pulverized using methanol followed by centrifu-
gation to isolate the supernatant fraction. Subsequently, it was blended with Folin-phenol
reagent and Na 2CO3 and kept in darkness during incubation. The determination was
performed at 765 nm and calculated according to the standard curve of gallic acid. The total
flavonoid content was quantified following the methodology described by Yin et al. [25].
The black wheat seedlings were ground with ethanol, then subjected to ultrasonication
followed by centrifugation to isolate the supernatant fraction. Then, diluted and quan-
titative absorbance measurements were taken at 260 nm. The anthocyanin content was
quantified in accordance with the methodology proposed by Lao et al. [26]. Black wheat
seedlings were ground in acidified ethanol followed by centrifugation and collection of the
supernatant. The absorbance measurements were taken at 535 nm.
2.6. Determination of Malondialdehyde, Superoxide Anion, and Hydrogen Peroxide
The measurement of the malondialdehyde (MDA) content was conducted according
to the method described by Zhuang et al. [27]. The levels of superoxide anion (O−.
2 ) and
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) were quantified following the procedures detailed by Zhao
et al. [28].
2.7. Determination of Antioxidant Enzyme Activity
The black wheat samples were ground in a phosphate-buffer solution (pH 7.0, 50 mM),
followed by centrifugation to separate the supernatant fraction. The superoxide dismu-
tase (SOD) and ascorbate peroxidase (APX) activities were quantified using the protocol
established by Bin et al. [29]. A unit of SOD and APX activity was defined as a change of
0.01 per minute at OD560nm and OD290nm, respectively. For the catalase (CAT) and perox-
idase (POD) activities, the method of Yin et al. [30] was used. The units of the CAT and
POD activities are defined as the change per minute at OD240nm and OD470nm, respectively,
with a value of 0.01.
2.8. Determination of Phenolic Acid Synthase Activity
The evaluation of PAL, C4H, and 4CL activities followed the protocol established by
Yin et al. [30]. The black wheat seedlings were homogenized using Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8.9,
0.1 M) followed by centrifugation to separate the supernatant fraction. The activities of
PAL, C4H, and 4CL are defined as one unit when the changes in OD290nm, OD340nm, and
OD333nm per minute are 0.01.
2.9. RNA Extraction and Quantitative Real-Time PCR Analysis
Total RNA was extracted from the black wheat seedlings employing the E.A.N.A.TM
Plant RNA kit (R6827-01, OMEGA, Norcross, GA, USA). Subsequently, this RNA was
reverse transcribed into cDNA employing the PrimeScript™ RT Master Mix Kit (RR036A,
Takara, Japan). For quantitative analysis, triplicate reactions were performed on each cDNA
sample, utilizing SYBR® Premix Ex Taq™ (RR420A, Takara, Japan) on a Light Cycler 480
II detection system (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). The oligonucleotide primers utilized for
qRT-PCR are detailed in Supplementary Materials Table S1. The relative gene expression
levels were determined employing the 2−∆∆Ct method as described by Livak et al. [31].
2.10. Statistical Analysis
The results of the experiments are expressed as the means ± standard deviations
based on triplicate measurements. A one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparison
tests was performed to evaluate the statistical significance at a predetermined level of 0.05
(p < 0.05).
Foods 2024, 13, 2499 5 of 14
3. Results
3.1. Effects of Red Light Combined with UV-A and UV-B Treatments on Physiological and
Oxidative Damage Indexes of Black Wheat Seedlings
Figure 2I–III show the effects of the red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments
on the growth performance, seedling length, and fresh weight of black wheat seedlings.
Compared with red light treatment alone, the UV-A and UV-B treatments retarded growth
on black wheat seedlings. The length of black wheat seedlings treated with UV-A and
UV-B dropped considerably (p < 0.05) to 70.12% and 78.66% of that treated with red light
alone, respectively. The fresh weight of the UV-A treatment was lower than that of the
other treatments after 4 days of light. The findings reveal that both the UV-A and UV-B
treatments exhibited significant inhibitory impacts on the growth of black wheat seedlings,
with UV-A demonstrating a stronger inhibitory effect. Figure 2IV–VI show the effects of
the red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments on the H2O2 content, O−
2 content,
and MDA content of black wheat seedlings. The UV-A and UV-B treatments significantly
enhanced the contents of H2O2, O−
2 , and MDA in black wheat seedlings compared with red
light treatment alone (p < 0.05). Following four days of treatment, the H2O2 content in black
wheat seedlings subjected to the UV-B treatment exhibited a notable elevation compared
to those treated with UV-A ( p < 0.05). After two days of light treatment, the content of
O−
2 in black wheat seedlings exposed to UV-B was notably elevated compared to those
under UV-A, demonstrating a significant disparity (p < 0.05). In contrast, the MDA content
remained relatively unchanged between the two treatments, lacking a notable disparity
(p > 0.05). With the extension of the illumination time, there was no notable disparity in the
O−.
2 contents between the UV-A and UV-B treatments on the 4th day (p > 0.05). The content
of MDA exhibited a marked elevation in comparison to UV-B (p < 0.05). This indicates that
the UV-A and UV-B treatments resulted in varying degrees of oxidative damage to black
wheat seedlings.
Foods 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 15 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Eﬀects of red light combined with the UV-A and UV-B treatments on the physiological 
and oxidative damage indexes of black wheat seedlings. The lowercase letters represent signiﬁcant 
diﬀerences between diﬀerent treatments at the same time. 
3.2. Impact of Red Light Combined with UV-A and UV-B Treatments on the Phenolic Acids, 
Total Phenols, Anthocyanin, and Total Flavonoid Contents of Black Wheat Seedlings 
Figure 3 shows the eﬀects of red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments on 
the contents of total phenolic acids, free ph enolic acids, bound phenolic acids, total phe-
nols, anthocyanins, and total ﬂavonoids in black wheat seedlings. The results presented 
in Figure 2I–III depict the impact of red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments 
on the levels of phenolic acids in black wheat seedlings. Compared with the red light 
treatment alone, the total phenolic acid co ntent of the UV-A and UV-B treatments in-
creased by 19% and 30.4%, respectively, after 4 days of treatment. Following two days of 
UV-A and UV-B treatments, a substantial augmentation in the content of free phenolic 
acids was observed (p < 0.05), while the content of bound phenolic acids remained largely 
unchanged (p > 0.05). On the fourth day, the levels of both free and bound phenolic acids 
were found to be 1.14 and 1.36 times higher, respectively, in response to the UV-B treat-
ment compared to the red light treatment. While exposure to UV-A treatment contributed 
to the enhancement of bound phenolic acid levels, its impact proved to be comparatively 
inferior to that induced by UV-B (p < 0.05). The contents of total phenols and anthocyanins 
in black wheat seedlings under the UV-A an d UV-B treatments were notably elevated 
compared with those treated with red light,  and the total phenolic content was signi ﬁ-
cantly elevated under the UV-B treatment in contrast to the UV-A treatment ( p < 0.05). 
After a four-day UV-A treatment, the total ﬂavonoid content exhibited a notable elevation 
in contrast to the other treatment groups ( p < 0.05). The above outcomes showed that 
Figure 2. Effects of red light combined with the UV-A and UV-B treatments on the physiological
and oxidative damage indexes of black wheat seedlings. The lowercase letters represent significant
differences between different treatments at the same time.
Foods 2024, 13, 2499 6 of 14
3.2. Impact of Red Light Combined with UV-A and UV-B Treatments on the Phenolic Acids, Total
Phenols, Anthocyanin, and Total Flavonoid Contents of Black Wheat Seedlings
Figure 3 shows the effects of red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments
on the contents of total phenolic acids, free phenolic acids, bound phenolic acids, total
phenols, anthocyanins, and total flavonoids in black wheat seedlings. The results presented
in Figure 2I–III depict the impact of red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments
on the levels of phenolic acids in black wheat seedlings. Compared with the red light
treatment alone, the total phenolic acid content of the UV-A and UV-B treatments increased
by 19% and 30.4%, respectively, after 4 days of treatment. Following two days of UV-A
and UV-B treatments, a substantial augmentation in the content of free phenolic acids was
observed (p < 0.05), while the content of bound phenolic acids remained largely unchanged
(p > 0.05). On the fourth day, the levels of both free and bound phenolic acids were
found to be 1.14 and 1.36 times higher, respectively, in response to the UV-B treatment
compared to the red light treatment. While exposure to UV-A treatment contributed to the
enhancement of bound phenolic acid levels, its impact proved to be comparatively inferior
to that induced by UV-B (p < 0.05). The contents of total phenols and anthocyanins in black
wheat seedlings under the UV-A and UV-B treatments were notably elevated compared
with those treated with red light, and the total phenolic content was significantly elevated
under the UV-B treatment in contrast to the UV-A treatment (p < 0.05). After a four-day
UV-A treatment, the total flavonoid content exhibited a notable elevation in contrast to the
other treatment groups (p < 0.05). The above outcomes showed that although the UV-B
treatment accumulated more phenolic substances, the promotion effect on total flavonoids
was less than that of UV-A (Figure 2IV ,VI).
Foods 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 15 
 
 
although the UV-B treatment accumulated mo re phenolic substances, the promotion ef-
fect on total ﬂavonoids was less than that of UV-A (Figure 2IV,VI). 
 
Figure 3. Eﬀects of red light combined with the UV-A and UV-B treatments on the contents of phe-
nols in black wheat seedlings. The lowercase letters represent signiﬁcant diﬀerences between diﬀer-
ent treatments at the same time. 
3.3. Impact of Red Light Combined with UV-A and UV-B Treatments on Chlorophyll Content 
and Related Genes’ Expression Levels of Photosynthesis of Black Wheat Seedlings 
Figure 4 shows the eﬀects of red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments on 
the total chlorophyll content, FBA, and NADP-ME expression levels of black wheat seed-
lings. The chlorophyll contents exhibited a signi ﬁcant increase under the UV-A and UV-
B treatments in contrast to the sole application of red light ( p < 0.05). After 4 days, the 
chlorophyll contents under the UV-A and UV-B treatments were 1.57 times and 1.33 times 
that of red light alone, respectively. The chlorophyll levels following exposure to UV-A 
treatment exhibited a marked increase compared to those subjected to UV-B treatment (p 
< 0.05). UV-A and UV-B notably increased the relative expression levels of fructose-1,6-
bisphosphate aldolase (FBA) and NADP-malic enzyme (NADP-ME) (p < 0.05). The relative ex-
pression level of FBA under the UV-A treatment gradually increased, and the relative ex-
pression level reached its highest at 4 days. During the UV-B treatment, the relative ex-
pression level of FBA peaked on the second day. After 2 days of light treatment, the rela-
tive expression level of NADP-ME peaked under the UV-B treatment, which was 2.09 
times that of the red light treatment alone. At 4 days of light treatment, the relative expres-
sion levels of NADP-ME between the UV-A and UV-B treatments did not show a notable 
disparity (p > 0.05). 
Figure 3. Effects of red light combined with the UV-A and UV-B treatments on the contents of phenols
in black wheat seedlings. The lowercase letters represent significant differences between different
treatments at the same time.
3.3. Impact of Red Light Combined with UV-A and UV-B Treatments on Chlorophyll Content and
Related Genes’ Expression Levels of Photosynthesis of Black Wheat Seedlings
Figure 4 shows the effects of red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments
on the total chlorophyll content, FBA, and NADP-ME expression levels of black wheat
Foods 2024, 13, 2499 7 of 14
seedlings. The chlorophyll contents exhibited a significant increase under the UV-A and
UV-B treatments in contrast to the sole application of red light (p < 0.05). After 4 days, the
chlorophyll contents under the UV-A and UV-B treatments were 1.57 times and 1.33 times
that of red light alone, respectively. The chlorophyll levels following exposure to UV-A
treatment exhibited a marked increase compared to those subjected to UV-B treatment
(p < 0.05). UV-A and UV-B notably increased the relative expression levels offructose-1,6-
bisphosphate aldolase (FBA) and NADP-malic enzyme (NADP-ME) (p < 0.05). The relative
expression level of FBA under the UV-A treatment gradually increased, and the relative
expression level reached its highest at 4 days. During the UV-B treatment, the relative
expression level of FBA peaked on the second day. After 2 days of light treatment, the
relative expression level of NADP-ME peaked under the UV-B treatment, which was
2.09 times that of the red light treatment alone. At 4 days of light treatment, the relative
expression levels of NADP-ME between the UV-A and UV-B treatments did not show a
notable disparity (p > 0.05).
Foods 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 15 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Eﬀects of the red light treatment combined wi th UV-A and UV-B treatments on the chlo-
rophyll contents and relative genes’ expression levels of photosynthesis in black wheat seedlings. 
The lowercase letters represent signiﬁcant diﬀerences between diﬀerent treatments at the same time. 
3.4. Impact of Red Light Combined with UV-A and UV-B Treatments on the Antioxidant  
Enzyme Activity and Relative Genes’ Expression Levels in Black Wheat Seedlings 
The eﬀects of the red light treatment combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments on 
the activities of SOD, POD, CAT, and APX in black wheat seedlings are shown in Figure 
5I–IV. After a four-day light treatment period, both the UV-A and UV-B treatments exhib-
ited a notable augmentation in SOD and POD ac tivities in comparison to the red light 
treatment (p < 0.05). The SOD activity increased 1.55-fold under the UV-A and 1.29-fold 
under the UV-B treatments compared to red light alone, while the POD activity rose by 
15.83% and 23.79%, respectively. After 2 days of light treatment, under the UV-A and UV-
B treatments, the CAT and APX activities were signi ﬁcantly elevated compared to those 
observed under the red light treatment (p < 0.05). In contrast to the red light treatment, the 
CAT activity increased by 12.64% and 12.95%, respectively. The APX activity was elevated 
1.26-fold under the UV-A and 1.22-fold under  the UV-B treatments compared with red 
light alone. This indicates that the red li ght treatment combined with UV-A and UV-B 
treatments activated the antioxidant system of the black wheat seedlings. 
Figure 5V–VIII show the eﬀects of the red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treat-
ments on the expression levels of SOD, POD, CAT, and APX in black wheat seedlings. The 
UV-A and UV-B treatments notably increased the relative expression levels of SOD, POD, 
CAT, and APX in contrast to the red light treatment. ( p < 0.05). The relative expression 
level of SOD was notably elevated under the UV-B treatment compared to UV-A (p < 0.05), 
while the relative expression levels of CAT and APX were notably higher under the UV-
A treatment in contrast to UV-B (p < 0.05). The relative expression levels of SOD and CAT 
were signiﬁcantly elevated under the UV-A treatment compared to the other treatments 
(p < 0.05), while the relative expression levels of POD and APX under the UV-B treatment 
were higher and 5.49 and 4.09 times that of the red light treatment, respectively. The re-
sults indicate that, as the illumination time  increased, the UV-A treatment markedly up-
regulated the expression levels of SOD and CAT (p < 0.05), while the UV-B treatment ex-
hibited a more potent inductive eﬀect on the expressions of POD and APX. 
Figure 4. Effects of the red light treatment combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments on the
chlorophyll contents and relative genes’ expression levels of photosynthesis in black wheat seedlings.
The lowercase letters represent significant differences between different treatments at the same time.
3.4. Impact of Red Light Combined with UV-A and UV-B Treatments on the Antioxidant Enzyme
Activity and Relative Genes’ Expression Levels in Black Wheat Seedlings
The effects of the red light treatment combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments on the
activities of SOD, POD, CAT, and APX in black wheat seedlings are shown in Figure 5I–IV .
After a four-day light treatment period, both the UV-A and UV-B treatments exhibited a
notable augmentation in SOD and POD activities in comparison to the red light treatment
(p < 0.05). The SOD activity increased 1.55-fold under the UV-A and 1.29-fold under the
UV-B treatments compared to red light alone, while the POD activity rose by 15.83% and
23.79%, respectively. After 2 days of light treatment, under the UV-A and UV-B treatments,
the CAT and APX activities were significantly elevated compared to those observed under
the red light treatment (p < 0.05). In contrast to the red light treatment, the CAT activity
increased by 12.64% and 12.95%, respectively. The APX activity was elevated 1.26-fold
under the UV-A and 1.22-fold under the UV-B treatments compared with red light alone.
This indicates that the red light treatment combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments
activated the antioxidant system of the black wheat seedlings.
Foods 2024, 13, 2499 8 of 14
Foods 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 15 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Eﬀects of the red light treatment combined wi th UV-A and UV-B treatments on the anti-
oxidant enzyme activity and relative gene expression levels in black wheat seedings. The lowercase 
letters represent signiﬁcant diﬀerences between diﬀerent treatments at the same time. 
3.5. Impact of the Red Light Combined with UV-A and UV-B Treatments on the Activities of 
Enzymes Related to Phenolic Acid Synthesis and the Relative Gene Expression Levels in Black 
Wheat Seedlings 
The eﬀects of the red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments on the activi-
ties of PAL, 4CL, and C4H in black wheat seedlings were described in Figure 6I–III. Com-
pared with the red light treatment, the PAL,  4CL, and C4H enzyme activities exhibited 
signiﬁcant upregulation after 4 days of the UV-A and UV-B exposures ( p < 0.05). Speciﬁ-
cally, the UV-A treatment led to 1.16-, 1.09-, and 1.32-fold increases in the PAL, 4CL, and 
C4H activities, respectively, while the UV-B tr eatment resulted in 1.20-, 1.39-, and 1.58-
fold enhancements. The 4CL and C4H activities were notably elevated under the UV-B 
treatment in contrast to the UV-A treatment (p < 0.05).  
The relative expression levels of PAL, 4CL, C3H, C4H, ferulate 5-hydroxylase (F5H), 
COMT, and cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD) in the phenolic acid synthesis path-
way are shown in Figure 6V–X. Upon prolonged treatment, the relative expression levels 
of key enzymes in the phenolic acid synthesis pathway, including  PAL, 4CL, C3H, C4H, 
F5H, and CAD, exhibited signiﬁcant upregulation under the UV-A and UV-B treatments 
(p < 0.05). In black wheat seedlings exposed to the UV-A treatment for 4 days, the relative 
expression levels of PAL, 4CL, C3H, C4H, F5H, and CAD were upregulated by 2.10-, 2.30-
, 2.18-, 1.64-, 1.64-, and 2.79-fold, respectively. In black wheat seedlings subjected to UV-B 
treatment for 4 days, the relative expression levels of PAL, 4CL, C3H, C4H, F5H, and CAD 
underwent marked upregulation, speciﬁcally by 2.94, 4.75, 2.11, 2.39, 2.06, and 4.53 times, 
respectively. This indicated that the UV-B treatment had a more notable upregulation ef-
fect on the relative expression levels of PAL, 4CL, C4H, F5H, and CAD. In addition, the 
Figure 5. Effects of the red light treatment combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments on the
antioxidant enzyme activity and relative gene expression levels in black wheat seedings. The
lowercase letters represent significant differences between different treatments at the same time.
Figure 5V–VIII show the effects of the red light combined with UV-A and UV-B
treatments on the expression levels of SOD, POD, CAT, and APX in black wheat seedlings.
The UV-A and UV-B treatments notably increased the relative expression levels of SOD,
POD, CAT, and APX in contrast to the red light treatment. (p < 0.05). The relative expression
level of SOD was notably elevated under the UV-B treatment compared to UV-A (p < 0.05),
while the relative expression levels of CAT and APX were notably higher under the UV-A
treatment in contrast to UV-B (p < 0.05). The relative expression levels of SOD and CAT
were significantly elevated under the UV-A treatment compared to the other treatments
(p < 0.05), while the relative expression levels of POD and APX under the UV-B treatment
were higher and 5.49 and 4.09 times that of the red light treatment, respectively. The results
indicate that, as the illumination time increased, the UV-A treatment markedly upregulated
the expression levels of SOD and CAT (p < 0.05), while the UV-B treatment exhibited a more
potent inductive effect on the expressions of POD and APX.
3.5. Impact of the Red Light Combined with UV-A and UV-B Treatments on the Activities of
Enzymes Related to Phenolic Acid Synthesis and the Relative Gene Expression Levels in Black
Wheat Seedlings
The effects of the red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments on the activities
of PAL, 4CL, and C4H in black wheat seedlings were described in Figure 6I–III. Compared
with the red light treatment, the PAL, 4CL, and C4H enzyme activities exhibited significant
upregulation after 4 days of the UV-A and UV-B exposures (p < 0.05). Specifically, the UV-A
treatment led to 1.16-, 1.09-, and 1.32-fold increases in the PAL, 4CL, and C4H activities,
respectively, while the UV-B treatment resulted in 1.20-, 1.39-, and 1.58-fold enhancements.
The 4CL and C4H activities were notably elevated under the UV-B treatment in contrast to
the UV-A treatment (p < 0.05).
Foods 2024, 13, 2499 9 of 14
Foods 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 15 
 
 
relative expression level of caﬀeic acid O-methyl transferase  (COMT) under the light treat-
ment did not change signiﬁcantly compared with the red light treatment (p > 0.05). 
 
Figure 6. Eﬀects of the red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments on the enzyme activities 
and relative genes’ expression levels of phenolic acid synthesis in black wheat seedlings. The low-
ercase letters represent signiﬁcant diﬀerences between diﬀerent treatments at the same time. 
4. Discussion 
When plants are subjected to UV radiation for an extended period of time, they show 
a variety of morphological and physiological reactions, which may lead to cell damage. 
This damage may include DNA damage, prot ein damage, and cell membrane structure 
damage, which might hinder plant growth, dev elopment, and viability [22,32]. In this 
study, the impacts of the red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments on the ac-
cumulation of phenolic acids in black wheat seedlings was investigated, and the impacts 
of these treatments on the physiology and biochemistry of black wheat seedlings was also 
explored. The outcomes reveal that the UV-A  and UV-B treatments caused a decrease in 
the seedling length of the black wheat seedlin gs and an increase in the contents of 
O2
-., 
H2O2, and MDA, the main markers of plant membrane lipid peroxidation. This indicates 
that the UV-A and UV-B treatments induced a certain degree of oxidative damage in the 
Figure 6. Effects of the red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments on the enzyme activities
and relative genes’ expression levels of phenolic acid synthesis in black wheat seedlings. The
lowercase letters represent significant differences between different treatments at the same time.
The relative expression levels of P AL, 4CL, C3H, C4H, ferulate 5-hydroxylase (F5H),
COMT, and cinnamyl alcohol dehydrogenase (CAD) in the phenolic acid synthesis pathway
are shown in Figure 6V–X. Upon prolonged treatment, the relative expression levels of
key enzymes in the phenolic acid synthesis pathway, including P AL, 4CL, C3H, C4H,
F5H, and CAD, exhibited significant upregulation under the UV-A and UV-B treatments
(p < 0.05). In black wheat seedlings exposed to the UV-A treatment for 4 days, the relative
expression levels of P AL, 4CL, C3H, C4H, F5H, and CAD were upregulated by 2.10-, 2.30-,
2.18-, 1.64-, 1.64-, and 2.79-fold, respectively. In black wheat seedlings subjected to UV-B
treatment for 4 days, the relative expression levels of P AL, 4CL, C3H, C4H, F5H, and CAD
underwent marked upregulation, specifically by 2.94, 4.75, 2.11, 2.39, 2.06, and 4.53 times,
respectively. This indicated that the UV-B treatment had a more notable upregulation effect
on the relative expression levels of P AL, 4CL, C4H, F5H, and CAD. In addition, the relative
expression level of caffeic acid O-methyl transferase (COMT) under the light treatment did
not change significantly compared with the red light treatment (p > 0.05).
4. Discussion
When plants are subjected to UV radiation for an extended period of time, they show a
variety of morphological and physiological reactions, which may lead to cell damage. This
Foods 2024, 13, 2499 10 of 14
damage may include DNA damage, protein damage, and cell membrane structure damage,
which might hinder plant growth, development, and viability [ 22,32]. In this study, the
impacts of the red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments on the accumulation
of phenolic acids in black wheat seedlings was investigated, and the impacts of these
treatments on the physiology and biochemistry of black wheat seedlings was also explored.
The outcomes reveal that the UV-A and UV-B treatments caused a decrease in the seedling
length of the black wheat seedlings and an increase in the contents ofO−.
2 , H2O2, and MDA,
the main markers of plant membrane lipid peroxidation. This indicates that the UV-A and
UV-B treatments induced a certain degree of oxidative damage in the black wheat seedlings,
and the phenolic acid content in the black wheat seedlings significantly increased under
the UV-A and UV-B treatments.
The enrichment of phenolic acids is linked to the regulation of the activities and gene
expression levels of PAL, 4CL, C4H, C3H, COMT, F5H, and CAD via the biosynthetic route.
Prohydrojasmon treatment led to a substantial upregulation in the relative expression levels
of P ALand F3H in lettuce, thereby significantly augmenting the levels of phenolic acids [13].
Under NaCl treatment, the activities and gene expression levels of PAL, 4CL, and C4H in
barley were increased, which promoted the biosynthesis of more phenolic acids [12]. The
findings of this study unmistakably indicate that both UV-A and UV-B treatments led to
oxidative damage in the interior of black wheat seedlings. This damage may act as a signal
to trigger the activation of the phenolic acid synthesis pathway [32]. Specifically, both UV
treatments markedly elevated the activities of PAL, 4CL, and C4H, three key phenolic acid
synthases. However, through comparative analysis, it was discovered that the effect of
the UV-B treatment on the augmentation of the activities of these enzymes was notably
greater than that of the UV-A treatment. It is worth noting that the UV-B treatment not only
showed a stronger induction at the enzyme activity level but also showed a similar trend
at the gene expression level. The relative expression levels of the enzymes P AL, 4CL, C4H,
F5H, and CAD were observed to be substantially elevated following the UV-B treatment
compared to those under the UV-A treatment. This indicates that the UV-B treatment was
stronger than the UV-A treatment in inducing the activation of the phenolic acid synthesis
pathway. This effect is not only reflected in the enzyme activity but also further verified
at the level of gene transcription. The above findings reveal that the induction impact of
the UV-B treatment on the expression of the phenolic acid synthase gene in black wheat
seedlings was stronger than that of the UV-A treatment. The relative expression levels of
COMT in black wheat did not change significantly under the UV-A and UV-B treatments.
This may be due to the short lengths of time for the red light combined with UV-A and
UV-B treatments, which had little impact on the expression of COMT [19].
As a part of the solar spectrum, UV-A and UV-B radiations have a marked impact
on plant photosynthesis. In this study, compared with the red light treatment alone, the
red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments significantly elevated the levels of
photosynthetic pigments in black wheat seedlings. An increase in photosynthetic pigments
usually means an increase in the light energy utilization rate of plants, which is very
important for improving the photosynthetic efficiency of plants. FBA and NADP-ME are
two important enzymes for photosynthesis. Under the action of UV-A and UV-B, the relative
expression levels of FBA and NADP-ME were significantly elevated compared to those
observed under the red light treatment alone. FBA and NADP-ME occupy pivotal positions
in the light and dark reactions of photosynthesis. The increase in their gene expression
may directly promote photosynthesis, thus improving the photosynthetic efficiency of
black wheat seedlings [ 33,34]. It bears mentioning that the UV-A and UV-B treatments
not only enhance the photosynthesis of black wheat seedlings but may also improve their
antioxidant properties. This may be because the energy and substances produced by
photosynthesis can provide antioxidants for plants and help them resist oxidative damage
caused by UV-A and UV-B [35].
UV-A and UV-B treatments can lead to an elevation in the formation of ROS in plant
cells, resulting in oxidative damage and injury to cell structure and function [36]. In order
Foods 2024, 13, 2499 11 of 14
to cope with this challenge, plants have developed an efficient antioxidant enzyme system
as one of the most important means of alleviating oxidative damage [ 37]. Studies have
shown that plants can increase their seedlings endurance to UV duress by upregulating
the activity of antioxidant enzymes [38]. In this study, it was observed that the POD, SOD,
CAT, and APX activities in black wheat seedlings were significantly enhanced under the
red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments, which were significantly different
from that under the red light treatment. Simultaneously, the gene expression levels of these
antioxidant enzymes were also significantly increased under compound light treatment.
This result clearly shows that black wheat seedlings can effectively mobilize their antiox-
idant enzyme system to cope with and alleviate the environmental pressures caused by
UV-A and UV-B stress.
Phenolic substances, comprising an indispensable class of plant secondary metabolites,
serve as vital components of plants’ nonenzymatic antioxidant system [36]. In this study,
it was found that when black wheat seedlings were treated with red light combined with
UV-A and UV-B, the contents of total flavonoids and anthocyanins in their bodies increased
significantly. The findings indicate that UV-A and UV-B irradiation promoted the secondary
metabolic activity of black wheat seedlings and induced the synthesis of antioxidant sub-
stances. Phenolic compounds, specifically total flavonoids and anthocyanins, exert a crucial
function in eliminating free radicals, thereby mitigating oxidative damage to cells. Under
UV-A and UV-B stress, black wheat seedlings enhanced their own defense mechanism
by increasing the synthesis of these antioxidants, thus mitigating the harm due to UV
radiation. The results are consistent with the conclusions of Chen et al. [21], who observed
that the phenolic compounds in wheat seedlings were elevated after the UV-B treatment
alone. It was also found that the UV-A treatment could markedly elevate the content of
phenols in strawberries [16] and broccoli [17]. In addition, in this research, the anthocyanin
content under the UV-B treatment was notably greater than that achieved under the UV-A
treatment, while the total flavonoid content was significantly elevated under the UV-A
treatment in contrast to the UV-B treatment, which may be related to the differences be-
tween UV-B and UV-A in wavelength, energy distribution, and mechanism of action on
plant cells [38]. Based on the above discussion, Figure 7 summarizes the mechanism of the
impact of irradiation from a light source on the enrichment and physiological metabolism
of phenolic acids in black wheat seedlings.
Foods 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 15 
 
 
treatment. This result clearly shows that black wheat seedlings can effectively mobilize 
their antioxidant enzyme system to cope with and alleviate the environmental pressure s 
caused by UV-A and UV-B stress. 
Phenolic substances, comprising an indispensable class of plant secondary metabo-
lites, serve as vital component s of plants’ nonenzymatic antioxidant system [36]. In this 
study, it was found that when black wheat seedlings were treated with red light combined 
with UV-A and UV -B, the contents of total flavonoids and anthocyanins in their bodies 
increased significantly. The findings indicate that UV-A and UV-B irradiation promoted 
the secondary metabolic activity of black wheat seedlings and induced the synthe sis of 
antioxidant substances. Phenolic compounds, specifically total flavonoids and anthocya-
nins, exert a crucial function in eliminating free radicals, thereby mitigating oxidative 
damage to cells. Under UV-A and UV-B stress, black wheat seedlings enhanced their own 
defense mechanism by increasing the synthesis of these antioxidants, thus mitigating the 
harm due to UV radiation. The results are consistent with the conclusions of Chen et al. 
[21], who observed that the phenolic compounds in wheat seedlings  were elevated after 
the UV-B treatment alone. It was also found that the UV-A treatment could markedly el-
evate the content of phenols in strawberries [16] and broccoli [17]. In addition, in this re-
search, the anthocyanin content under the UV-B treatment was notably greater than that 
achieved under the UV-A treatment, while the total flavonoid content was significantly 
elevated under the UV-A treatment in contrast to the UV-B treatment, which may be re-
lated to the differences between UV-B and UV-A in wavelength, energy distribution, and 
mechanism of action on plant cells [38]. Based on the above discussion, Figure 7 summa-
rizes the mechanism of the impact of irradiation from a light source on the enrichment 
and physiological metabolism of phenolic acids in black wheat seedlings. 
 
Figure 7. Hypothesis of the mechanisms of the red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments 
on black wheat seedling growth and the regulation of phenolic acid enrichment. 
5. Conclusions 
This study investigated the regulatory effects of red light combined with UV -A and 
UV-B treatments on the synthesis of phenolic acids in black wheat seedlings. The results 
show that red light combined with UV -A and UV-B significantly enhanced the activities 
Figure 7. Hypothesis of the mechanisms of the red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments
on black wheat seedling growth and the regulation of phenolic acid enrichment.
Foods 2024, 13, 2499 12 of 14
5. Conclusions
This study investigated the regulatory effects of red light combined with UV-A and
UV-B treatments on the synthesis of phenolic acids in black wheat seedlings. The results
show that red light combined with UV-A and UV-B significantly enhanced the activities of
PAL, C4H, and 4CL and differentially upregulated the relative gene expression levels of
phenolic acid synthesis, thus promoting phenolic acid synthesis. UV-B exhibited a more
significant enrichment effect. Furthermore, the UV-A and UV-B treatments increased the
chlorophyll content, upregulated the relative gene expression levels of photosynthesis,
and stimulated photosynthesis in black wheat seedlings. Additionally, UV-A and UV-B
treatments suppressed the growth and development of black wheat seedlings, activated the
antioxidant system, and improved the antioxidant performance of black wheat seedlings.
The red light combined with UV-A and UV-B treatments play a positive role in promoting
phenolic acid accumulation in black wheat seedlings, providing theoretical support and
practical guidance for the production of black wheat products rich in phenolic acids.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https:
//www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/foods13162499/s1, Table S1: Sequence-specific primers used in
the present study.
Author Contributions: H.L., Draft—original manuscript; C.W., Experiment-related work and data
curation; Z.Y., Formal analysis; J.Z., Supervision; W.F., Supervision; Y.Y., Designed the research and
revised the manuscript. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in the study are included in the
article/Supplementary Material, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Zhang, L.; Zhang, M.; Zhang, L.; Mujumdar, A.S.; Yu, D. Drying technology development for future starchy staples food
processing: Research process, challenges, and application prospects. Drying Technol. 2024, 42, 518–539. [CrossRef]
2. Mattila, P .; Pihlava, J.M.; Hellström, J. Contents of phenolic acids, alkyl-and alkenylresorcinols, and avenanthramides in
commercial grain products. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2005, 53, 8290–8295. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Saleem, A.; Akhtar, M.F.; Sharif, A.; Akhtar, B.; Siddique, R.; Ashraf, G.M.; Alghamdi, B.S.; Alharthy, S.A. Anticancer, cardio-
protective and anti-inflammatory potential of natural-sources-derived phenolic acids. Molecules 2022, 27, 7286. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
4. Acosta-Estrada, B.A.; Gutierrez-Uribe, J.A.; Serna-Saldivar, S.O. Bound phenolics in foods, a review.Food Chem. 2014, 152, 46–55.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Khosroshahi, E.D.; Razavi, S.H. Wheat germ valorization by fermentation: A novel insight into the stabilization, nutri-
tional/functional values and therapeutic potentials with emphasis on anti-cancer effects. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 2023,
131, 175–189. [CrossRef]
6. Dong, N.Q.; Lin, H.X. Contribution of phenylpropanoid metabolism to plant development and plant–environment interactions.
J. Integr. Plant Biol. 2021, 63, 180–209. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Laddomada, B.; Blanco, A.; Mita, G.; D’Amico, L.; Singh, R.P .; Ammar, K.; Crossa, J.; Guzmán, C. Drought and heat stress impacts
on phenolic acids accumulation in durum wheat cultivars. Foods 2021, 10, 2142. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Zanotto, S.; Bertrand, A.; Purves, R.W.; Olsen, J.E.; Elessawy, F.M.; Ergon, Å. Biochemical changes after cold acclimation in
Nordic red clover (Trifolium pratense L.) accessions with contrasting levels of freezing tolerance. Physiol. Plant. 2023, 175, e13953.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Ding, M.; Xie, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Cai, X.; Zhang, B.; Ma, P .; Dong, J. Salicylic acid regulates phenolic acid biosynthesis via
SmNPR1–SmTGA2/SmNPR4 modules in Salvia miltiorrhiza. J. Exp. Bot. 2023, 74, 5736–5751. [CrossRef]
10. Pesaraklu, A.; Radjabian, T.; Salami, S.A. Methyl jasmonate and Ag+ as effective elicitors for enhancement of phenolic acids
contents in Salvia officinalis and Salvia verticillata, as two traditional medicinal plants. J. S. Afr. Bot. 2021, 141, 105–115. [CrossRef]
Foods 2024, 13, 2499 13 of 14
11. You, W.; Zhang, J.; Ru, X.; Xu, F.; Wu, Z.; Jin, P .; Zheng, Y.; Cao, S. CaCl 2 promoted phenolics accumulation via the
CmCAMTA4-mediated transcriptional activation of phenylpropane pathway and energy metabolism in fresh-cut cantaloupe.
Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2024, 207, 112599. [CrossRef]
12. Ma, Y.; Wang, P .; Chen, Z.; Gu, Z.; Yang, R. NaCl stress on physio-biochemical metabolism and antioxidant capacity in germinated
hulless barley (Hordeum vulgare L.). J. Sci. Food Agric. 2019, 99, 1755–1764. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Takahashi, S.; Namioka, Y.; Azis, H.R.; Sano, T.; Aono, M.; Koshiyama, M.; Fujisawa, H.; Isoda, H. Prohydrojasmon promotes the
accumulation of phenolic compounds in red leaf lettuce. Plants 2021, 10, 1920. [CrossRef]
14. Niu, Y.; Ye, L.; Wang, Y.; Shi, Y.; Liu, Y.; Luo, A. Transcriptome analysis reveals salicylic acid treatment mitigates chilling injury in
kiwifruit by enhancing phenolic synthesis and regulating phytohormone signaling pathways. Postharvest Biol. Technol. 2023,
205, 112483. [CrossRef]
15. Jung, W.S.; Chung, I.M.; Hwang, M.H.; Kim, S.H.; Yu, C.Y.; Ghimire, B.K. Application of light-emitting diodes for improving
the nutritional quality and bioactive compound levels of some crops and medicinal plants. Molecules 2021, 26, 1477. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
16. Villamil-Galindo, E.; Antunes-Ricardo, M.; Piagentini, A.M.; Jacobo-Velázquez, D.A. Adding value to strawberry agro-industrial
by-products through ultraviolet A-induced biofortification of antioxidant and anti-inflammatory phenolic compounds. Front.
Nutr. 2022, 9, 1080147. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Gao, M.; He, R.; Shi, R.; Li, Y.; Song, S.; Zhang, Y.; Su, W.; Liu, H. Combination of selenium and UVA radiation affects growth and
phytochemicals of broccoli microgreens. Molecules 2021, 26, 4646. [CrossRef]
18. Lim, Y.J.; Jeong, H.Y.; Gil, C.S.; Kwon, S.J.; Na, J.K.; Lee, C.; Eom, S.H. Isoflavone accumulation and the metabolic gene expression
in response to persistent UV-B irradiation in soybean sprouts. Food Chem. 2020, 303, 125376. [CrossRef]
19. Cuong, D.M.; Ha, T.W.; Park, C.H.; Kim, N.S.; Yeo, H.J.; Chun, S.W.; Kim, C.; Park, S.U. Effects of LED lights on expression of
genes involved in phenylpropanoid biosynthesis and accumulation of phenylpropanoids in wheat sprout. Agronomy 2019, 9, 307.
[CrossRef]
20. Qian, H.; Liu, T.; Deng, M.; Miao, H.; Cai, C.; Shen, W.; Wang, Q. Effects of light quality on main health-promoting compounds
and antioxidant capacity of Chinese kale sprouts. Food Chem. 2016, 196, 1232–1238. [CrossRef]
21. Chen, Z.; Ma, Y.; Weng, Y.; Yang, R.; Gu, Z.; Wang, P . Effects of UV-B radiation on phenolic accumulation, antioxidant activity and
physiological changes in wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) seedlings. Food Biosci. 2019, 30, 100409. [CrossRef]
22. Wang, M.; Leng, C.; Zhu, Y.; Wang, P .; Gu, Z.; Yang, R. UV-B treatment enhances phenolic acids accumulation and antioxidant
capacity of barley seedlings. LWT 2022, 153, 112445. [CrossRef]
23. Zhang, Z.; Li, Y.; Qiu, T.; Duan, C.; Chen, L.; Zhao, S.; Zhang, X.; Fang, L. Microplastics addition reduced the toxicity and uptake
of cadmium to Brassica chinensis L. Sci. Total Environ. 2022, 852, 158353. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Mencin, M.; Jamnik, P .; Petkovšek, M.M.; Veberiˇ c, R.; Terpinc, P . Enzymatic treatments of raw, germinated and fermented spelt
(Triticum spelta L.) seeds improve the accessibility and antioxidant activity of their phenolics. LWT 2022, 169, 114046. [CrossRef]
25. Yin, Y.; Xue, J.; Hu, J.; Yang, Z.; Fang, W. Exogenous methyl jasmonate combined with Ca2+ promote resveratrol biosynthesis and
stabilize sprout growth for the production of resveratrol-rich peanut sprouts. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2023, 203, 107988. [CrossRef]
26. Lao, F.; Giusti, M.M. Quantification of purple corn (Zea mays L.) anthocyanins using spectrophotometric and HPLC approaches:
Method comparison and correlation. Food Anal. Methods 2016, 9, 1367–1380. [CrossRef]
27. Zhuang, L.; Xu, K.; Zhu, Y.; Wang, F.; Xiao, J.; Guo, L. Calcium affects glucoraphanin metabolism in broccoli sprouts under ZnSO4
stress. Food Chem. 2021, 334, 127520. [CrossRef]
28. Zhao, K.; Zhao, C.; Yang, M.; Yin, D. ZnCl2 treatment improves nutrient quality and Zn accumulation in peanut seeds and sprouts.
Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 2364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Tang, B.; Xu, S.-Z.; Zou, X.-L.; Zheng, Y.-L.; Qiu, F.-Z. Changes of antioxidative enzymes and lipid peroxidation in leaves and
roots of waterlogging-tolerant and waterlogging-sensitive maize genotypes at seedling stage. Agric. Sci. China 2010, 9, 651–661.
[CrossRef]
30. Yin, Y.; Tian, X.; He, X.; Yang, J.; Yang, Z.; Fang, W. Exogenous melatonin stimulated isoflavone biosynthesis in NaCl-stressed
germinating soybean (Glycine max L.). Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2022, 185, 123–131. [CrossRef]
31. Livak, K.J.; Schmittgen, T.D. Analysis of relative gene expression data using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2−∆∆CT method.
Methods 2001, 25, 402–408. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. González Moreno, A.; de Cózar, A.; Prieto, P .; Domínguez, E.; Heredia, A. Radiationless mechanism of UV deactivation by cuticle
phenolics in plants. Nat. Commun. 2022, 13, 1786. [CrossRef]
33. Carrera, D.Á.; George, G.M.; Fischer-Stettler, M.; Galbier, F.; Eicke, S.; Truernit, E.; Streb, S.; Zeeman, S.C. Distinct plastid fructose
bisphosphate aldolases function in photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic metabolism in Arabidopsis. J. Exp. Bot. 2021, 72,
3739–3755. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Zhao, H.; Wang, Y.; Lyu, M.J.A.; Zhu, X.G. Two major metabolic factors for an efficient NADP-malic enzyme type C4 photosynthe-
sis. Plant Physiol. 2022, 189, 84–98. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Soriano, G.; Del-Castillo-Alonso, M.- Á.; Monforte, L.; Tom ás-Las-Heras, R.; Mart ínez-Abaigar, J.; N úñez-Olivera, E.
Photosynthetically-active radiation, UV-A and UV-B, causes both common and specific damage and photoprotective responses in
the model liverwort Marchantia polymorpha subsp. ruderalis. Photochem. Photobiol. Sci. 2019, 18, 400–412. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Foods 2024, 13, 2499 14 of 14
36. Yadav, A.; Singh, D.; Lingwan, M.; Yadukrishnan, P .; Masakapalli, S.K.; Datta, S. Light signaling and UV-B-mediated plant growth
regulation. J. Integr. Plant Biol. 2020, 62, 1270–1292. [CrossRef]
37. ´Swieca, M. Elicitation with abiotic stresses improves pro-health constituents, antioxidant potential and nutritional quality of lentil
sprouts. Saudi J. Biol. Sci. 2015, 22, 409–416. [CrossRef]
38. Surjadinata, B.B.; Jacobo-Velázquez, D.A.; Cisneros-Zevallos, L. UVA, UVB and UVC light enhances the biosynthesis of phenolic
antioxidants in fresh-cut carrot through a synergistic effect with wounding. Molecules 2017, 22, 668. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.