ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences          (2024) 81:375 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-024-05388-9
  Lisong Teng
lsteng@zju.edu.cn
1	 Department	of	Oncological	Surgery,	The	First	Affiliated	
Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
2 Cancer Institute (Key Laboratory for Cancer Intervention 
and Prevention, China National Ministry of Education, 
Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology in 
Medical	Sciences),	The	Second	Affiliated	Hospital,	Zhejiang	
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China
3 Department of Gynecology, Guangzhou First People’s 
Hospital, Guangzhou, China
Abstract
Background Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most malignant cancers worldwide. Metabolism disorder is a critical charac-
teristic of malignant tumors related to tumor progression and metastasis. However, the expression and molecular mechanism 
of malic enzyme 3 (ME3) in GC are rarely reported. In this study, we aim to investigate the molecular mechanism of ME3 in 
the development of GC and to explore its potential value as a prognostic and therapeutic target in GC.
Method ME3 mRNA and protein expression were evaluated in patients with GC using RT-qPCR, WB, and immunohisto -
chemistry,	as	well	as	their	correlation	with	clinicopathological	indicators.	The	effect	of	ME3	on	proliferation	and	metastasis	
was evaluated using Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8), 5-ethynyl-20-deoxyuridine (EdU) assay, transwell assay, wound healing 
assay,	and	subcutaneous	injection	or	tail	vein	injection	of	tumor	cells	in	mice	model.	The	effects	of	ME3	knockdown	on	the	
level	of	metabolites	and	hypoxia-inducible	factor-1α	(HIF-1α)	protein	were	determined	in	GC	cells.	Oxidative	phosphoryla-
tion was measured to evaluate adenosine triphosphate (ATP) production.
Results ME3 was downregulated in human GC tissues ( P < 0.001). The decreased ME3 mRNA expression was associ -
ated with younger age (P = 0.02), pathological staging (P = 0.049), and lymph node metastasis (P = 0.001), while low ME3 
expression was associated with tumor size (P = 0.048), tumor invasion depth (P < 0.001), lymph node metastasis (P = 0.018), 
TNM staging (P < 0.001), and poor prognosis (OS, P = 0.0206; PFS P =	0.0453).	ME3	knockdown	promoted	GC	cell	malig-
nancy	phenotypes.	Moreover,	α-ketoglutarate	(α-KG)	and	NADPH/NADP+ ratios were reduced while malate was increased 
in	the	ME3	knockdown	group	under	normoxia.	When	cells	were	incubated	under	hypoxia,	the	NADPH/NADP+ ratio and 
α-KG	decreased	while	intracellular	reactive	oxygen	species	(ROS)	increased	significantly.	The	ME3	knockdown	group	
exhibited an increase in ATP production and while ME3 overexpression group exhibited oppositely. We discovered that ME3 
and	HIF-1α	expression	were	negatively	correlated	in	GC	cells	and	tissues,	and	proposed	the	hypothesis:	downregulation	of	
ME3	promotes	GC	progression	via	regulating	intracellular	oxidative	stress	and	HIF-1α.
Conclusion We provide evidence that ME3 downregulation is associated with poor prognosis in GC patients and propose a 
hypothesis	for	the	ME3	regulatory	mechanism	in	GC	progression.	The	present	study	is	of	great	scientific	significance	and	
clinical	value	for	exploring	the	prognostic	and	therapeutic	targets	of	GC,	evaluating	and	improving	the	clinical	efficacy	of	
patients, reducing recurrence and metastasis, and improving the prognosis and quality of life of patients.
Keywords	 Malic	enzyme	3	(ME3)	·	Gastric	cancer	·	Α-ketoglutarate	·	Hypoxia-inducible	factor-1α	·	Reactive	oxygen	
species
Received: 31 January 2024 / Revised: 4 July 2024 / Accepted: 29 July 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
Downregulation of malic enzyme 3 facilitates progression of gastric 
carcinoma via regulating intracellular oxidative stress and hypoxia-
inducible factor-1α stabilization
Yingying Huang1,2,3 · Yan Yang1 · Xiangliu Chen1 · Siying Zeng2 · Yiran Chen1 · Haiyong Wang1 · Xiadong Lv1 · 
Xun Hu2 · Lisong Teng1
1 3
Cellular andM olecular Life Sciences

Y. Huang et al.
Abbreviations
AJCC  American Joint Committee on Cancer
GO  Gene ontology
BP  Biology process
CC  Cellular component
MF  Molecular function
KEGG  Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes
NADP+	 	β-nicotinamide	adenine	dinucleotide	
phosphate
NADPH	 	β-nicotinamide	adenine	dinucleotide	phos-
phate, reduced form
TCGA  The Cancer Genome Atlas
GEPIA	 	Gene	Expression	Profiling	Interactive	
Analysis
STAD  Stomach Adenocarcinoma
EMT  Epithelial-mesenchymal transition
MET  Mesenchymal-epithelial transition
OS  Overall survival
PFS  Progression-free analysis
FDR  False discovery rate
α-KG	 	α-ketoglutarate
DMKG	 	Dimethyl	α-ketoglutarate
OXPHOS  Oxidative phosphorylation
ROS  Reactive oxygen species
IHC  Immunohistochemistry
ATP  Adenosine triphosphate
HIF-1α	 	Hypoxia-inducible	factor	1-alpha
Introduction
Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common aggres -
sive	malignancies	and	the	fifth	leading	cause	of	cancer-
related mortality worldwide [1].	Despite	recent	remarkable	
advances and progress in diagnostics and treatments, the 
five-year	survival	rate	of	GC	patients	remains	the	frustrat-
ing cause of the high recurrence and metastasis rates [ 2–4]. 
However, the molecular mechanism that regulates GC pro -
gression and metastasis remain poorly understood. In this 
study, we aim to investigate the molecular mechanism of 
ME3 in the development of GC and to explore its potential 
value as a prognostic and therapeutic target in GC.
Metabolism	reprogramming	is	an	important	marker	of	
malignant tumors [5]. The tumor cells can adjust receptors 
or activate related pathways through gene mutation or other 
ways to overcome growth-factor-dependent growth patterns, 
hence promoting the absorption and metabolism of nutrients 
or	choosing	new	energy	supply	methods	to	provide	suffi-
cient energy for cell growth and proliferation [ 6–8]. How-
ever,	metabolic	remodeling	affects	the	microenvironment	of	
cancer cells and regulates tumor cell proliferation and dis -
tant metastasis [ 9, 10]. Mitochondria are an important hub 
for coordinating metabolism reprogramming. Mitochondria 
regulate energy metabolism, biosynthesis, and signal trans -
duction pathways, allowing cancer cells to adapt to harsh 
survival environments and initiate invasion, metastasis, and 
treatment resistance [ 11]. Mitochondria can regulate reac -
tive	oxygen	species	(ROS),	cell	differentiation,	and	autoph-
agy during metabolic remodeling. Mitochondria can also 
influence	the	malignant	process	of	the	tumor	by	increasing	
the abundance of oncogenic proteins and metabolites, such 
as	HIF-1α	and	α-KG	[11–14]. Studies on GC have revealed 
that drug treatment could cause mitochondrial ROS accu -
mulation and promote apoptosis and autophagy. Metabolic 
reprogramming can sustain the survival and proliferation of 
GC cells when mitochondrial DNA damage occurs [15–17].
Cancer cells grow at an aberrantly rapid rate with the 
expense	of	overtaken	oxygen,	contributing	to	the	relative	
hypoxia tumor microenvironment [ 18, 19]. The hypoxia-
inducible	factor-1	(HIF-1)	is	a	key	mediator	of	hypoxia	
response [20].	HIF-1,	consisting	of	HIF-1α	and	HIF-1β,	is	
a	heterodimeric	transcription	factor.	HF-1α	is	an	oxygen	
concentration-sensitive	subunit,	while	HIF-1β	is	a	continu-
ously expressed subunit [21, 22].	HIF-1α	is	hydroxylated	on	
proline residue 402 or 564 by proline hydroxylase domain 
(PHD) protein under normoxia, degrading via the ubiquitin-
protease pathway with a half-life of less than 1 min [23]. In 
contrast,	PHD	activity	is	inhibited,	and	the	HIF-1α	protein	is	
increased	under	hypoxia.	Then,	HIF-1α	and	HIF-1β	rapidly	
polymerize and regulate the downstream gene expression 
[24]. HIF-1 exhibits an important role in GC carcinogene -
sis, angiogenesis, metastasis, and chemoresistance [25–28]. 
However, the exact mechanisms involved in hypoxia-driven 
GC metastasis remain uninvestigated.
Malic enzymes (MEs) are essential decarboxylases in 
the tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA), catalyzing the conver -
sion of malate to pyruvate [ 29, 30]. In human cells, malic 
enzymes	are	encoded	by	three	homologous	genes:	ME1	is	
located in the cytoplasm, and its enzymatic activity depends 
on NADP+; ME2 and ME3 are both located in mitochon -
dria, and their enzymatic activity depends on NAD + and 
NADP+, respectively [ 31, 32]. According to studies, ME1 
plays an important role in various diseases. ME1 is upreg -
ulated to maintain redox homeostasis [ 33], while ME2 is 
frequently hemizygously co-deleted with SMAD4 in GC. 
Another	 study	 reveals	 a	 positive	 feedback	 mechanism	
between TP53 and MEs (ME1 and ME2) that modulates 
the metabolism reprogramming and senescence. Inhibit -
ing ME1 and ME2 expression induces cellular senescence 
(rather than apoptosis) by activating p53 feed-forwardly 
via the Mdm2 and AMPK pathways, respectively, whereas 
ME1 and ME2 overexpression inhibit cellular senescence 
[32].	The	co-deletion	effect	of	ME2	and	SMAD4	could	be	
replenished by ME3 in pancreatic cancers, implying that 
1 3
  375  Page 2 of 21
Downregulation of malic enzyme 3 facilitates progression of gastric carcinoma via regulating intracellular…
ME3 inhibitors might be a promising target of ME2-null 
tumors [ 34]. However, little research has been conducted 
on the role of ME3 in cancers, especially GC. Mitochon -
drial	malic	enzymes’	altered	expression	or	activity	affects	
other TCA cycle intermediate metabolites, including citric 
acid	and	α-KG.	Increased	α-KG	facilitated	modification	of	
HIF-1α	by	PHDs	and	further	recognition	by	Von	Hippel	
Lindau	protein	(pVHL)	for	degradation	via	the	proteasomal	
pathway [35]. Therefore, we attempt to investigate whether 
the ME3 downregulation could promote GC growth and 
metastasis	by	regulating	HIF-1α	expression	and	to	provide	
a mechanistic understanding of hypoxia and tumor metabo-
lism pathways.
According to proteomic sequencing of GC samples from 
our	center,	ME3	is	differentially	expressed	in	GC	patients	
with high or low metastatic tendency. However, there 
must be more research on the ME3 expression in GC and 
its impact on the biological behavior of GC cells, includ -
ing tumorigenesis, progression, and potential regulatory 
mechanisms. Tumor cells adapt to this change by meta -
bolic reprogramming because they have a higher demand 
for material and energy supplements. Increasing intracel -
lular ROS and the onset of hypoxia accompany this pro -
cess. Malic enzymes are involved in intracellular substance 
metabolism, and their abnormal expression and function in 
a hypoxic environment might disrupt intracellular redox 
homeostasis. This signaling pathway activation can be con-
trolled	by	regulating	α-KG	production,	affecting	the	HIF-1α	
protein	degradation.	Therefore,	we	investigate	the	effects	of	
abnormal	ME3	expression	on	the	HIF-1α	signaling	and	its	
potential regulatory mechanisms in promoting GC growth 
and metastasis. We hope that this study would provide new 
prospectives	and	scientific	evidence	for	exploring	the	prog-
nostic and therapeutic targets of GC, evaluating and improv-
ing	the	clinical	efficacy	of	patients,	reducing	recurrence	and	
metastasis, and improving the prognosis and quality of life 
of patients.
Methods
Patients and clinical specimens
GC and para-cancerous tissue samples were collected ran -
domly from patients undergoing gastrectomy between 2015 
and	2020	at	the	First	Affiliated	Hospital	of	Zhejiang	Univer-
sity, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China. All the partici -
pants	have	signed	“written	informed	consent”	to	take	part	in	
this study. All the samples were pathologically diagnosed as 
GC, and all patients had not received radiotherapy or che -
motherapy before gastrectomy, and follow-up information 
was available. Patients were informed that their specimens 
were stored by the hospital and potentially used for scien -
tific	research.	The	study	was	conducted	under	the	Declara-
tion	of	Helsinki	and	its	amendments	and	approved	by	the	
the	Medical	Ethics	Committee	of	the	First	Affiliated	Hospi-
tal	of	Zhejiang	University	(Approval	Number:	2021	− 869).
Cell culture and transfection
The human immortalized normal gastric mucosal cell line 
GES-1 was obtained from the China Center for Type Cul -
ture Collection (CCTCC). The GC cell lines (AGS, HGC-
27, BGC823, MGC803, SGC7901, SNU-1, NCI-N87, and 
MKN45)	were	purchased	from	the	Cell	Bank	of	the	Chinese	
Academy of Sciences (Shanghai, China). GC cell lines were 
cultured	in	RPMI	(Roswell	Park	Memorial	Institute)-1640	
medium (supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 
100	 units/mL	 penicillin,	 and	 100	 µg/mL	 streptomycin),	
while GES-1 was cultured in DMEM (dulbecco’s modi -
fied	eagle	medium)	medium	(supplemented	with	10%	fetal	
bovine	serum,	100	units/mL	penicillin	and	100	µg/mL	strep-
tomycin)	at	37℃	with	5%	CO2 considered as a normoxic 
condition. A hypoxic culture chamber (ELECTROTEK, 
England)	was	employed	to	evaluate	the	effects	of	hypoxic	
conditions	(37℃,	1%	O2, and 5% CO2).
The	specific	small	interfering	RNA	(siRNA)	targeting	
ME3 and a negative control siRNA were obtained from 
GenePharma (Shanghai, China). Plasmids expressing ME3 
shRNA or control shRNA were chemically synthesized by 
Generay Biotech (Shanghai, China). The cells were cultured 
in a six-well plate and transfected with siRNA or shRNA 
using lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen, USA), according to 
the manufacturer’s instructions. The cells were harvested 
48 h after transfection for further experiments.
RNA extraction and quantitative real-time 
polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
Total RNA was extracted from tissues and cells using Trizol 
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) followed by RT-PCR. 
The qRT-PCR was performed using TB Green® Premix EX 
Taq™	II	(Takara,	Osaka,	Japan)	via	StepOne	Real-Time	
PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). 
Relative expression analysis was performed using the com-
parative CT method (2 −ΔΔCT), and gene mRNA level was 
normalized to GAPDH expression. qPCR primers were pur-
chased	from	Tsingke	(Beijing,	China).
Western blot (WB) analysis
Total protein was extracted from GC cells and tissues, and 
Pierce™ Rapid Gold BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher 
Scientific)	 was	 used	 to	 measure	 protein	 concentrations.	
1 3
Page 3 of 21   375 
Y. Huang et al.
Edu assay
The cell proliferation ability was inquired using a 5-ethy -
nyl-20-deoxyuridine	 (Edu)	 assay	 kit	 (Ribobio,	 Guang-
zhou, China). The cells were seeded into 24-well plates at 
a density of 1 × 105 each well. Subsequent operations were 
carried out according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The 
proliferating cells are stained with Edu dye, and nuclei with 
Hoechst.	Then,	the	results	were	visualized	using	a	fluores-
cence microscope, and cell counting was performed using 
ImageJ software.
Xenograft mouse model
Four-week-old	BALB/c	female	nude	mice	were	purchased	
from the Experimental Animal Center of Zhejiang Prov -
ince.	We	chose	MGC803	to	construct	ME3-knockdown	cell	
line and HGC-27 to construct ME3 expression cell line. An 
equal number of treated GC cells were resuspended in 100 
µL	PBS	and	subcutaneously	injected	into	the	left	flank	of	
mice, randomly divided into several groups. Tumor size was 
measured	every	five	days.	After	four	weeks	of	feeding,	mice	
were euthanized, and subcutaneous transplanted tumors 
were removed for histology analysis. Tumor volume was 
calculated	using	the	formula:	1/2(length×width2).
Six-week-old	 BALB/c	 female	 mice	 were	 randomly	
grouped and injected with 1 × 106	(in	100	µL	PBS)	control	
shRNA	or	sh-ME3/	Luc	HGC-27	cells	via	the	tail	vein.	Bio-
luminescent	images	were	captured	four	weeks	after	cancer	
cell	injection	with	the	IVIS	Spectrum	to	detect	whether	lung	
metastasis had occurred. Mice were euthanized with organs 
(lung, liver, and bone) removed for hematoxylin-eosin 
staining (HE) staining and other histology analysis.
All animal experiments were approved by the Eth -
ics	Committee	for	Laboratory	Animals	of	the	First	Affili-
ated	Hospital	of	Zhejiang	University	(Approval	number:	
2021 − 1431, 2022 − 1060).
Measurement of intracellular ROS
Intracellular	 ROS	 was	 probed	 using	 2,	 7′-dichlorodi-
hydrofluorescein	 diacetate	 (DCFH-DA,	 Beyotime)	 and	
MitoSOX™ Red mitochondrial superoxide indicator (Invit-
rogen) according to manufacturers’ instruction. The staining 
of cells treated with hypoxia was conducted in a hypoxia 
incubator. The stained cells were washed with ice-cold 
HBSS, then observed under Zeiss LSM900 laser confocal 
microscope	(Carl	Zeiss,	Germany).	The	fluorescence	inten-
sity was analyzed using ImageJ software.
An equal quantity of protein samples was separated using 
SDS-PAGE	and	transferred	onto	a	polyvinylidene	fluoride	
(PVDF)	membrane	(Millipore,	USA).	The	membranes	were	
probed with primary antibodies overnight and incubated 
with the HRP-conjugated goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit IgG 
antibody (Cell Signaling Technology, USA).
Immunofluorescence (IF)
The	GC	cells	were	fixed	with	4%	paraformaldehyde	and	per-
meabilized	with	0.025%	Triton	X-100.	After	blocking,	the	
fixed	cells	were	incubated	with	the	E-cadherin,	N-cadherin,	
and vimentin primary antibodies. The secondary antibod -
ies were Fluorescein isothiocyanate isomer I (FITC)-labeled 
Goat Anti-Mouse IgG (H + L) and Cy3-labeled Goat Anti-
Rat IgG (H + L) (Beyotime, China). 4’,6-diamidino2-
phenylindole (DAPI) was used to label the cell nucleus. 
Fluorescence confocal images were captured using a laser-
scanning confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Germany).
Cell migration and transwell assay
The invasion and migration assays were performed using 
a Transwell chamber (Corning, USA). The chambers were 
coated	with	50	µL	of	Matrigel	(BD,	USA)/	PRMI-1640	
medium	(1:4,	v/v)	for	30	min	at	37℃.	A	total	of	2	× 104 cells 
were	seeded	into	the	upper	chambers	with	100	µL	serum-
free	medium,	while	the	cell	culture	dish	was	filled	with	700	
µL	RPMI-1640	medium	containing	10%	FBS.	After	24	h	
of	incubation,	the	chamber	membranes	were	fixed	with	4%	
paraformaldehyde and stained with crystal violet dye. The 
number	of	invaded	or	migrated	cells	was	quantified	in	five	
random	visual	fields	and	photographed	under	microscopic.
Wound healing assay
Cells were cultured in 12-welll plates until they reached con-
fluence.	After	creating	a	straight	line	in	the	cell	monolayer	
using a sterile pipette tip. Detached cells were removed by 
PBS. Images were captured after 24 h and the percentage of 
scratch	area	was	quantified	by	using	ImageJ.
Cell viability assay
The treatment and control cells were seeded in 96-well plates 
at a density of 1 × 103	cells/well	and	incubated	at	37℃.	The	
cell viability was measured at 6, 24, 48, 72, and 96 h using 
Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK-8, Dojindo, Kumamoto, Japan) 
according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
1 3
  375  Page 4 of 21
Downregulation of malic enzyme 3 facilitates progression of gastric carcinoma via regulating intracellular…
Results
ME3 is downregulated in GC and correlated with 
poor prognosis
We examined ME3 expression in cancer and para-cancer -
ous tissues to validate its role in GC. We collected tissues 
from patients after gastrectomy and retrieved their medi -
cal histories. We discovered that ME3 mRNA (Fig. 1a) and 
protein (Fig. 1b–c)	levels	were	remarkably	reduced	in	can-
cer tissues using RT-qPCR and WB, suggesting that ME3 
was restrained at the transcriptional level during GC pro -
gression (Cohort A for RT-qPCR and Cohort B for WB). 
As mentioned, ME2 is an important isoenzyme of ME3, so 
we simultaneously detected ME2 protein expression in 23 
pairs of patients’ tissue samples by WB assay and compared 
its correlation with the expression of ME3 in GC tissues. 
The	result	showed	that	there	was	no	significant	correlation	
between the expression of ME2 and ME3 in GC (Supple -
mentary Fig. 1a–b). We also extracted ME3 expression data 
from	the	Gene	Expression	Profiling	Interactive	Analysis	
(GEPIA)	online	tool	to	re-confirm	our	findings.	The	result	
demonstrated that ME3 mRNA had a lower expression level 
in GC (Fig. 1d). Table 1 lists the clinical characteristics of 
258 GC patients and their relationships with ME3 expres -
sion.	Low	ME3	expression	was	significantly	associated	with	
younger age (P =	0.02),	poor	differentiation	(P = 0.049), and 
increased lymph node metastasis (P = 0.001).
Then, we randomly selected 161 patients with GC 
(Cohort C), collected cancer and para-cancerous tissues, 
and created a GC tissue microarray (TMA). The ME3 
expression was detected using an Immunohistochemistry 
(IHC) assay. The IHC result revealed that ME3 was down-
regulated in cancer tissues (Fig. 1e–f). According to the IHC 
score, the patients were divided into the ME3-high and the 
ME3-low group. Figure 1g depicts the typical high and low 
ME3 protein expression from GC tissue and its adjacent 
counterpart. Based on the median IHC score, the percentage 
of samples with low ME3 expression was 21.1% in para-
cancerous tissues and as high as 91.6% in cancerous tissues 
(Fig. 1h). Table 2 lists the clinical characteristics of 161 GC 
patients and their relationship with ME3 expression level. 
Low	 ME3	 expression	 was	 significantly	 associated	 with	
advanced T staging ( P < 0.0001), N staging ( P = 0.018), 
TNM staging ( P < 0.001), and tumor size ( P = 0.048). The 
Kaplan-Meier analysis revealed that patients with low ME3 
expression levels had poor overall survival (OS, P = 0.026) 
and disease-free survival (DFS, P = 0.0453, Fig. 1i–j). We 
divided patients into metastasis and non-metastasis groups 
based on the presence of simultaneous or heterogeneous 
distant	metastasis	to	verify	further	the	difference	in	the	ME3	
expression protein in patients with or without metastasis. 
Cell and mitochondria oxygen consumption rate 
analysis
The oxygen consumption rate was analyzed using the Oxy-
graph-2 K platform (Oroboros Instruments Corp, Austria). 
Briefly,	1	× 106 cells resuspended in RPMI-1640 medium 
were	injected	into	the	assay	chamber.	Oligomycin	(1	µM),	
rotenone	(1	µM),	FCCP	(6	µM),	and	antimycin	(1	µM)	were	
sequentially injected into the assay chambers when the oxy-
gen consumption rate reached a plateau. The soluble oxygen 
concentration was recorded for data analysis.
Measurement of malate
After cultured in normoxia or hypoxia environment, cells 
were rinsed three times with cold PBS, followed by adding 
800	µL	perchloric	acid	per	well.	The	plates	were	scraped,	
and the suspension was transferred into a 1.5 mL Eppen -
dorf tube. For the hypoxia treatment group, the above pro -
tocol was performed in a hypoxia incubator with 1% O 2. 
The samples were placed on ice, and potassium carbonate 
was used to adjust the pH value of the suspension. After -
ward, the mixture was thoroughly mixed and centrifuged 
(14,000	rpm,	10	min,	and	4℃)	to	remove	the	cell	debris.	
The supernatant was collected for subsequent analysis.
Briefly,	100	µL	of	the	sample	was	added	to	900	µL	of	
the	 reaction	 buffer	 (100	 mmol/L	 Glycine,	 170	 mmol/L	
hydrazine,	2	mmol/L	NAD+,	2.1	U/mL	malic	dehydroge-
nases, pH = 9.2). The sample was thoroughly mixed and 
incubated at room temperature for 1 h, and the absorbance 
was	recorded	at	340	nm	against	the	blank	(100	µL	sample	
without enzyme).
Assay for α-KG
According	to	the	manufacturer’s	instructions,	the	α-KG	in	
cells	was	measured	using	Abcam	α-ketoglutarate	Assay	Kit	
(ab83431).
Statistical analysis
All data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism software 
(GraphPad Prism 8.0) and IBM SPSS Statistics software, 
version 21. The data were presented as the mean ± standard 
deviation (SD) from at least three independent experiments. 
The	significant	difference	in	quantitative	data	was	assessed	
using an independent Student’s t-test or One-way analysis 
of	variance	(ANOVA),	while	qualitative	data	were	com-
pared	using	the	Pearson	χ2 tests. P-values for each analy -
sis	were	marked	on	figures,	and	significance	was	defined	at	
*p < 0.05.
1 3
Page 5 of 21   375 
Y. Huang et al.
Downregulation of ME3 promotes tumor growth, 
migration, and invasion in vitro
Then, we compared the ME3 mRNA and protein level 
(Fig. 2a) in several GC cell lines using GES-1 (a type of 
human gastric mucosal cell) as normal control. We used 
siRNA transfection or lentiviral infection to establish stable 
cell	lines	with	ME3	knockdown	to	investigate	the	role	of	
The results displayed that ME3 expression was lower in the 
metastasis group than in the non-metastasis group (P < 0.05, 
Fig. 1k).	This	result	suggests	that	reduced	ME3	expression	
may be associated with distant metastasis in GC.
Fig. 1 Down-regulated ME3 expres-
sion is associated with poor out-
comes of GC. (a) The expression of 
ME3 mRNA was determined based 
on Cohort A (N = 258); (b-c) The 
expression of ME3 protein was ana-
lyzed by western blotting in 23 pairs 
of	GC	tissues	(T:	tumor;	N:	normal	
control); (d) The expression of ME3 
was	verified	by	GEPIA	(dataset	
from TCGA and the GTEx projects) 
(STAD:	Stomach	and	Esophageal	
carcinoma); (e-f)IHC scores of 
161 pairs of GC tissues in TMA 
(Cohort C) based on ME3 staining; 
(g) Representative IHC images of 
ME3 staining in gastric cancer or 
cancerous	tissues	(scale	bar,100	μm;	
magnification,	100× and 200×); (h) 
Proportion of ME3 low- or high-
expressing in gastric cancer tissues 
or para-cancerous tissues (based 
on IHC scores); (i-j) Kaplan-Meier 
analysis of overall survival (OS) 
and progression-free survival (PFS) 
of 161 GC patients (data from 
Cohort C); (k)	Differences	in	ME3	
expression between patients with 
simultaneous or diachronic distant 
metastases (Metastasis) and those 
without metastasis (No metastasis)
 
1 3
  375  Page 6 of 21
Downregulation of malic enzyme 3 facilitates progression of gastric carcinoma via regulating intracellular…
suppressed the proliferation, invasion, and migration abil -
ity (Fig. 3b–f). We also employed plasmid transfection to 
overexpress ME3 in GC cells, the corresponding phenotype 
experiments were conducted, and the results were consis -
tent with those after lentiviral infection (Supplementary 
Fig. 3). In previous experiments, we discovered that either 
transfection	with	siRNA	or	stable	knockdown	of	ME3	by	
lentivirus promoted GC cell proliferation in vitro. Thus, we 
utilized	AGS	and	MGC803	cells	with	stable	knockdown	of	
ME3 expression after drug screening and ME3 overexpres-
sion plasmid to restore its expression. The CCK-8 assay 
result demonstrated that ectopic ME3 expression inverted 
the	effect	of	promoting	tumor	proliferation	caused	by	ME3	
downregulation (Supplementary Fig. 3f). We then estab -
lished	a	set	of	ME2	knockdown	cell	lines	and	examined	the	
ME3 expression. It was found that the ME2 expression was 
not	significantly	affected	the	ME3	expression	in	GC	cells	
(Supplementary Fig. 1e). So in later study, we focused on 
investigating	the	effect	of	ME3	expression	on	GC	cells.
ME3 in GC cells. Figure 2b	depicts	the	knockdown	effi-
ciency of lentiviral infection. We also detected ME2 expres-
sion	when	ME3	was	knockdown	at	protein	level	and	there	
was	not	significantly	different	of	ME2	expression	between	
ME3	knockdown	group	and	control	group	(Supplementary	
Fig. 1c).
Supplementary	Fig.	2a	presents	siRNA	interference	effi-
ciency. Subsequent functional studies selected shME3-1 
and shME3-3. The results of CCK-8, Edu dyeing, and 
clone	formation	assay	revealed	that	ME3	knockdown	sig-
nificantly	promoted	cell	proliferation	and	growth	abilities	
(Fig. 2c–e). Meanwhile, the migration and invasion abilities 
were bolstered (Fig. 2f, g). Supplementary Fig. 2b-f depicts 
the corresponding phenotype assay results of ME3 siRNA 
knockdown	in	GC	cells.	We	backfilled	ME3	in	GC	cell	lines	
with low ME3 expression via plasmid transfection and lenti-
viral infection to verify whether ME3 functioned as a cancer 
suppressor protein. ME3 stable-expressed cell lines were 
also constructed with lentiviral infection. Figure 3a pres -
ents	the	overexpression	efficiency.	And	the	ME2	expression	
was	detected	and	it	was	shown	that	there	wasn’t	different	
between ME3 overexpression group and control group 
(Supplementary Fig. 1d). However, ectopic ME3 expression 
Table 1 Association between ME3 mRNA level and clinicopathologi-
cal feature of GC in Cohort A
Num-
ber of 
patients
Low High P 
value(n = 184) (n = 74)
Gender
Male 174 124 50 0.978a
Female 84 60 24
Age
<65 142 112 30 0.02a
≥ 65 116 72 44
Differentiation
moderate-well dif. 60 30 30 0.049a
moderate-poorly & 
poorly dif.
198 154 44
T stage
T1-2 122 93 29 0.09a
T3-4 136 91 45
N stage
N0-1 183 86 53 0.001a
N2-3 75 98 21
M stage
M0 228 164 64 0.549a
M1 30 20 10
Tumor size
≤5 cm 161 115 46 0.96a
>5 cm 97 69 28
TNM stage (AJCC)
I-II 92 67 25 0.69a
III-IV 166 117 49
aChi-square test
Table 2 Association between ME3 protein expression and clinicopah-
tological features of GC in Cohort C
Number of 
patients
Low 
(n = 141)
High 
(n = 20)
P value
Gender
Male 113 97 16 0.445b
Female 48 44 4
Age
≤ 65 95 86 9 0.174a
>65 66 55 11
Differention
moderate-well 
dif.
77 69 8 0.454a
poorly dif. 84 72 12
T stage
T1-3 30 14 16 <0.001a
T4 131 127 4
N stage
N0-1 73 59 14 0.018a
N2-3 88 82 6
M stage
M0 137 137 20 1c
M1 6 6 0
Tumor size
≤ 5 cm 64 52 12 0.048b
>5 cm 97 89 8
TNM stage (AJCC)
I-II 50 35 15 <0.001a
III-IV 111 106 5
aChi-square test, bYates’ continuity corrected chi-squared test, cFish-
er’s precision probability test
1 3
Page 7 of 21   375 
Y. Huang et al.
among groups (Fig. 4d). Meanwhile, ectopic ME3 expres -
sion restrained tumorigenesis compared to the negative 
control group (Fig. 4e–g). Moreover, the growth of body 
weight	in	mice	revealed	no	significant	difference	between	
the	LV-OV	and	the	LV-NC	groups	(Fig.	4h).
MGC803 cells with stably expressing luciferase and ME3 
knockdown	(Luci-shME3-1	and	Luci-shME3-3)	and	con-
trol	group	(Luci-sh-NC)	were	injected	into	BALB/c	nude	
mice via tail vein. The mice’s weight was recorded regularly 
(Fig. 4i).	We	observed	high	fluorescence	intensity	in	lungs,	
spines,	and	legs	in	the	ME3	knockdown	groups	using	in	
Downregulation of ME3 promotes tumor growth 
and metastasis in vivo
Tumor xenograft models were constructed by subcuta -
neously	injecting	MGC803	cells	with	stable	knockdown	
(sh-ME3-1, sh-ME3-3) or HGC-27 cells with ME3 overex-
pression	(LV-OV)	into	NOD-SCID	mice	to	confirm	the	role	
of	ME3	in	vivo.	We	discovered	that	the	ME3	knockdown	
promoted tumorigenesis with prominently greater tumor 
volumes than the negative control group (Fig. 4a–c). How-
ever,	the	body	weight	of	mice	did	not	differ	significantly	
Fig. 2 Down-regulated ME3 promotes tumor 
growth, invasion and migration abilities of 
GC in vitro. (a) ME3 expression (mRNA and 
protein)	in	different	types	of	GC	cell	lines;	(b) 
Efficiency	of	ME3	knockdown	in	AGS	and	
MGC803 cell lines via lentiviral infection; (c-e) 
ME3	knockdown	promotes	GC	cell	growth.	The	
proliferation capacity was detected by CCK-8, 
colony formation assay and EdU assays (scale 
bar,100	μm).	(f-g)	ME3	knockdown	promotes	
invasion and migration abilities of AGS and 
MGC803	(scale	bar,20	μm)
 
1 3
  375  Page 8 of 21
Downregulation of malic enzyme 3 facilitates progression of gastric carcinoma via regulating intracellular…
Alteration of ME3 influences ROS levels in GC cells
Studies have demonstrated that metabolic reprogramming 
occurs	in	undifferentiated	stromal	tumor	cells	with	high	
glycolysis rates, elevated ATP production, and abnormal 
redox balance [ 36–38]. ME3 is a protein with metabolic 
enzymatic activity that catalyzes the oxidative decar -
boxylation of malate and reduces the cofactor NADP + to 
vivo animal bioluminescence imaging technology (Fig. 4j). 
Figure 4k	displays	the	typical	images	of	the	lung	from	dis-
section.	Paraffin	section	and	HE	staining	were	performed	on	
the tissues obtained from mice autopsy. Figure 4l illustrates 
the HE staining results of the metastatic and non-metastatic 
lung tissues and the metastatic foci in bone. Based on the 
above	results,	ME3	knockdown	GC	cells	were	more	prone	
to distant metastasis in vivo.
Fig. 3  Up-regulated ME3 suppresses tumor growth, invasion and 
migration abilities of GC in vitro. ( a)	Efficiency	of	ME3	overexpres-
sion in HGC-27 and MGC803 cell lines via lentiviral infection; ( b-
d) Ectopic expression of ME3 depresses GC cell growth. The pro -
liferation capacity was detected by CCK-8, colony formation assay 
and	EdU	assays	(scale	bar,	100	μm).	(e-f) Ectopic expression of ME3 
depresses invasion and migration abilities of HGC-27 and MGC803 
(scale	bar,20	μm)
 
1 3
Page 9 of 21   375 
Y. Huang et al.
the	NADPH/NADP+	ratio	was	significantly	lower	in	ME3	
knockdown	cells	than	in	the	control	group.	In	contrast,	the	
NADPH/NADP+	ratio	was	significantly	higher	in	cells	with	
ME3 overexpression (Fig. 5b). Meanwhile, we tested the 
enzyme activity of MEs in vitro and discovered that ME3 
knockdown	 reduced	 the	 total	 activity	 of	 MEs,	 whereas	
ME3 overexpression promoted the total activity under nor -
moxia (Fig. 5c). The results of in vitro experiment suggest 
that	altered	ME3	expression	might	affect	the	biochemical	
NADPH [39, 40].	We	first	measured	the	NADPH/NADP+ 
ratio of GC cells under normoxia to explore the potential 
regulatory	pathway	of	ME3	on	GC.	The	ratio	of	NADPH/
NADP+	 was	 decreased	 in	 ME3	 knockdown	 GC	 cells,	
while it was increased in GC cells with ME3 overexpres -
sion (Fig. 5a). However, a certain hypoxia environment in 
solid tumors frequently appears with the rapid prolifera -
tion of tumor cells [ 41, 42]. We cultured GC cells under 
hypoxia (1% O 2) to mimic the hypoxia microenvironment 
and	measured	the	NADPH/NADP+ ratio. We observed that 
Fig. 4 Down-regulated ME3 promotes tumor 
growth and metastasis of GC in vivo. (a) Sub-
cutaneous transplanted tumor nodules of were 
collected	to	present	the	growth	difference	within	
the	influence	of	ME3	knockdown;	(b-c) Tumor 
growth curve of stable ME3 silenced MGC803 
cell (or negative control) in the xenograft mouse 
model was based on the measurement of tumor 
size; (d) Body weight of mice with injection 
of stable ME3 silenced MGC803 cell was 
recorded; (e) Subcutaneous transplanted tumor 
nodules were collected to present the growth dif-
ference	within	the	influence	of	ME3	overexpres-
sion; (f-g) Tumor growth curve of stable ME3 
overexpressed HGC-27 cell (or negative control) 
in the xenograft mouse model was based on the 
measurement of tumor size; (h) Body weight of 
mice with injection of stable ME3 overexpressed 
HGC-27 cell was recorded; (i) Body weight 
of mice with tail vein injection of stable ME3 
silenced and luciferase expressed MGC803 cell 
was recorded; (j) Bioluminescence intensity of 
tumors	formed	by	ME3	knockdown	MGC803	
cell and negative control; (k) Classic image of 
lung sample with metastatic lung lesions; (l) HE 
staining results of biopsies of mouse lung and 
bone	tissues	(scale	bar,100	μm)
 
1 3
  375  Page 10 of 21
Downregulation of malic enzyme 3 facilitates progression of gastric carcinoma via regulating intracellular…
abnormal	 ME3	 expression	 could	 influence	 intracellular	
redox homeostasis. The DCFH-DA probe was used to detect 
the	total	intracellular	ROS.	There	is	no	significant	difference	
between ME3 downregulation and upregulation in GC cells 
under normoxia (Fig. 5d). When cells were transferred to a 
hypoxia environment, it was discovered that the ROS level 
was	significantly	increased	in	GC	cells	with	ME3	knock-
down	but	significantly	lower	in	the	ME3	overexpression	
reactions in GC cells by changing the overall enzymatic 
activity of malic enzymes.
NADPH, an important cofactor of glutathione reductase, 
is involved in maintaining glutathione (GSH) reduction and 
plays an essential role in regulating GSH concentration and 
oxidative stress balance in cells [43]. We cultured AGS and 
MGC803	with	ME3	stably	knockdown	in	normoxia	(20%	
O2) and hypoxia (1% O 2), respectively, to explore whether 
Fig. 5	 Down-regulated	ME3	decreases	NADPH/
NADP+ ratio and increases ROS in GC cells 
under hypoxia. (a-b)	Effect	of	knockdown	or	
overexpression	of	ME3	on	NADPH/NADP+ in 
GC cells in normoxia (20% O2) or hypoxia (1% 
O2)	environment.	The	NADPH/NADP+ ratio 
was	measured	by	using	the	NADPH/NADP+ test 
kit;	(c) In vitro assay of malic enzyme (MEs) 
activity in GC cell lysates under normoxia 
conditions (20% O2); (d-e) Intracellular ROS in 
GC	cell	with	ME3	knockdown	or	overexpres-
sion under normoxia or hypoxia conditions. The 
intracellular ROS was detected by DCFH-DA 
probe; (f) Downregulation of ME3 increased 
both intracellular total ROS (DCFH, green) and 
mitochondrial ROS (MitoSox, red), (scale bar, 
100	μm)
 
1 3
Page 11 of 21   375 
Y. Huang et al.
various downstream signaling pathways [ 44]. It plays an 
essential role in promoting tumor progression and metas -
tasis.	However,	the	relationship	between	ME3	and	HIF-1α	
expression and its regulatory mechanism is still unclear. We 
first	analyzed	the	expression	pattern	using	GEPIA	online	
tool	to	further	explore	the	role	of	ME3	and	HIF-1α	in	GC	
progression. Figure 6a	displays	that	HIF-1α	is	negatively	
correlated with ME3 (q-value = 6e-30, R = -0.43). The GC 
microarray Cohort C, consisting of 161 pairs of GC tissues 
and paired adjacent tissues randomly selected in our center, 
was adopted, and IHC staining and scoring were performed. 
The	results	demonstrated	that	HIF-1α	was	upregulated	in	
GC tissues (P < 0.001, Fig. 6b–c). Figure 6d depicts typical 
IHC results for high- and low HIF-1 expression in GC tis -
sues.	We	discovered	a	negative	correlation	between	HIF-1α	
expression and ME3 in GC tissues by comparing the 
immunohistochemical staining scores of the same patient 
samples (Fig. 6e).	We	discovered	that	HIF-1α	expression	
in	the	ME3	knockdown	group	was	higher	than	in	the	con-
trol group, while it was lower in the ME3 overexpressed 
group tumor tissues than in the control group by detecting 
group (Fig. 5e). Intracellular ROS is primarily distributed in 
the cytoplasm and mitochondria; we utilized the MitoSOX 
Red mitochondrial superoxide indicator and the DCFH-DA 
reactive	oxygen	species	detection	kit	to	visualize	mitochon-
drial and total intracellular ROS in GC cells under hypoxia, 
respectively. The image displayed that cytoplasm and mito-
chondrial	ROS	were	significantly	increased	in	GC	cells	with	
ME3	knockdown	and	significantly	lower	in	the	ME3	over-
expression group (Fig. 5f). These results suggested that the 
ME3	knockdown	could	reduce	NADPH/NADP+ ratio and 
increase ROS in GC cells under hypoxia.
ME3 promotes GC progression by regulating the 
stability of HIF-1α
Hypoxia and intracellular oxidative stress state are important 
features of solid tumors. The alteration of ME3 expression 
level	affects	NADPH/NADP+ and ROS in GC cells, espe -
cially	under	a	hypoxic	environment.	HIF-1α	is	upregulated	
when cells are exposed to an anaerobic environment. It acts 
as a transcription factor, enters the nucleus, and activates 
Fig. 6	 HIF-1α	is	upregulated	in	
GC cell and tissue, and nega-
tively correlated with ME3. (a) 
HIF-1α	was	negatively	cor-
related with ME3 expression. 
The expression of ME3 and 
HIF-1α	were	determined	based	
on GEPIA online tool; (b-c) The 
expression	of	HIF-1α	was	based	
on IHC scores of Cohort C; 
(d) Representative IHC images 
of	HIF-1α	staining	in	gastric	
cancer or cancerous tissues (scale 
bar,100	μm;	magnification,	100× 
and 200×); (e)	HIF-1α	protein	
was negatively correlated with 
ME3 based on the IHC score of 
Cohort C; (f) Representative IHC 
images	of	HIF-1α	staining	in	
subcutaneous tumor from mice 
model	(scale	bar,	100	μm)
 
1 3
  375  Page 12 of 21
Downregulation of malic enzyme 3 facilitates progression of gastric carcinoma via regulating intracellular…
especially	in	ME3	knockdown	groups	(Fig.	7c–d). We dis-
covered	that	HIF-1α	and	ME3	manifested	opposite	expres-
sion trends at the protein level under normoxia through 
WB experiments (Fig. 7e).	Although	HIF-1α	in	ME3	over-
expressed group was elevated at the mRNA level under 
hypoxia,	HIF-1α	was	decreased	at	the	protein	level	in	the	
ME3 overexpression group (Fig. 7f). The protein level is 
influenced	by	transcription,	translation	speed,	and	protein	
degradation rate. We speculated that alteration of ME3 pro-
tein	level	might	influence	HIF-1α	protein	level	by	impacting	
its protein stability and degradation rate.
HIF-1α	expression	in	subcutaneous	tumor	transplantation	
tissues from mice model. Figure 6f illustrates the classic 
IHC images.
We	detected	ME3	and	HIF-1α	mRNA	and	protein	levels	
in	knockdown	and	overexpressed	GC	cells	using	qRT-PCR	
and WB further to investigate the relationship between ME3 
and	HIF-1α	expression	(cells	were	cultured	under	normoxia	
or hypoxia for same time and samples were obtained at the 
same	time).	We	observed	that	ME3	and	HIF-1α	mRNA	
expression was negatively correlated in the normoxia envi -
ronment (Fig. 7a-b),	while	the	HIF-1α	expression	level	in	
each GC cell group was elevated under hypoxic conditions, 
Fig. 7	 HIF-1α	is	upregulated	under	hypoxia	and	negatively	correlated	
with ME3 expression. (a-b)	HIF-1α	mRNA	was	negatively	correlated	
with ME3 mRNA under normoxia condition (20% O 2); (c-d)	HIF-1α	
mRNA was upregulated in hypoxia environment (1% O2) regardless of 
ME3 expression; (e-f)	HIF-1α	protein	was	negatively	correlated	with	
ME3 protein expression regardless of ME3 expression
 
1 3
Page 13 of 21   375 
Y. Huang et al.
adopted	to	detect	HIF-1α	and	ME3	protein.	We	observed	
that	total	HIF-1α	protein	content	was	lower	in	cells	with	
ME3 overexpressing than its control group after CHX treat-
ment (Fig. 8c–d).
Accordingly,	we	incubated	GC	cells	with	ME3	knock-
down in a hypoxic chamber for 24 h (1% O 2) to verify the 
effect	of	α-KG	on	HIF-1α	stability.	DMKG	(a	cell	mem-
brane permeable ester that can be hydrolyzed by intra -
cellular	esterase	to	produce	α-KG)	was	added	at	a	final	
concentration	of	1	mM	for	24	h.	Blank	control	without	
DMKG was set up for each group (Fig. 8e). We discovered 
that	HIF-1α	expression	was	higher	in	ME3	knockdown	cells	
without exogenous DMKG than in their control group. In 
cells	treated	with	DMKG,	HIF-1α	expression	was	slightly	
reduced	or	not	significantly	different,	and	this	change	was	
related to the active duration of DMKG. Therefore, we 
speculated	that	the	alteration	of	ME3	level	may	influence	
α-KG	content	and	affect	HIF-1α	stability	and	total	HIF-1α	
protein,	thus	affecting	GC	progression.
Ectopic ME3 expression promoted HIF-1α 
degradation
Several published studies describe the regulatory mecha -
nisms	of	HIF-1α	protein	expression,	stability,	and	degrada-
tion.	The	α-KG,	a	key	substrate	of	HIF-PHDs,	participates	
in	the	progression	of	proline	hydroxylation	of	HIF-1α	and	
degradation via ubiquitination and proteasome pathway. 
We followed experiments to verify whether altering ME3 
expression	influenced	HIF-1α	protein	fluctuation	by	regu-
lating its degradation. We observed content of intracellular 
α-KG	was	influenced	when	ME3	changed	the	weather	in	
a normoxia or hypoxia environment. Figure 8a–b display 
that	the	content	of	α-KG	decreases	when	ME3	is	knocked	
down,	while	α-KG	increases	when	ME3	is	overexpressed.	
We	assumed	ME3	overexpression	might	affect	the	stability	
of	HIF-1α	by	regulating	intracellular	α-KG	content.
We cultured HGC-27 and MGC803 in a hypoxia incu -
bator (1% O 2)	for	24	h	and	then	added	CHX	at	different	
time intervals to depressed protein biosynthesis to verify 
whether	overexpressing	ME3	could	promote	HIF-1α	degra-
dation. The total protein was extracted, and a WB assay was 
Fig. 8 Ectopic expression of ME3 
promoted	HIF-1α	degradation	via	
regulating	α-KG	production.	(a) 
α-KG	content	in	GC	cell	cultured	
in normoxia environment (20% 
O2); (b)	α-KG	content	in	GC	cell	
cultured in hypoxia environ-
ment (1% O2); (c-d) Alteration 
of	HIF-1α	and	ME3	protein	after	
the addition of CHX in GC cells 
with ME3 ectopic expression 
after 24 h of incubation under 
hypoxia (1% O2). (e) Alteration 
of	HIF-1α	and	ME3	protein	with	
or without DMKG treatment after 
24 h of incubation under hypoxia 
(1% O2)
 
1 3
  375  Page 14 of 21
Downregulation of malic enzyme 3 facilitates progression of gastric carcinoma via regulating intracellular…
using	cell	immunofluorescence,	and	the	results	were	consis-
tent with those of WB (Fig. 9g).
ME3 may affect GC progression via mTOR and STAT3 
signaling
The above results suggested that ME3 protein down-regu -
lation	could	stabilize	HIF-1α	and	promote	GC	progression	
and metastasis. According to previous research, complex 
networks	of	signaling	pathways	are	involved	in	tumorigene-
sis	and	progression.	mTOR	signaling	activation	and	HIF-1α	
stabilization are important for T cell receptor (TCR) signal-
ing downstream, such as T cell metabolic reprogramming 
and	prolonged	lifespan	of	peripheric	T	cells.	Interleukin-6	
(IL-6)	is	a	proinflammatory	cytokine	that	promotes	HIF-1α	
transcription via the JAK-STAT3 signaling pathway in the 
hepatocellular carcinoma model [ 50]. Our study measured 
mTOR and STAT3 signaling-related proteins using WB. 
The result revealed mTOR pathway was activated and the 
STAT3	pathway	was	restrained	when	ME3	was	knockdown,	
and vice versa (Fig. 10a).
Discussion
Abnormal metabolism is an essential feature of malignant 
tumors [5]. Intracellular redox homeostasis is destroyed due 
to rapid tumor cell proliferation and limited material supple-
ments. Intracellular ROS could act as a “second messenger” 
that coordinates activating multiple pathways, carcinogenic 
phenotype occurrence, promoting tumor proliferation and 
angiogenesis,	and	affecting	the	microenvironment	of	tumor	
cells, leading to component alteration of tumor niche and 
abnormal	inflammatory	response.	These	changes	provide	
favorable conditions for tumor progression [51]. Hypoxia is 
a common microenvironmental factor in rapidly prolifera -
tive solid tumors [52]. Our preliminary proteomic sequence 
analysis results demonstrated that ME3 expression was 
reduced in patients with high metastatic tendencies. Nota -
bly, additional pathological analysis of our clinical samples 
revealed that ME3 protein expression in patients with GC 
was	closely	related	to	tumor	infiltration	depth,	lymph	node	
metastasis, and poor prognosis. We discovered that ME3 
expression	was	significantly	lower	in	the	group	with	distant	
metastases than in the group without distant metastases by 
comparing the tissue ME3 protein levels of patients with 
simultaneous and (or) diachronic distant metastases to those 
without distant metastases. This result implies that ME3 
expression	deficiency	may	be	one	of	the	key	steps	in	pro-
moting distant metastasis development in GC. It was dem -
onstrated that ME3 low expression promoted the malignant 
phenotype of GC cells. Combining previous research results 
ME3 expression affected GC mitochondria’s 
oxidative phosphorylation rate
The	above	experiments	verified	that	α-KG	concentration,	
NADPH/NADP+ ratio, and intracellular ROS altered when 
ME3 expression changed. We also measured the content of 
malate that served as the substrate of ME3 after normoxia 
or	hypoxia	treatment.	The	results	indicated	that	ME3	knock-
down led to malate accumulation in GC cells, whereas ME3 
overexpression led to the reduction of malate in normoxia 
and hypoxia environments (Figures a–b). We revealed GC 
cell	proliferation	ability	promoted	when	ME3	was	knock-
down. Cell growth and proliferation need adequate energy, 
and mitochondria are an important hub of material and 
energy metabolism [ 11, 45]. We measured the mitochon -
drial oxidative phosphorylation rate of GC cells. The oxy -
gen	consumption	rate	and	ATP	production	were	significantly	
accelerated	when	ME3	was	knocked	down.	ME3	upregula-
tion led to a reduction in oxygen consumption rate and ATP 
generation (Fig. 9c).
ME3 downregulation promotes GC progression by 
regulating EMT progression
We obtained the co-expressed genes of ME3 from the Onco-
mine database for bioinformatic analyses to better explore 
the molecular mechanisms of ME3-driven GC growth and 
progression. The results indicated that ME3 was involved in 
cell adhesion and tissue migration (Supplementary Fig. 4). 
Supplementary Fig. 4 illustrates the Gene Ontology (GO) 
enrichment analysis and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes 
and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis result. Accord -
ing to studies, the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
and mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) processes in 
tumor cells are closely related to distant metastasis. When 
the EMT-related protein expression is altered, tight junc -
tion-related proteins also change, which is involved in the 
progress of tumor cells shedding from in-site into circula -
tory systems and distant engraftment [ 46–49]. We tested 
the	alteration	of	EMT-related	biomarkers	when	ME3	was	
knockdown	or	overexpressed	using	WB.	When	ME3	was	
downregulated,	the	expression	of	N-Cadherin,	Vimentin,	
and E-Cadherin elevated, whereas E-Cadherin was down -
regulated (Fig. 9d). ME3 overexpression upregulated 
E-Cadherin	while	downregulating	N-Cadherin	and	Vimen-
tin (Fig. 9e). Meanwhile, ME3-overexpression plasmid 
transfection restored ME3 expression in AGS and MGC803 
cells	(with	ME3	stably	knocked	down).	After	ME3	over-
expression,	the	EMT-related	biomarkers	N-Cadherin	and	
Vimentin	were	reduced,	while	E-Cadherin	was	increased	
(Fig. 9f). Additionally, the alteration of N-Cadherin in GC 
cells	with	ME3	knockdown	or	overexpression	was	detected	
1 3
Page 15 of 21   375 
Y. Huang et al.
(Fig. 10b):	(1)	down-regulation	of	ME3	expression	in	the	
mitochondria	increased	malate	flux	in	the	TCA	cycle	by	
reducing malate shunt, which led to the acceleration of the 
TCA	cycle	and	metabolism,	thus	providing	sufficient	energy	
for the rapid proliferation of GC cells. (2) ME3 oxidatively 
decarboxylates malate to form pyruvate in the mitochondria. 
and the enzymatic function of ME, we speculated that the 
aberrant ME3 expression in a hypoxic environment might 
promote the progression and metastasis of GC by regulat -
ing	the	activity	of	oxidative	stress	and	the	HIF-1α	signaling	
pathway. We propose a molecular regulation model for ME3 
low expression promoting GC progression and metastasis 
Fig. 9 Downregulation of ME3 
promotes mitochondria oxidative 
phosphorylation rate and EMT 
process. (a-b) Malate concentra-
tion in GC cells under normoxia 
(20% O2) or hypoxia (1% O2); 
(c) Alteration of ME3 expression 
affected	mitochondrial	oxidative	
phosphorylation in normoxia 
condition; (d) KEGG analysis 
result of ME3 co-expressed gene 
set of STAD (based on Oncomine 
database); (e-h) Down-regulated 
ME3 promoted the progress of 
EMT	(scale	bar,	10	μm)
 
1 3
  375  Page 16 of 21
Downregulation of malic enzyme 3 facilitates progression of gastric carcinoma via regulating intracellular…
GC	cells	and	inhibited	HIF-1α	hydroxylation	at	the	cor-
responding sites by PHDs, thus reducing degradation of 
HIF-1α	by	proteasome	pathway.	The	expression	of	down-
stream target proteins is activated by the dimerization of 
HIF-1β	and	HIF-1α	into	the	nucleus,	promoting	the	growth	
and metastasis of gastric cancer cells. However, the path -
way of how ME3 expression is reduced in GC tissues needs 
to be further explored.
ME3 is a mitochondria-localized malic enzyme. ME3 has 
received little attention in regulating tumor development 
This process is accompanied by the reduction of NADP + 
to	 NADPH,	 and	 the	 knockdown	 of	 ME3	 expression	 in	
hypoxic	environment	makes	the	NADPH/NADPH	in	gas-
tric	cancer	cells	Under	hypoxic	environment,	knockdown	of	
ME3	expression	decreased	the	NADPH/NADP+ ratio in GC 
cells and increased intracellular ROS, which activated the 
HIF-1α	signaling	pathway.	Under	normoxia,	there	was	no	
significant	change	in	intracellular	ROS,	although	malate	and	
NADPH/NADP+ changed accordingly. (3) In hypoxic envi-
ronment,	α-KG	content	was	decreased	in	ME3-knockdown	
Fig. 10 ME3 might regulate 
GC progression via mTOR and 
STAT3 signaling pathway. (A-B) 
mTOR and STAT3 signaling 
altered when ME3 expression 
changed; (C) A schematic model 
illustrating	our	findings	on	ME3	
regulation in GC progression
 
1 3
Page 17 of 21   375 
Y. Huang et al.
progress that is companied by the reduction of NADP + to 
NADPH. ME3 expression has been involved in regulat -
ing NADPH levels in mitochondria and intracellular redox 
homeostasis [59, 60]. We measured the total ROS content 
in GC cells cultured under normoxia. We discovered that it 
did	not	change	significantly,	probably	because	the	changes	
in NADP+ and NADPH caused by ME3 expression under 
normoxia	 were	 insufficient	 to	 affect	 the	 overall	 redox	
homeostasis	in	cells.	This	also	confirmed	that	cells	can	
self-regulate redox homeostasis within a certain range. This 
may be explained by the fact that changes in NADPH con -
tent caused by ME3 expression alteration in the normoxia 
environment	were	insufficient	to	affect	the	overall	redox	
homeostasis; the cells can still compensate for such changes 
via their intrinsic regulatory mechanisms. In this study, 
we	discovered	for	the	first	time	that	ME3	is	important	for	
regulating ROS under hypoxia. As mentioned previously, a 
moderate	increase	in	ROS	is	beneficial	for	stimulating	cell	
growth and proliferation. Low ME3 expression can increase 
intracellular ROS, promoting GC cell proliferation and met-
astatic ability by activating other signaling pathways, such 
as	HIF-1α.
Numerous	studies	have	demonstrated	that	HIF-1α	is	an	
important regulatory molecule in hypoxia and oxidative 
stress	stimulation.	HIF-1α,	as	the	primary	oxygen	concen-
tration response molecule, is sensitive to changes in oxygen 
concentration.	HIF-1α	and	HIF-1β	form	a	dimer	and	enter	
the nucleus as a transcription factor that drives the down -
stream gene expression by selectively binding to hypoxia 
response elements (HREs) under hypoxia [61].	HIF-1α	pro-
tein is negatively regulated by ubiquitination and degraded 
by the proteasome pathway under normoxia conditions [21, 
62].	We	discovered	that	HIF-1α	expression	was	upregulated	
in	ME3	knockdown	and	overexpression	groups	of	cells	at	
the transcriptional level under a hypoxic environment, but 
the	intracellular	HIF-1α	content	was	more	abundant	in	GC	
cells	with	the	ME3	knockdown	group	at	the	protein	level.	
Hypoxia and ROS upregulation are important signals to 
activate the HIF-1 signaling pathway [63]. We hypothesized 
that	ME3	knockdown	in	hypoxic	increased	HIF-1α	expres-
sion	by	promoting	the	HIF-1α	transcription,	maintaining	the	
HIF-1α	stability,	and	slowing	down	its	degradation.	Cells	
primarily	produce	α-KG	via	the	TCA	cycle.	It	regulates	
numerous	pathophysiological	processes,	such	as	skeletal	
muscle	protein	synthesis,	lipid	metabolism,	and	inflamma-
tory responses, either as a substrate for other biochemical 
reactions or by directly regulating enzymatic activity [ 64–
66]. It has been reported that the collagen prolyl-4-hydrox -
ylase	α1	subunit	(P4HA1)	can	regulate	α-KG	and	succinate	
in	breast	cancer	cells	to	maintain	the	stability	of	HIF-1α	
protein, thus enhancing the stemness of BC cells [ 67]. The 
present	study	observed	that	the	intracellular	α-KG	content	
compared to the other malic enzymes. ME1 is localized in 
the cytoplasm and catalyzes the same biochemical reaction 
as	ME3.	ME2	differs	from	ME1	and	ME3	because	it	uses	
NAD+ as a cofactor to produce NADH, which regulates 
cellular redox homeostasis. In non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC),	ME2	knockdown	led	to	tumor	cell	cycle	arrest,	
elevated ROS level, promotion of cell death, and increased 
sensitivity to cisplatin [ 53]. ME3 is elevated in pancreatic 
cancer and is associated with poor prognosis [ 54]. In our 
study,	we	discovered	for	the	first	time	that	ME3	expression	
was reduced in GC tissues, and cells’ growth and metastatic 
ability	were	significantly	enhanced	after	ME3	knockdown.	
The accelerated tumor proliferation was inverted using plas-
mid	to	overexpress	ME3	in	ME3-stable-knockdown	GC	
cells. Recent studies discovered that drugs based on extra -
neous transcribed mRNA might have potential therapeutic 
efficacy	in	treating	malignant	and	infectious	diseases	[55]. 
Thus, we assumed that our study might provide new clues 
for the design of targeted therapy for GC. Malic enzymes 
catalyze the biochemical reaction of malate to pyruvate, 
shunting malate, an intermediate product of the TCA cycle, 
into other biochemical reactions in mitochondria. The pres-
ent study revealed that malate content was increased in GC 
cells	with	ME3	knockdown	in	normoxic	and	hypoxic	envi-
ronments.	We	discovered	that	GC	cells	in	the	knockdown	
group had accelerated oxidative phosphorylation rates and 
increased ATP production. Since intracellular substance and 
energy metabolism is a complex process, and malate is an 
essential intermediate product of the TCA cycle. Consider -
ing	the	above	experiment	results,	we	assumed	ME3	knock-
down inhibited the reaction of malate to pyruvate, leading to 
the	malate	shunt	reduction	and	its	flux	accumulation	in	the	
TCA	cycle.	It	benefited	the	TCA	circulation	and	increased	
the oxygen consumption rate, thus providing energy for cell 
proliferation.
The mitochondrial oxidative respiratory chain mainly 
produces ROS under normal physiological conditions, and 
an appropriate amount of ROS is important for maintain -
ing	cell	proliferation,	differentiation,	and	other	physiologi-
cal processes. An excessive amount of ROS may activate 
apoptosis, autophagy, and other related signaling pathways, 
eventually leading to cell death. However, cancer cells have 
a higher intracellular ROS concentration than normal tissue 
cells due to increased metabolic demand and accelerated rate 
of oxidative phosphorylation. A high level of ROS can con-
tribute to new intracellular redox homeostasis by activating 
certain signaling pathways that upregulate the production 
of antioxidant components and promote tumor progression 
[56]. However, excessive ROS production in mitochondria 
can inhibit mitochondrial autophagy and cause cell death 
because many chemotherapeutic agents depend on ROS 
for	tumor-killing	activity	[57, 58]. ME3 contributes to the 
1 3
  375  Page 18 of 21
Downregulation of malic enzyme 3 facilitates progression of gastric carcinoma via regulating intracellular…
Conclusion
We provide experimental and clinical evidence that ME3 
plays a role in GC progression. We demonstrate that ME3 
promotes proliferation and metastasis via accelerating the 
TCA	cycle	and	regulating	α-KG	to	stabilize	HIF-1α	in	GC	
cells, and ME3 may be a novel therapy and prognositic tar-
get in gastric cancer.
Supplementary Information  The online version contains 
supplementary material available at https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-
024-05388-9.
Acknowledgements	The	authors	thank	Dr.	Jionghui	Gu	and	Dr.	Min-
feng Ying for technical assistance.
Author contributions HYY participated in the conception and design, 
figure,	data	analysis	and	paper	writing;	YY	contributes	to	literature	
search and design; CXL and ZSY contributes to analysis and method-
ology; CYR and WHY contributes to review; LXD contributes to data 
curation; HX contributes to supervision; TLS contributes to funding 
acquisition, supervision and project guidance. All authors have read 
and	approved	the	final	manuscript.
Funding	This	work	was	supported	by	project	of	the	regional	diagnosis	
and treatment center of the Health Planning Committee (No. JBZX-
201903).
Data availability  The human sequence data generated in this study 
are not publicly available due to patient privacy requirements but 
are available upon reasonable request from the corresponding author. 
Other data generated in this study are available within the article and 
its	supplementary	data	files.
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate  Gastric cancer tissue and 
para-cancerous tissue samples were randomly collected from patients 
undergoing	gastrectomy	between	2015	and	2020	in	the	First	Affiliated	
Hospital of Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, Chi -
na	(Approval	Number:	2021	− 869). All the participants have signed 
“written	informed	consent”	to	take	part	in	this	study.	All	animal	experi-
ments were approved by the Ethics Committee for Laboratory Animals 
of	the	First	Affiliated	Hospital	of	Zhejiang	University	(Approval	num-
ber:	2021	− 1431, 2022 − 1060).
Consent for publication All authors gave their consent for publication.
Competing interests The authors have declared that no competing in-
terest exists.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, 
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and 
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropri -
ate	credit	to	the	original	author(s)	and	the	source,	provide	a	link	to	the	
Creative	Commons	licence,	and	indicate	if	you	modified	the	licensed	
material. You do not have permission under this licence to share 
adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or 
other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Cre-
ative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to 
changed when the ME3 expression was altered, especially 
in	GC	cells	with	ME3	knockdown	in	a	hypoxic	environ-
ment.	 We	 hypothesized	 that	 ME3	 affected	 intracellular	
HIF-1α	content	by	regulating	the	level	of	α-KG	content	and	
HIF-1α	degradation	rate.
Several studies have elucidated the molecular mecha -
nisms associated with GC invasion and metastasis, includ -
ing	 activation	 of	 the	 HIF-1α	 signaling	 pathway,	tumor	
neovascularization, and EMT. It has been demonstrated that 
hypoxia-tolerant GC cells expressed higher levels of EMT-
related	protein	markers	Snail,	Twist,	ZEB,	and	Vimentin	
than their parental cells and exhibited stronger invasive 
ability and spindle-shaped morphology in vitro [68]. More-
over,	hypoxia-tolerant	GC	cells	were	more	likely	to	develop	
multiple peritoneal metastases and lymph node metastases 
in mice. The mTOR pathway activation could regulate the 
HIF-1α	protein	expression	and	is	associated	with	tumor	
angiogenesis [ 69]. In this study, the enrichment analysis 
of ME3 co-expressed genes revealed that ME3 expression 
might be associated with epithelial adhesion. The mTOR 
and STAT3 may be involved in the ME3 promotion of GC 
progression and metastasis.
In summary, our study reported the ME3 expression in 
GC	for	the	first	time.	We	demonstrated	that	the	ME3	knock-
down promoted the proliferation and migration of GC 
cells in vitro and in vivo. We hypothesize that the poten -
tial mechanism of ME3 on the biological behavior of GC 
cells	is	as	follows:	ME3	knockdown	accelerated	the	rate	
of oxidative phosphorylation and increased ATP produc -
tion to meet the energy demand of cell proliferation. ME3 
expression may promote the proliferation and migration of 
GC cells via mTOR, STAT3, and other signaling pathways. 
Particularly, ME3 downregulation in a hypoxic environ -
ment could increase intracellular ROS levels while decreas-
ing	α-KG	levels,	activating	the	HIF-1α	signaling	pathway,	
and	maintaining	the	HIF-1α	stability.	The	above	mechanism	
allows	HIF-1α	signaling	to	remain	continuously	activated,	
stimulating various downstream signaling pathways and 
promoting GC tumor growth and metastasis. We hope that 
our research results will provide a theoretical and research 
basis for further understanding of the role of ME3 on GC 
development through the regulation of metabolites, intracel-
lular oxidative stress levels and related signalling pathways 
and provide clues for further exploration of prognostic and 
therapeutic targets to improve the prognosis of patients with 
GC.
Our present study has some limitations. For example, we 
do	not	know	whether	ME3	is	involed	in	GC	carcinogen-
sis and the upstream regulational mechanism was not suf -
ficiently	clear	and	need	further	study;	other	potential	related	
metabolites mediated the progression of GC need to be fur-
ther studied.
1 3
Page 19 of 21   375 
Y. Huang et al.
21.	 Wang	XH	et	al	(2021)	Hypoxia-induced	FOXO4/LDHA	axis	
modulates gastric cancer cell glycolysis and progression. Clin 
Transl	Med	11(1):e279
22.	 Kaelin	WG	Jr.,	Ratcliffe	PJ	(2008)	Oxygen	sensing	by	metazo-
ans:	the	central	role	of	the	HIF	hydroxylase	pathway.	Mol	Cell	
30(4):393–402
23.	 Schofield	CJ,	Ratcliffe	PJ	(2004)	Oxygen	sensing	by	HIF	hydrox-
ylases.	Nat	Rev	Mol	Cell	Biol	5(5):343–354
24.	 Shan	T	et	al	(2013)	β2-AR-HIF-1α:	a	novel	regulatory	axis	for	
stress-induced pancreatic tumor growth and angiogenesis. Curr 
Mol	Med	13(6):1023–1034
25.	 Griffiths	EA	et	al	(2007)	Hypoxia-inducible	factor-1alpha	expres-
sion in the gastric carcinogenesis sequence and its prognostic role 
in gastric and gastro-oesophageal adenocarcinomas. Br J Cancer 
96(1):95–103
26. Stoeltzing O et al (2004) Role of hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha 
in gastric cancer cell growth, angiogenesis, and vessel matura -
tion.	J	Natl	Cancer	Inst	96(12):946–956
27. Zhang R et al (2010) Subcellular distribution of S100A4 and its 
transcriptional regulation under hypoxic conditions in gastric 
cancer	cell	line	BGC823.	Cancer	Sci	101(5):1141–1146
28. Rohwer N et al (2009) HIF-1alpha determines the metastatic 
potential	of	gastric	cancer	cells.	Br	J	Cancer	100(5):772–781
29. Chang GG, Tong L (2003) Structure and function of malic 
enzymes, a new class of oxidative decarboxylases. Biochemistry 
42(44):12721–12733
30. Murai S et al (2017) Inhibition of malic enzyme 1 disrupts cel -
lular metabolism and leads to vulnerability in cancer cells in glu-
cose-restricted	conditions.	Oncogenesis	6(5):e329
31.	 Ranzani	AT	et	al	(2017)	Identification	of	specific	inhibitors	of	
Trypanosoma Cruzi Malic enzyme isoforms by Target-based 
HTS.	SLAS	Discov	22(9):1150–1161
32. Jiang P et al (2013) Reciprocal regulation of p53 and malic 
enzymes modulates metabolism and senescence. Nature 
493(7434):689–693
33. Lu YX et al (2018) ME1 regulates NADPH homeostasis to 
promote gastric Cancer growth and metastasis. Cancer Res 
78(8):1972–1985
34. Dey P et al (2017) Genomic deletion of malic enzyme 2 confers col-
lateral	lethality	in	pancreatic	cancer.	Nature	542(7639):119–123
35. Sobhanifar S et al (2005) Reduced expression of hypoxia-induc -
ible factor-1alpha in perinecrotic regions of solid tumors. Cancer 
Res	65(16):7259–7266
36.	 Tormos	KV	et	al	(2011)	Mitochondrial	complex	III	ROS	regulate	
adipocyte	differentiation.	Cell	Metab	14(4):537–544
37.	 Upadhyay	M	et	al	(2013)	The	Warburg	effect:	insights	from	the	
past	decade.	Pharmacol	Ther	137(3):318–330
38. Li L, Li W (2015) Epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human 
cancer:	 comprehensive	 reprogramming	 of	 metabolism,	 epi-
genetics,	and	differentiation.	Pharmacol	Ther	150:33–46
39. Saha N, Jeremiah SJ, Povey S (1978) Further data on mitochon -
drial	malic	enzyme	in	man.	Hum	Hered	28(6):421–425
40.	 Sauer	LA,	Dauchy	RT,	Nagel	WO	(1979)	Identification	of	an	
NAD(P)+-dependent ‘malic’ enzyme in small-intestinal-mucosal 
mitochondria.	Biochem	J	184(1):185–188
41. Maynard MA, Ohh M (2007) The role of hypoxia-inducible fac -
tors	in	cancer.	Cell	Mol	Life	Sci	64(16):2170–2180
42.	 Minchenko	OH	et	al	(2016)	Effect	of	hypoxia	on	the	expression	
of nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial proteins in U87 glioma 
cells.	Ukr	Biochem	J	88(3):54–65
43. Xiao W et al (2018) NAD(H) and NADP(H) Redox Couples 
and Cellular Energy Metabolism. Antioxid Redox Signal 
28(3):251–272
44. Gabriely G et al (2017) Role of AHR and HIF-1alpha in Glioblas-
toma	Metabolism.	Trends	Endocrinol	Metab	28(6):428–436
the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Com -
mons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regu-
lation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission 
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
References
1.	 Bray	F	et	al	(2018)	Global	cancer	statistics	2018:	GLOBOCAN	
estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36 cancers in 
185	countries.	CA	Cancer	J	Clin	68(6):394–424
2. Thrift AP, El-Serag HB (2020) Burden of gastric Cancer. Clin 
Gastroenterol	Hepatol	18(3):534–542
3.	 Smyth	EC	et	al	(2020)	Gastric	cancer.	Lancet	396(10251):635–648
4.	 Sung	H	et	al	(2021)	Global	Cancer	statistics	2020:	GLOBOCAN	
estimates of incidence and Mortality Worldwide for 36 cancers in 
185	countries.	CA	Cancer	J	Clin	71(3):209–249
5.	 Hanahan	D,	Weinberg	RA	(2011)	Hallmarks	of	cancer:	the	next	
generation.	Cell	144(5):646–674
6.	 Missiroli	S	et	al	(2020)	Cancer	metabolism	and	mitochondria:	
finding	 novel	 mechanisms	 to	 fight	 tumours.	 EBioMedicine	
59:102943
7. Cao Y et al (2020) Mitochondrial ROS accumulation inhibiting 
JAK2/STAT3	pathway	is	a	critical	modulator	of	CYT997-induced	
autophagy and apoptosis in gastric cancer. J Exp Clin Cancer Res 
39(1):119
8.	 Gorrini	C,	Harris	IS,	Mak	TW	(2013)	Modulation	of	oxida-
tive stress as an anticancer strategy. Nat Rev Drug Discov 
12(12):931–947
9.	 Sabharwal	SS,	Schumacker	PT	(2014)	Mitochondrial	ROS	in	
cancer:	initiators,	amplifiers	or	an	Achilles’	heel?	Nat	Rev	Cancer	
14(11):709–721
10.	 Gao	P	et	al	(2007)	HIF-dependent	antitumorigenic	effect	of	anti-
oxidants	in	vivo.	Cancer	Cell	12(3):230–238
11. Weinberg F et al (2010) Mitochondrial metabolism and ROS gen-
eration are essential for Kras-mediated tumorigenicity. Proc Natl 
Acad	Sci	U	S	A	107(19):8788–8793
12. Sullivan LB et al (2013) The proto-oncometabolite fumarate 
binds glutathione to amplify ROS-dependent signaling. Mol Cell 
51(2):236–248
13.	 Dong	S	et	al	(2022)	ROS/PI3K/Akt	and	Wnt/beta-catenin	signal-
ings activate HIF-1alpha-induced metabolic reprogramming to 
impart	5-fluorouracil	resistance	in	colorectal	cancer.	J	Exp	Clin	
Cancer	Res	41(1):15
14. Ferreira F et al (2018) Early redox activities modulate Xenopus 
tail	regeneration.	Nat	Commun	9(1):4296
15.	 Prabhakar	NR,	Semenza	GL	(2015)	Oxygen	sensing	and	Homeo-
stasis.	Physiol	(Bethesda)	30(5):340–348
16. Matsuo Y et al (2014) Hypoxia inducible factor-1 alpha plays a 
pivotal	role	in	hepatic	metastasis	of	pancreatic	cancer:	an	immuno-
histochemical	study.	J	Hepatobiliary	Pancreat	Sci	21(2):105–112
17. Trastour C et al (2007) HIF-1alpha and CA IX staining in inva -
sive	breast	carcinomas:	prognosis	and	treatment	outcome.	Int	J	
Cancer	120(7):1451–1458
18.	 Deberardinis	RJ	et	al	(2008)	Brick	by	brick:	metabolism	and	
tumor	cell	growth.	Curr	Opin	Genet	Dev	18(1):54–61
19.	 Carnero	A,	Lleonart	M	(2016)	The	hypoxic	microenvironment:	
a determinant of cancer stem cell evolution. BioEssays 38(Suppl 
1):S65–74
20. Sheta EA et al (2001) Cell density mediated pericellular 
hypoxia leads to induction of HIF-1alpha via nitric oxide and 
Ras/MAP	 kinase	 mediated	 signaling	 pathways.	 Oncogene	
20(52):7624–7634
1 3
  375  Page 20 of 21
Downregulation of malic enzyme 3 facilitates progression of gastric carcinoma via regulating intracellular…
58.	 Gupta	N	et	al	(2020)	Free	radicals	as	a	double-edged	Sword:	the	
Cancer Preventive and therapeutic roles of Curcumin. Molecules, 
25(22)
59.	 Fan	J	et	al	(2014)	Quantitative	flux	analysis	reveals	folate-depen-
dent	NADPH	production.	Nature	510(7504):298–302
60. Lewis CA et al (2014) Tracing compartmentalized NADPH 
metabolism in the cytosol and mitochondria of mammalian cells. 
Mol	Cell	55(2):253–263
61. Wang GL et al (1995) Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 is a basic-helix-
loop-helix-PAS heterodimer regulated by cellular O2 tension. 
Proc	Natl	Acad	Sci	U	S	A	92(12):5510–5514
62. Semenza GL (2003) Targeting HIF-1 for cancer therapy. Nat Rev 
Cancer	3(10):721–732
63.	 Maxwell	PH,	Pugh	CW,	Ratcliffe	PJ	(2001)	Activation	of	the	HIF	
pathway	in	cancer.	Curr	Opin	Genet	Dev	11(3):293–299
64.	 Hammarqvist	F	et	al	(1991)	Alpha-ketoglutarate	preserves	pro-
tein	synthesis	and	free	glutamine	in	skeletal	muscle	after	surgery.	
Surgery	109(1):28–36
65.	 Vaz	FM,	Wanders	RJ	(2002)	Carnitine	biosynthesis	in	mammals.	
Biochem	J	361(Pt	3):417–429
66. Cummins EP et al (2006) Prolyl hydroxylase-1 negatively regulates 
IkappaB	kinase-beta,	giving	insight	into	hypoxia-induced	NFkap-
paB	activity.	Proc	Natl	Acad	Sci	U	S	A	103(48):18154–18159
67. Xiong G et al (2018) Collagen prolyl 4-hydroxylase 1 is essential 
for	HIF-1α	stabilization	and	TNBC	chemoresistance.	Nat	Com-
mun	9(1):4456
68. Kato Y et al (2010) Establishment and characterization of a new 
hypoxia-resistant	cancer	cell	line,	OCUM-12/Hypo,	derived	from	
a	scirrhous	gastric	carcinoma.	Br	J	Cancer	102(5):898–907
69. Lang SA et al (2007) Mammalian target of rapamycin is activated 
in human gastric cancer and serves as a target for therapy in an 
experimental	model.	Int	J	Cancer	120(8):1803–1810
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to juris-
dictional	claims	in	published	maps	and	institutional	affiliations.	
45. Magnani ND et al (2020) Role of Mitochondria in the Redox Sig-
naling	Network	and	its	outcomes	in	high	impact	inflammatory	
syndromes.	Front	Endocrinol	(Lausanne)	11:568305
46. Wu Y et al (2018) Gold Nanorod Photothermal Therapy alters cell 
junctions	and	actin	network	in	Inhibiting	Cancer	cell	collective	
Migration.	ACS	Nano	12(9):9279–9290
47. Cui B et al (2013) Targeting ROR1 inhibits epithelial-mesenchy-
mal	transition	and	metastasis.	Cancer	Res	73(12):3649–3660
48.	 Song	P	et	al	(2019)	Estrogen	receptor	β	inhibits	breast	cancer	
cells migration and invasion through CLDN6-mediated autoph -
agy.	J	Exp	Clin	Cancer	Res	38(1):354
49. Aban CE et al (2021) Downregulation of E-cadherin in pluripo-
tent stem cells triggers partial EMT	Sci	Rep,	11(1):	p.	2048
50. Hamaguchi Y et al (2016) Longer warm ischemia can accelerate 
tumor	growth	through	the	induction	of	HIF-1α	and	the	IL-6-JAK-
STAT3 signaling pathway in a rat hepatocellular carcinoma 
model.	J	Hepatobiliary	Pancreat	Sci	23(12):771–779
51. Costa A, Scholer-Dahirel A, Mechta-Grigoriou F (2014) The role 
of reactive oxygen species and metabolism on cancer cells and 
their	microenvironment.	Semin	Cancer	Biol	25:23–32
52.	 Kitajima	Y,	Miyazaki	K	(2013)	The	critical	impact	of	HIF-1a	on	
gastric	Cancer	Biology.	Cancers	(Basel)	5(1):15–26
53.	 Ren	JG	et	al	(2014)	Knockdown	of	malic	enzyme	2	suppresses	
lung	tumor	growth,	induces	differentiation	and	impacts	PI3K/
AKT	signaling.	Sci	Rep	4:5414
54.	 Zhang	Q	et	al	(2019)	Effects	of	ME3	on	the	proliferation,	inva-
sion and metastasis of pancreatic cancer cells through epithelial-
mesenchymal	transition.	Neoplasma	66(6):896–907
55.	 Heine	A,	Juranek	S,	Brossart	P	(2021)	Clinical	and	immunologi-
cal	effects	of	mRNA	vaccines	in	malignant	diseases.	Mol	Cancer	
20(1):52
56.	 Snezhkina	AV	 et	 al	 (2019)	 ROS	 generation	 and	 antioxidant	
Defense systems in normal and malignant cells. Oxid Med Cell 
Longev	2019:p6175804
57. Galadari S et al (2017) Reactive oxygen species and cancer para-
dox:	to	promote	or	to	suppress?	Free	Radic	Biol	Med	104:144–164
1 3
Page 21 of 21   375