Academic Editor: Marcello
Salvatore Lenucci
Received: 14 March 2025
Revised: 29 March 2025
Accepted: 31 March 2025
Published: 2 April 2025
Citation: Guo, B.; Zhang, L.; Guo, J.
Transcriptome Analysis Reveals
Distinct Differences in Organic Acid
Metabolism Between the Pericarp and
the Pulp ofCerasus humilisDuring
Fruit Maturation. Plants 2025, 14, 1105.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
plants14071105
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
Transcriptome Analysis Reveals Distinct Differences in Organic
Acid Metabolism Between the Pericarp and the Pulp of
Cerasus humilisDuring Fruit Maturation
Bingcheng Guo, Li Zhang and Jinli Guo *
College of Horticulture and Plant Protection, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University, Hohhot 010010, China;
guobingcheng111@163.com (B.G.); zlkx628@163.com (L.Z.)
* Correspondence: guojinli1111@163.com; Tel.: +86-13789515371
Abstract: Organic acids are key components that determine the taste and flavor of fruits,
playing a crucial role in maintaining fruit quality and nutritional value. To investigate the
metabolic differences of organic acids between the fruit pericarp and the pulp during the
developmental maturation of the Cerasus humilis, this experiment utilized Cerasus humilis
cultivated in Inner Mongolia, China, as the experimental material. By measuring the
malic acid and citric acid content, as well as the activities of the related metabolic enzymes
in the fruit pericarp and the pulp at five developmental stages, this study investigated
the characteristics of organic acid accumulation, changes in enzyme activities, and the
expression trends of corresponding genes. Transcriptomic data were integrated to support
the analysis. This study specifically analyzed the reasons for the differences in acidity
between the pericarp and the pulp, and performed a correlation analysis of various
indicators. The results indicated that, during development, the organic acid composition
in both the pericarp and the pulp was primarily malic acid, with citric acid as a secondary
component. The malic acid and citric acid content in the pericarp were significantly higher
than in the pulp, resulting in greater overall acidity in the pericarp. The combined action of
PEPC, NAD-MDH, and NADP-ME was identified as the primary reason for the differences
in malic acid content between the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis. CS and ACO
were identified as the key enzymes responsible for the lower citric acid content in the pulp
compared to the pericarp. Furthermore, the expression levels of ChMDH2, ChME, ChCS2,
ChCS3, ChACO1, and ChACO2 differed significantly between the fruit pericarp and the
pulp, suggesting their regulatory roles in organic acid accumulation.
Keywords: Cerasus humilis; enzyme activity; gene expression organic acid metabolism;
transcriptomic analysis
1. Introduction
Cerasus humilis(Bge.) Sok. is a member of the subgenus Microcerasus in the Rosaceae
family. It is a unique wild fruit tree resource in China, widely distributed in regions such
as Shanxi, Inner Mongolia, Hebei, and Heilongjiang [1]. The fruit of Cerasus humilishas a
distinctive flavor and is rich in various amino acids, vitamins, and minerals. The fruit is
characterized by its high acidity, with the titratable acid content ranging from 1.0% to 2.0%,
which is higher than that found in most other drupe fruits. The leaves of Cerasus humilis
can be used to make tea, and its kernels have medicinal applications. The plant holds
significant nutritional, economic, and medicinal value [ 2], offering broad prospects for
further development [3]. The Cerasus humilisindustry has long faced challenges related
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 https://doi.org/10.3390/plants14071105
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 2 of 22
to the fruit’s palatability, primarily due to its high organic acid content. This imbalance
in acid metabolism has hindered the development of a fresh food market, leading to a
focus on processing Cerasus humilisfruit into juices and wines, and contributing to the
homogenization of the processing industry.
Organic acids are key nutritional components of fruits, significantly affecting their
flavor. In plant physiology, they are involved in numerous metabolic pathways during
fruit development, including respiration and photosynthesis, and play a crucial role in the
synthesis of esters, phenolics, and amino acids [4]. Organic acids are generated through
metabolic processes involving pyruvate and are degraded via gluconeogenesis. The tricar-
boxylic acid cycle (TCA cycle) facilitates the interconversion of organic acid components,
which then undergo additional metabolic reactions [5,6].
The composition and content of organic acids vary significantly across different tree
species and at various stages of fruit development. Fruits are typically classified into three
categories—malic, citric, and tartaric acid fruits—based on the predominant organic acids.
The acidity of these acids differs, but they all initially increase and then decrease during
fruit development and maturation. Furthermore, the composition and content of organic
acids also vary across different parts of the fruit [7]. In studies on kumquats [8], grapes [9],
and grapefruit [10], significant differences were observed in the composition and content
of organic acids between the pericarp and the pulp.
The organic acid metabolic process has been well studied, and the regulation of organic
acid metabolism in fruits is significantly complex. This metabolic process is not indepen-
dently regulated by a single enzyme but relies on a synergistic network of multiple enzyme
systems [11,12]. There are significant differences in the key enzymes and their enzymatic
functions in the organic acid metabolic pathways between different fruit types. For exam-
ple, malate dehydrogenase (MDH) plays a central role in the TCA cycle of apple fruit [13],
while citrate synthase (CS) dominates citric acid accumulation in citrus fruits [14,15].
Cerasus humilisis a fruit tree known for its significant acidity, exhibiting particularly
high acidity during its immature stage. It serves as a model for studying organic acid
metabolism due to the marked changes in organic acid concentrations throughout its
development. In mature fruit, the predominant organic acid is malic acid, with citric
acid present in smaller amounts. Studying the accumulation patterns of organic acids
in Cerasus humilisand the trends in the related metabolic enzyme activities provides a
theoretical basis for exploring the nutritional quality of this species. Current research
on Cerasus humilisis extensive, with reports documenting changes in enzyme activities
associated with organic acid metabolism in the fruit, and it focuses on organic acids
and their associated metabolic enzyme activities [ 16]. However, the differences in the
organic acid metabolism between the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilishave not
been previously reported. This study uses Cerasus humilisas materials and analyzes the
physiomics data in conjunction with the transcriptome data to systematically compare
the composition and content of organic acids, the activities of acid-metabolizing enzymes,
and changes in gene expression between the pericarp and the pulp. The relationships
among these factors are discussed, which will help deepen the understanding of organic
acid metabolism in Cerasus humilisand provide a theoretical basis for further research on
organic acids and subsequent regulation.
2. Results
2.1. Analysis of Organic Acid Components and Content
The malic acid (Mal) and citric acid (CA) contents in the pericarp and the pulp of
Cerasus humilisduring development were quantitatively analyzed, and the proportions
of each organic acid component are shown in Figure 1a,b. The malic acid content in both
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 3 of 22
the pericarp and the pulp initially increased and then decreased, reaching their highest
levels at the fully ripe stage, with proportions of 98.66% and 98.88%, respectively. The citric
acid content in the pericarp followed a similar trend, peaking at the hard seed stage with a
proportion of 27.24%; while, in the pulp, citric acid content gradually decreased, reaching
the lowest percentage (<2%) at the fully ripe stage. Malic acid dominates (>95%), with citric
acid as a minor component. From the above, it can be seen that the proportion of citric acid
generally decreased throughout development, while the proportion of malic acid increased,
making malic acid the primary acid component in both the pericarp and the pulp.
Plants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 22 
 
 
2. Results 
2.1. Analysis of Organic Acid Components and Content 
The malic acid (Mal) and citric acid (CA) contents in the pericarp and the pulp of 
Cerasus humilis during development were quantitatively analyzed, and the proportions of 
each organic acid component are shown in Figure 1a,b. The malic acid content in both the 
pericarp and the pulp initially increased and then decreased, reaching their highest levels 
at the fully ripe stage, with proportions of 98.66% and 98.88%, respectively. The citric acid 
content in the pericarp followed a similar tr end, peaking at the hard seed stage with a 
proportion of 27.24%; while, in the pulp, citric acid content gradually decreased, reaching 
the lowest percentage (<2%) at the fully ripe stage. Malic acid dominates (>95%), with 
citric acid as a minor component. From the ab ove, it can be seen that the proportion of 
citric acid generally decreased throughout development, while the proportion of malic 
acid increased, making malic acid the primary acid component in both the pericarp and 
the pulp. 
  
(a) ( b) 
  
(c) ( d) 
Figure 1. Changes in the proportions and content of or ganic acid components in the pericarp and 
the pulp of Cerasus humilis during development: (a) represents the proportion of acid content in the 
pericarp of the Cerasus humilis; (b) represents the proportion of acid content in the pulp of the Cerasus 
humilis; (c) represents the changes in malic acid conten t in both the pericarp and the pulp of the 
Cerasus humilis during development; ( d) represents the changes in citr ic acid content in both the 
pericarp and the pulp of the Cerasus humilis during development. S1: the young fruit stage; S2: the 
hard seed stage; S3: the coloring–enlargement stage; S4: the hard–ripe stage; S5: the fully ripe stage. 
Note: lowercase letters represent the results of Duncan’s test at p < 0.05 for the same developmental 
stage of the pericarp and the pulp, while uppercase letters represent the results of Duncan’s test at 
p < 0.05 for the pericarp and the pulp at diﬀerent developmental stages, respectively; the error bars 
represent the average standard deviation (n = 3). 
Figure 1. Changes in the proportions and content of organic acid components in the pericarp and
the pulp of Cerasus humilisduring development: ( a) represents the proportion of acid content in
the pericarp of the Cerasus humilis; (b) represents the proportion of acid content in the pulp of the
Cerasus humilis; (c) represents the changes in malic acid content in both the pericarp and the pulp of
the Cerasus humilisduring development; (d) represents the changes in citric acid content in both the
pericarp and the pulp of the Cerasus humilisduring development. S1: the young fruit stage; S2: the
hard seed stage; S3: the coloring–enlargement stage; S4: the hard–ripe stage; S5: the fully ripe stage.
Note: lowercase letters represent the results of Duncan’s test at p < 0.05 for the same developmental
stage of the pericarp and the pulp, while uppercase letters represent the results of Duncan’s test at
p < 0.05 for the pericarp and the pulp at different developmental stages, respectively; the error bars
represent the average standard deviation (n = 3).
A detailed analysis was performed on the changes in the content of common organic
acids in the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilisat different developmental stages,
with the results presented in Figure 1. The malic acid content in both the pericarp and the
pulp initially increased and then decreased as the fruit developed, reaching peak values of
15.01 mg/g in the pericarp and 10.59 mg/g in the pulp during the hard–ripe stage. Malic
acid content in the pericarp accumulated rapidly after the hard seed stage, and during the
coloring–enlargement, the hard–ripe, and the fully ripe stages, the pericarp content was
significantly higher than that in the pulp (Figure 1c). Similarly, the citric acid content in the
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 4 of 22
pericarp followed an increasing then decreasing trend, peaking at 0.88 mg/g during the
coloring–enlargement stage. However, the citric acid content in the pulp did not show a
clear trend. Citric acid in the pericarp accumulated rapidly after the young fruit stage, with
significantly higher levels in the pericarp compared to the pulp during the hard seed stage,
the coloring–enlargement stage, the hard–ripe stage, and the fully ripe stage (Figure 1d).
These results highlight the distinct accumulation patterns of malic acid and citric acid
between the pericarp and the pulp.
2.2. Changes in the Activity of Enzymes Related to Acid Metabolism
The organic acid metabolic process is controlled by multiple enzymes. Phospho-
enolpyruvate (PEP) is converted into oxaloacetic acid (OAA) by the catalysis of phospho-
enolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC). OAA can then be converted into malic acid through
the catalysis of NAD-malic dehydrogenase (NAD-MDH). The generated malic acid will
also be decomposed by NADP-malic enzyme (NADP-ME). Citric acid, catalyzed by citrate
synthase (CS), is formed by the condensation of acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate, and it is
further degraded to α-ketoglutarate by aconitase.
During fruit development, the activity of malate dehydrogenase (NAD-MDH) in the
pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilisis shown in Figure 2a. The activity of NAD-MDH
in both the pericarp and the pulp is similar, with a trend of first increasing and then
decreasing, and the highest activity was observed during the coloring–enlargement stage
(203.90 U·g−1) and the hard–ripe stage (170.87 U·g−1). There was no significant difference
in NAD-MDH activity between the pericarp and the pulp during the young fruit stage,
the hard seed stage, and the hard–ripe stage; but, in the coloring–enlargement stage and
the fully ripe stage, NAD-MDH activity in the pericarp was significantly higher than in
the pulp.
The activity of NADP-ME in the pericarp and the pulp exhibited different trends and
magnitudes (Figure 2b). In the pericarp, NADP-ME activity exhibited a gradual decrease,
reaching the lowest value at maturity with an activity of 77.11 U ·g−1. By contrast, the
activity in the pulp first increased and then decreased, with the highest activity at the
hard-core stage (156.50 U·g−1). NADP-ME activity in the pulp was significantly higher
than in the pericarp during the hard seed stage, the coloring–enlargement stage, and the
hard–ripening stage, while there were no significant differences during the young fruit and
fully ripe stages.
The activity of PEPC in the pericarp and the pulp differed in magnitude, but the trends
were similar (Figure 2c). Both the pericarp and the pulp exhibited an increasing followed
by a decreasing trend in PEPC activity, with the highest activity observed at the hard–ripe
stage and the coloring–enlargement stage (78.15 U·g−1 and 45.58 U·g−1, respectively). In
the hard seed stage, the coloring–enlargement stage, and the fully ripe stage, PEPC activity
in the pulp was significantly higher than in the pericarp, while no significant differences
were observed in the young fruit stage and the hard–ripe stage.
The activity of CS in the pericarp and the pulp varied in magnitude, but the trends
were similar (Figure 2d). Both the pericarp and the pulp exhibited an increasing followed by
a decreasing trend in CS activity, with the highest activity observed at the hard–ripe stage
and the coloring–enlargement stage (55.46 U·g−1 and 32.01 U·g−1, respectively). From the
young fruit stage to the fully ripe stage, CS activity in the pericarp was significantly higher
than in the pulp, with activity differences nearing a threefold difference during the hard
seed stage and the hard–ripe stage.
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 5 of 22
Plants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 22 
 
 
  
(a) ( b) 
  
(c) (d) 
 
 
(e)  
Figure 2. Changes in the activity of enzymes related to acid metabolism in the pericarp and the pulp 
of Cerasus humilis: (a) represents changes in NAD-MDH activity during development; (b) represents 
changes in NADP-ME activity during development; (c) represents changes in PEPC activity during 
development; (d) represents changes in CS ac tivity during development; (e) represents changes in 
ACO activity during development. S1: the young frui t stage; S2: the hard seed stage; S3: the color-
ing–enlargement stage; S4: the hard–ripe stage; S5: the fully ripe stage. Note: lowercase letters rep-
resent the results of Duncan’s test at p < 0.05 for the same developmental stage of the pericarp and 
the pulp, while uppercase le tters represent the results of Duncan’s test at p < 0.05 for the pericarp 
and the pulp at di ﬀerent developmental stages, respectively ; the error bars represent the average 
standard deviation (n = 3). 
The activity of CS in the pericarp and the pulp varied in magnitude, but the trends 
were similar (Figure 2d). Both the pericarp and the pulp exhibited an increasing followed 
by a decreasing trend in CS activity, with the highest activity observed at the hard–ripe 
stage and the coloring–enlargement stage (55.46 U·g
−1 and 32.01 U·g−1, respectively). From 
the young fruit stage to the fully ripe stag e, CS activity in the pericarp was signi ﬁcantly 
Figure 2. Changes in the activity of enzymes related to acid metabolism in the pericarp and the pulp
of Cerasus humilis: (a) represents changes in NAD-MDH activity during development; (b) represents
changes in NADP-ME activity during development; (c) represents changes in PEPC activity during
development; (d) represents changes in CS activity during development; ( e) represents changes
in ACO activity during development. S1: the young fruit stage; S2: the hard seed stage; S3: the
coloring–enlargement stage; S4: the hard–ripe stage; S5: the fully ripe stage. Note: lowercase letters
represent the results of Duncan’s test at p < 0.05 for the same developmental stage of the pericarp and
the pulp, while uppercase letters represent the results of Duncan’s test at p < 0.05 for the pericarp
and the pulp at different developmental stages, respectively; the error bars represent the average
standard deviation (n = 3).
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 6 of 22
The activity of ACO in the pericarp and the pulp exhibited different trends and
magnitudes (Figure 2e). In the pericarp, ACO activity first decreased and then increased,
reaching the lowest value at the coloring–enlargement stage (25.12 U ·g−1), while in the
pulp, ACO activity gradually increased, reaching the highest value at the fully ripe stage
(48.22 U·g−1). During the young fruit and hard seed stages, ACO activity in the pericarp
was significantly higher than in the pulp, while at the coloring–enlargement stage, ACO
activity in the pulp was significantly higher than in the pericarp. At the hard–ripe stage
and the fully ripe stage, no significant differences were observed.
In summary, the activity of enzymes related to malic acid and citric acid metabolism
in the pericarp and the pulp exhibited varying degrees of differences, which may be the
main reason for the differences in organic acid content.
2.3. Screening of Genes Involved in Organic Acid Metabolism Differences Between the Pericarp
and the Pulp of Cerasus humilis During Development
2.3.1. Differential Gene Analysis of the Transcriptome Between the Pericarp and the Pulp
Differential expression analysis was performed between the pericarp and the pulp at
the same developmental stages: S3GP_vs_S3GR and S4GR_vs_S4GP , with the screening
criteria set as fold change ≥ 2 and FDR ≤ 0.01.
There are 3491 unique differentially expressed genes in the pericarp and the pulp
during the S3 stage, 2235 unique differentially expressed genes in the pericarp and the
pulp during the S4 stage, and 4114 common differentially expressed genes between the
two stages (Figure 3a). The results exhibited that there were a total of 7605 differentially ex-
pressed genes between the pericarp and the pulp during the S3 stage, with 3471 upregulated
genes and 4134 downregulated genes (Figure 3b). During the S4 stage, 6349 differentially
expressed genes were found, with 3307 upregulated genes and 3042 downregulated genes
(Figure 3c).
Plants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 22 
 
 
higher than in the pulp, with activity diﬀerences nearing a threefold diﬀerence during the 
hard seed stage and the hard–ripe stage. 
The activity of ACO in the pericarp and the pulp exhibited diﬀerent trends and mag-
nitudes (Figure 2e). In the pericarp, ACO activity ﬁrst decreased and then increased, 
reaching the lowest value at the coloring–enlargement stage (25.12 U·g −1), while in the 
pulp, ACO activity gradually increased, reaching the highest value at the fully ripe stage 
(48.22 U·g−1). During the young fruit and hard seed stages, ACO activity in the pericarp 
was signiﬁcantly higher than in the pulp, while at the coloring–enlargement stage, ACO 
activity in the pulp was signi ﬁcantly higher than in the pericarp. At the hard–ripe stage 
and the fully ripe stage, no signiﬁcant diﬀerences were observed. 
In summary, the activity of enzymes related to malic acid and citric acid metabolism 
in the pericarp and the pulp exhibited varying degrees of di ﬀerences, which may be the 
main reason for the diﬀerences in organic acid content. 
2.3. Screening of Genes Involved in Organic Acid Metabolism Diﬀerences Between the Pericarp 
and the Pulp of Cerasus humilis During Development 
2.3.1. Diﬀerential Gene Analysis of the Transcriptome Between the Pericarp and the Pulp 
Diﬀerential expression analysis was performed between the pericarp and the pulp at 
the same developmental stages: S3GP_vs_S3 GR and S4GR_vs_S4GP, with the screening 
criteria set as fold change ≥ 2 and FDR ≤ 0.01. 
There are 3491 unique di ﬀerentially expressed genes in the pericarp and the pulp 
during the S3 stage, 2235 unique di ﬀerentially expressed genes in the pericarp and the 
pulp during the S4 stage, and 4114 common di ﬀerentially expressed genes between the 
two stages (Figure 3a). The results exhibited that there were a total of 7605 di ﬀerentially 
expressed genes between the pericarp and the pulp during the S3 stage, with 3471 upreg-
ulated genes and 4134 downregulated genes (Figure 3b). During the S4 stage, 6349 diﬀer-
entially expressed genes were found, with  3307 upregulated genes and 3042 downregu-
lated genes (Figure 3c). 
  
(a) ( b) 
Figure 3. Cont.
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 7 of 22
Plants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 22 
 
 
 
 
(c) ( d) 
Figure 3. Diﬀerentially expressed genes between the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis during 
the coloring–enlargement stage and the hard–ripe stage: (a) represents the Venn diagram of diﬀer-
entially expressed genes in the pericarp and the pulp during the coloring–enlargement stage and 
the hard–ripe stage; (b) represents the volcano plot of diﬀerentially expressed genes in the pericarp 
and the pulp during the coloring–enlargement stage; (c) represents the volcano plot of diﬀerentially 
expressed genes in the pericarp and the pulp duri ng the hard–ripe stage. The x-axis represents a 
log2 fold change, and the y-axis represents a negative log10 p-value. Signiﬁcantly upregulated genes 
are in red, downregulated genes in blue, and nonsigniﬁcant changes in gray; (d) represents the prin-
cipal component analysis (PCA) plots of pericarp and pulp. S3: the coloring–enlargement stage; S4: 
the hard–ripe stage; GP: the pericarp of Cerasus humilis; GR: the pulp of Cerasus humilis. Note: Each 
point in the volcano plot represents a gene, with the x-axis showing the logarithmic value of the fold 
change in gene expression between the two samples, and the y-axis showing the negative logarith-
mic value of the statistical signiﬁcance of gene expression changes. In the plot, blue points represent 
downregulated diﬀerentially expressed genes, red points represent upregulated di ﬀerentially ex-
pressed genes, and gray points represent non-diﬀerentially expressed genes. 
2.3.2. Diﬀerential Gene Enrichment Analysis 
Perform a functional annotation of diﬀerentially expressed genes in the database and 
statistical analysis of the number of genes annotated in each diﬀerentially expressed gene 
set. The detailed content is shown in Table 1. 
Table 1. Statistical table of functional annotation counts for di ﬀerentially expressed genes in each 
database. 
DEG Set Total COG GO KEGG KOG NR Pfam Swiss-Prot eggNOG 
S3GP_vs_S3GR 5838 1871 4877 3906 3116 5833 4359 4143 4958 
S4GP_vs_S4GR 7051 2162 5925 4778 3936 7043 5283 4979 6021 
Note: S3: the coloring–enlargement stage; S4: the hard–ripe stage; GP: the pericarp of Cerasus humilis; 
GR: the pulp of Cerasus humilis; GP: the pericarp of Cerasus humilis; GR: the pulp of Cerasus humilis. 
2.3.3. KEGG Annotation and Pathway Enrichment Analysis of Diﬀerentially Expressed 
Genes 
KEGG annotation and pathway enrichment analysis of diﬀerentially expressed genes 
were performed, and the results are shown in the ﬁgure below. The results show that, for 
Figure 3. Differentially expressed genes between the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis
during the coloring–enlargement stage and the hard–ripe stage: (a) represents the Venn diagram of
differentially expressed genes in the pericarp and the pulp during the coloring–enlargement stage and
the hard–ripe stage; (b) represents the volcano plot of differentially expressed genes in the pericarp
and the pulp during the coloring–enlargement stage; (c) represents the volcano plot of differentially
expressed genes in the pericarp and the pulp during the hard–ripe stage. The x-axis represents
a log2 fold change, and the y-axis represents a negative log10 p-value. Significantly upregulated
genes are in red, downregulated genes in blue, and nonsignificant changes in gray; (d) represents
the principal component analysis (PCA) plots of pericarp and pulp. S3: the coloring–enlargement
stage; S4: the hard–ripe stage; GP: the pericarp of Cerasus humilis; GR: the pulp of Cerasus humilis.
Note: Each point in the volcano plot represents a gene, with the x-axis showing the logarithmic
value of the fold change in gene expression between the two samples, and the y-axis showing the
negative logarithmic value of the statistical significance of gene expression changes. In the plot, blue
points represent downregulated differentially expressed genes, red points represent upregulated
differentially expressed genes, and gray points represent non-differentially expressed genes.
2.3.2. Differential Gene Enrichment Analysis
Perform a functional annotation of differentially expressed genes in the database and
statistical analysis of the number of genes annotated in each differentially expressed gene
set. The detailed content is shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Statistical table of functional annotation counts for differentially expressed genes in
each database.
DEG Set Total COG GO KEGG KOG NR Pfam Swiss-Prot eggNOG
S3GP_vs_S3GR 5838 1871 4877 3906 3116 5833 4359 4143 4958
S4GP_vs_S4GR 7051 2162 5925 4778 3936 7043 5283 4979 6021
Note: S3: the coloring–enlargement stage; S4: the hard–ripe stage; GP: the pericarp of Cerasus humilis; GR: the
pulp of Cerasus humilis.
2.3.3. KEGG Annotation and Pathway Enrichment Analysis of Differentially Expressed Genes
KEGG annotation and pathway enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes
were performed, and the results are shown in the figure below. The results show that, for
S3GP_vs_S3GR, all differentially expressed genes were enriched in 134 pathways according
to the annotation results (Figure 4A,B); for S4GP_vs_S4GR, all differentially expressed
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 8 of 22
genes were enriched in 132 pathways according to the annotation results (Figure 4C,D). The
genes upregulated in GP relative to GR during the S3 and S4 phases involved pathways
such as ribosomal, endocytosis, oxidative phosphorylation, and endoplasmic reticulum
protein processing pathways. However, genes downregulated in GP relative to GR at
the S3 and S4 phases involved pathways such as plant–pathogen interaction, fatty acid
metabolism, fatty acid biosynthesis, and phytohormone signaling.
Plants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 22 
 
 
S3GP_vs_S3GR, all differentially expressed genes were enriched in 134 pathways accord-
ing to the annotation results (Figure 4A,B); for S4GP_vs_S4GR, all differentially expressed 
genes were enriched in 13 2 pathways according to the annotation results  (Figure 4C,D). 
The genes upregulated in GP relative to GR during the S3 and S4 phases involved path-
ways such as ribosomal, endocytosis, oxidative phosphorylation, and endoplasmic retic-
ulum protein processing pathways. However, genes downregulated in GP relative to GR 
at the S3 and S4 phases involved pathways such as plant–pathogen interaction, fatty acid 
metabolism, fatty acid biosynthesis, and phytohormone signaling. 
  
  
Figure 4. Pathway enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes in the pericarp and the pulp 
of Cerasus humilis during the coloring–enlargement stage and the hard–ripe stage: The horizontal 
axis represents GeneNum, the number of genes of interest annotated in the entry, while the vertical 
axis represents each pathway entry. The colors of the bars indicate the q -value from the hypergeo-
metric test: (A) represents S3GP vs . S3GR upregulated; ( B) represents S3GP vs . S3GR downregu-
lated; (C) represents S4GP vs. S4GR upregulated; (D) represents S4GP vs. S4GR downregulated. 
2.3.4. Prediction of Genes Related to Organic Acid Metabolic Pathways 
The predicted results and naming of the unknown genes are shown in the Table 2. 
Table 2. List of gene prediction names. 
Numbering of New Genes Predicting Enzyme-Encoding Genes Genes Name 
NewGene_1191.1 Malate dehydrogenase gene ChMDH1 
NewGene_6957.1 Malate dehydrogenase gene ChMDH2 
NewGene_20719.2 Malic enzyme gene ChME 
NewGene_10906.1 Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene ChPEPC 
NewGene_3681.1 Aconitic acid hydratase gene ChACO1 
NewGene_13406.1 Aconitic acid hydratase gene ChACO2 
Figure 4. Pathway enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes in the pericarp and the pulp
of Cerasus humilisduring the coloring–enlargement stage and the hard–ripe stage: The horizontal axis
represents GeneNum, the number of genes of interest annotated in the entry, while the vertical axis
represents each pathway entry. The colors of the bars indicate the q-value from the hypergeometric
test: ( A) represents S3GP vs. S3GR upregulated; ( B) represents S3GP vs. S3GR downregulated;
(C) represents S4GP vs. S4GR upregulated; (D) represents S4GP vs. S4GR downregulated.
2.3.4. Prediction of Genes Related to Organic Acid Metabolic Pathways
The predicted results and naming of the unknown genes are shown in the Table 2.
Table 2. List of gene prediction names.
Numbering of New Genes Predicting Enzyme-Encoding Genes Genes Name
NewGene_1191.1 Malate dehydrogenase gene ChMDH1
NewGene_6957.1 Malate dehydrogenase gene ChMDH2
NewGene_20719.2 Malic enzyme gene ChME
NewGene_10906.1 Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene ChPEPC
NewGene_3681.1 Aconitic acid hydratase gene ChACO1
NewGene_13406.1 Aconitic acid hydratase gene ChACO2
NewGene_14300.1 Citrate synthase gene ChCS1
NewGene_18025.5 Citrate synthase gene ChCS2
NewGene_14300.1 Citrate synthase gene ChCS3
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 9 of 22
2.4. Expression Analysis of Genes Encoding Enzymes Related to Acid Metabolism
An analysis of the organic acid content in both the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus
humilis reveals that malic acid is the primary component, with citric acid following. This
suggests that the combined levels of malic acid and citric acid account for the acidity
variation between the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis. The coloring–enlargement
stage and the hard–ripe stage are crucial stages in the development of Cerasus humilis,
characterized by the most significant changes. Based on the transcriptome sequencing
results of the pericarp and the pulp during the coloring–enlargement stage and the hard–
ripe stage, and in comparison with homologous sequences from the National Center for
Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, accessed on
15 February 2025), changes in malic acid and citric acid metabolism related genes during
the growth and development of the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humiliswere analyzed.
Organic acid metabolism during fruit development is highly dynamic, with fluctua-
tions in components and content driven by a cascade of reactions involving multiple genes
and enzymes. Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) influences the synthesis of malic
acid and citric acid by catalyzing the β-carboxylation of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) to
produce oxaloacetic acid (OAA) and inorganic phosphate. Researchers have analyzed
the transcriptome database of the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilisand identified
at least one gene from the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) family. During the
coloring–enlargement stage and the hard–ripe stage, expression levels of ChPEPC increases
in the pericarp but decreases in the pulp. The expression levels of ChPEPC in both tissues
remain low, aligning with the observed changes in PEPC activity (Figure 5a).
Malate dehydrogenase (NAD-MDH) aids in malic acid accumulation by catalyzing
the conversion of oxaloacetic acid (OAA) to malic acid. A transcriptome analysis identified
at least two members of the malate dehydrogenase (NAD-MDH) gene family. During the
coloring–enlargement stage and the hard–ripe stage, the expression levels of the ChMDH1
and ChMDH2 genes increased in both the pericarp and the pulp. Notably, expression levels
of ChMDH2 in the pulp significantly surpassed that in the pericarp during the hard–ripe
stage. The elevated expression levels of the ChMDH1 and ChMDH2 genes in both the
pericarp and the pulp likely contributes to the increased NAD-MDH activity (Figure 5b,c).
Malic enzyme (NADP-ME) facilitates malic acid breakdown by catalyzing the conver-
sion of malic acid to phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP). Transcriptome data identified at least
one gene encoding malic enzyme (NADP-ME). During the coloring–enlargement stage
and the hard–ripe stage, expression levels of ChME decreases in the pericarp but increases
in the pulp, aligning with the changes in NADP-ME activity in both tissues throughout
development. During the coloring–enlargement stage, the expression level of ChME was
significantly higher in the pericarp than in the pulp. However, during the hard–ripe stage,
this trend reversed, though not significantly, likely contributing to the higher NADP-ME
activity in the pulp (Figure 5d).
Citrate synthase (CS) catalyzes the condensation of acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetic acid
(OAA), promoting citric acid accumulation. A transcriptome analysis identified at least
three genes encoding citrate synthase (CS). During the coloring–enlargement stage and
the hard–ripe stage, the expression levels of the ChCS2 and ChCS3 genes were higher than
ChCS1, with higher expression in the pericarp compared to the pulp. In the pericarp, the
expression levels of the ChCS1 and ChCS2 genes increase, while ChCS3 decreases. In the
pulp, expression levels of ChCS1 and ChCS3 decrease, while ChCS2 follows an upward–
downward pattern. Differential expression of ChCS2 and ChCS3 may be the main reason
for the difference in CS activity between the pericarp and the pulp, which in turn affects
the citric acid content of both (Figure 5e–g).
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 10 of 22
Plants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 22 
 
 
pulp, expression levels of ChCS1 and ChCS3 decrease, while ChCS2 follows an upward–
downward pattern. Diﬀerential expression of ChCS2 and ChCS3 may be the main reason 
for the diﬀerence in CS activity between the pericarp and the pulp, which in turn a ﬀects 
the citric acid content of both (Figure 5e–g). 
   
(a) ( b) ( c) 
   
(d) ( e) (f) 
   
(g) (h) (i) 
Figure 5. Changes in genes related to organic acid metabolism in the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus
humilis: (a) represents PEPC gene expression; (b) represents ChMDH1 gene expression; (c) represents
ChMDH2 gene expression; ( d) represents ChME gene expression; ( e) represents ChCS1 gene
expression; (f) representsChCS2 gene expression; (g) representsChCS3 gene expression; (h) represents
ChACO1 gene expression; (i) representsChACO2 gene expression. S3: the coloring–enlargement stage;
S4: the hard–ripe stage. Note: lowercase letters represent the results of Duncan’s test at p < 0.05 for
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 11 of 22
the same developmental stage of the pericarp and the pulp, while uppercase letters represent the
results of Duncan’s test at p < 0.05 for the pericarp and the pulp at different developmental stages,
respectively; the error bars represent the average standard deviation (n = 3).
Aconitase (ACO), crucial for citric acid degradation in the tricarboxylic acid cy-
cle, is encoded by at least two genes identified in the transcriptome data. During the
coloring–enlargement and hard–ripe stages, the expression levels of ChACO1 and ChACO2
in the pericarp remain relatively stable, while ChACO1 expression in the pulp gradually
increases. During the coloring–enlargement stage, the expression levels of ChACO1 and
ChACO2 in the pericarp is higher than in the pulp, with no significant differences observed
at the hard–ripe stage. These expression trends in the pulp align with changes in ACO
activity, facilitating citric acid degradation (Figure 5h,i).
2.5. qRT-PCR Validation
To validate the reliability of the RNA-Seq data, qRT-PCR was employed to detect the
genes associated with organic acid metabolism predicted by the screening process. The results
indicated that the relative expression of these genes differed between the S3 and S4 pericarp
and pulp, with similar gene expression patterns and consistent data trends in both qRT-PCR
and RNA-Seq. This suggests that the genes identified in this study , which are involved in the
accumulation and metabolism of organic acids inCerasus humilis, are reliable (Figure 6).
Plants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 23 
 
 
    
(a)  (b)  (c) 
    
(d)  (e)  (f) 
    
(g)  (h)  (i) 
Figure 6. Changes in the relative expression of genes related to organic acid metabolism in the per‐
icarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis: (a) represents the relative expression of PEPC; (b) represents 
Figure 6. Cont.
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 12 of 22
Plants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 23 
 
 
    
(a)  (b)  (c) 
    
(d)  (e)  (f) 
    
(g)  (h)  (i) 
Figure 6. Changes in the relative expression of genes related to organic acid metabolism in the per‐
icarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis: (a) represents the relative expression of PEPC; (b) represents 
Figure 6. Changes in the relative expression of genes related to organic acid metabolism in the
pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis: (a) represents the relative expression of PEPC; (b) represents
the relative expression of ChMDH1; (c) represents the relative expression of ChMDH2; (d) represents
the relative expression of ChME; (e) represents the relative expression of ChCS1; (f) represents the
relative expression ofChCS2; (g) represents the relative expression ofChCS2; (h) represents the relative
expression ofChACO1; (i) represents the relative expression ofChACO2. S3: the coloring–enlargement
stage; S4: the hard–ripe stage. Note: lowercase letters represent the results of Duncan’s test at p < 0.05
for the same developmental stage of the pericarp and the pulp, while uppercase letters represent the
results of Duncan’s test at p < 0.05 for the pericarp and the pulp at different developmental stages,
respectively; the error bars represent the average standard deviation (n = 3).
2.6. Correlation Analysis
2.6.1. The Correlation Between Acid Content in the Pericarp and the Pulp of Cerasus humilis
and the Activity of Enzymes Involved in Acid Metabolism
A correlation analysis was conducted on the acid content and the activity of acid
metabolism-related enzymes in the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilisduring devel-
opment. The results indicated a positive correlation between malic acid content and PEPC
activity in both the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis, with a highly significant corre-
lation observed in the pericarp (p < 0.01). A significant positive correlation was observed
between malic acid content and NAD-MDH activity in both the fruit pericarp and the pulp
(p < 0.05). A negative correlation was found between malic acid content and NADP-ME
activity in both the pericarp and the pulp, with a significant correlation in the pericarp
(p < 0.05) (Figure 7a).
The citric acid content in both the pericarp and the pulp exhibited a negative correlation
with PEPC activity, though this correlation was not significant. A positive correlation was
observed between citric acid content in the pericarp and CS activity, whereas a negative
correlation was found between citric acid content in the pulp and CS activity; however,
neither correlation was significant. A negative correlation was observed between citric acid
content in both the pericarp and the pulp and ACO activity, with a significant correlation
in the pericarp (p < 0.05) (Figure 7b).
These results indicate that PEPC and NAD-MDH facilitate the synthesis of malic acid,
while NADP-ME aids its degradation; CS promotes citric acid synthesis, and ACO promotes
its breakdown. However, the acid metabolism mechanisms in the pericarp and the pulp
may vary, with the two organic acids showing different correlations with the activity of
their respective metabolic enzymes. They interact synergistically in the metabolic processes
of malic and citric acid.
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 13 of 22
Plants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 22 
 
 
activity in both the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis, with a highly signiﬁcant cor-
relation observed in the pericarp (p < 0.01). A signiﬁcant positive correlation was observed 
between malic acid content and NAD-MDH activity in both the fruit pericarp and the 
pulp (p < 0.05). A negative correlation was found between malic acid content and NADP-
ME activity in both the pericarp and the pulp, with a signiﬁcant correlation in the pericarp 
(p < 0.05) (Figure 7a). 
The citric acid content in both the pericarp and the pulp exhibited a negative corre-
lation with PEPC activity, though this correlation was not signi ﬁcant. A positive correla-
tion was observed between citric acid conten t in the pericarp and CS activity, whereas a 
negative correlation was found between citric acid content in the pulp and CS activity; 
however, neither correlation was signi ﬁcant. A negative correlation was observed be-
tween citric acid content in both the pericarp and the pulp and ACO activity, with a sig-
niﬁcant correlation in the pericarp (p < 0.05) (Figure 7b). 
These results indicate that PEPC and NAD-MDH facilitate the synthesis of malic acid, 
while NADP-ME aids its degradation; CS promotes citric acid synthesis, and ACO pro-
motes its breakdown. However, the acid metabolism mechanisms in the pericarp and the 
pulp may vary, with the two organic acids showing diﬀerent correlations with the activity 
of their respective metabolic enzymes. They interact synergistically in the metabolic pro-
cesses of malic and citric acid. 
  
(a) ( b) 
Figure 7. The correlation between acid content and the activity of acid metabolism-related enzymes 
in the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis: (a) represents the relationship between organic acids 
and their related metabolic enzymes in the pericarp; (b) represents the relationship between organic 
acids and their related metabolic enzymes in the pulp. Note: “*” indicates a signi ﬁcant correlation 
at the p < 0.05 level, and “**” indicates an extremely signiﬁcant correlation at the p < 0.01 level. 
2.6.2. Relationship Between the Activity of Acid Metabolism-Related Enzymes and the 
Expression of Their Encoding Genes in the Pericarp and the Pulp of Cerasus humilis 
A correlation analysis was performed separately on the activity of acid metabolism-
related enzymes and their encoding genes in the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis 
during development (Figure 8). The results indicated that PEPC activity in both the peri-
carp and the pulp was positively correlated with ChPEPC expression, with a highly sig-
niﬁcant correlation in the pericarp ( p < 0.01). MDH activity in both the pericarp and the 
pulp was positively  correlated with ChMDH1 and ChMDH2 expression to varying de-
grees, with a stronger correlation in the pulp than in the pericarp. ME activity in the per-
icarp was positively correlated with ChME expression; whereas, in the pulp, it was nega-
tively correlated, although neither correlation was signiﬁcant. CS activity in the pericarp 
was positively correlated with ChCS1 and ChCS2 expression to varying extents; while, in 
the pulp, it was negatively correlated with ChCS1 and ChCS2 expression, with a highly 
signiﬁcant correlation with ChCS1 (p < 0.01). ACO activity in the pericarp was positively 
correlated with ChACO1 and negatively correlated with ChACO2 expression; whereas, in 
Figure 7. The correlation between acid content and the activity of acid metabolism-related enzymes
in the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis: (a) represents the relationship between organic acids
and their related metabolic enzymes in the pericarp; (b) represents the relationship between organic
acids and their related metabolic enzymes in the pulp. Note: “*” indicates a significant correlation at
the p < 0.05 level, and “**” indicates an extremely significant correlation at the p < 0.01 level.
2.6.2. Relationship Between the Activity of Acid Metabolism-Related Enzymes and the
Expression of Their Encoding Genes in the Pericarp and the Pulp of Cerasus humilis
A correlation analysis was performed separately on the activity of acid metabolism-
related enzymes and their encoding genes in the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis
during development (Figure 8). The results indicated that PEPC activity in both the pericarp
and the pulp was positively correlated with ChPEPC expression, with a highly significant
correlation in the pericarp (p < 0.01). MDH activity in both the pericarp and the pulp was
positively correlated with ChMDH1 and ChMDH2 expression to varying degrees, with a
stronger correlation in the pulp than in the pericarp. ME activity in the pericarp was posi-
tively correlated with ChME expression; whereas, in the pulp, it was negatively correlated,
although neither correlation was significant. CS activity in the pericarp was positively
correlated with ChCS1 and ChCS2 expression to varying extents; while, in the pulp, it
was negatively correlated with ChCS1 and ChCS2 expression, with a highly significant
correlation with ChCS1 (p < 0.01). ACO activity in the pericarp was positively correlated
with ChACO1 and negatively correlated with ChACO2 expression; whereas, in the pulp,
both were positively correlated, but none of these correlations reached significance.
Plants 2025, 14, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 22 
 
 
the pulp, both were positively correlated, but none of these correlations reached signi ﬁ-
cance. 
  
(a) (b) 
Figure 8. The relationship between the activity of acid metabolism-related enzymes and the expres-
sion of their encoding genes in the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis: (a) represents the rela-
tionship between acid content and enzyme ac tivity in the perica rp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis 
during development; (b) represents the relationship between acid metabolism enzyme activity and 
their encoding genes in the pulp of Cerasus humilis. Note: “*” indicates a signi ﬁcant correlation at 
the p < 0.05 level, and “**” indicates an extremely signiﬁcant correlation at the p < 0.01 level. 
These results suggest that the same enzyme and gene exhibit diﬀerential expression 
between the pericarp and the pulp, with varying degrees of correlation between the activ-
ity of acid metabolism-related enzymes and their encoding genes. 
3. Discussion 
3.1. Changes in Organic Acid Content in the Pericarp and the Pulp of Cerasus humilis During 
Development 
During the development and maturation of Cerasus humilis, malic acid and citric acid 
are the primary organic acids contributing to its acidity [6,17]. Malic acid provides a sharp, 
immediate sourness, while citric acid deliv ers a smoother, more gradual sourness [18]. 
These acids inﬂuence the pH gradient of the fruit’s cell sap due to their distinct dissocia-
tion constants (pKa values of 3.4 for malic acid and 3.1 for citric acid). In this study, the 
organic acid content in both the pericarp and the pulp was analyzed. The results exhibited 
that malic acid accumulated rapidly in the early stages of fruit development, comprising 
over 95% of the organic acids at maturity, followed by citric acid. This high malic acid 
content is the primary contributor to the sour and astringent taste of Cerasus humilis. Dur-
ing the coloring–enlargement stage, the hard–ripe stage, and the fully ripe stage, the per-
icarp consistently had signi ﬁcantly higher levels of malic and citric acids than the pulp, 
indicating a distinct diﬀerence in acidity. The malic acid content peaked during the hard–
ripe stage and then declined at maturity. Similarly, citric acid accumulated during the 
hard seed stage, peaked during the coloring–enlargement stage, and then gradually de-
creased [19]. This shift in organic acid content is likely linked to changes in metabolic 
pathways and the distribution of carbon sources. In the early stages of development, fruit 
cells actively divide and expand, using malic and citric acids as metabolic intermediates 
for synthesizing amino acids, lipids, and other cellular components. As the fruit matures, 
metabolic processes shift toward the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) and gluconeogen-
esis, with sugars and lipids taking precedence, leading to a reduction in organic acids [20]. 
Figure 8. The relationship between the activity of acid metabolism-related enzymes and the expression
of their encoding genes in the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis: (a) represents the relationship
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 14 of 22
between acid content and enzyme activity in the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilisduring
development; (b) represents the relationship between acid metabolism enzyme activity and their
encoding genes in the pulp of Cerasus humilis. Note: “*” indicates a significant correlation at the
p < 0.05 level, and “**” indicates an extremely significant correlation at the p < 0.01 level.
These results suggest that the same enzyme and gene exhibit differential expression
between the pericarp and the pulp, with varying degrees of correlation between the activity
of acid metabolism-related enzymes and their encoding genes.
3. Discussion
3.1. Changes in Organic Acid Content in the Pericarp and the Pulp of Cerasus humilis
During Development
During the development and maturation of Cerasus humilis, malic acid and citric acid
are the primary organic acids contributing to its acidity [6,17]. Malic acid provides a sharp,
immediate sourness, while citric acid delivers a smoother, more gradual sourness [ 18].
These acids influence the pH gradient of the fruit’s cell sap due to their distinct dissociation
constants (pKa values of 3.4 for malic acid and 3.1 for citric acid). In this study, the organic
acid content in both the pericarp and the pulp was analyzed. The results exhibited that
malic acid accumulated rapidly in the early stages of fruit development, comprising over
95% of the organic acids at maturity, followed by citric acid. This high malic acid content
is the primary contributor to the sour and astringent taste of Cerasus humilis. During
the coloring–enlargement stage, the hard–ripe stage, and the fully ripe stage, the pericarp
consistently had significantly higher levels of malic and citric acids than the pulp, indicating
a distinct difference in acidity. The malic acid content peaked during the hard–ripe stage
and then declined at maturity. Similarly, citric acid accumulated during the hard seed
stage, peaked during the coloring–enlargement stage, and then gradually decreased [19].
This shift in organic acid content is likely linked to changes in metabolic pathways and the
distribution of carbon sources. In the early stages of development, fruit cells actively divide
and expand, using malic and citric acids as metabolic intermediates for synthesizing amino
acids, lipids, and other cellular components. As the fruit matures, metabolic processes shift
toward the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) and gluconeogenesis, with sugars and lipids
taking precedence, leading to a reduction in organic acids [20]. Additionally, the increase in
fruit size and water content likely dilutes the concentration of organic acids, contributing
further to the decrease in acidity [21].
3.2. Changes in Organic Acid Metabolism-Related Enzymes in the Pericarp and the Pulp of
Cerasus humilis During Development
Organic acid metabolism in fruit development is highly dynamic, with fluctuations in
malic and citric acid content largely driven by the coordinated action of several enzymes.
Previous studies have indicated that enzymes such as phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase
(PEPC), malate dehydrogenase (NAD-MDH), NADP-malic enzyme (NADP-ME), citrate
synthase (CS), and aconitase (ACO) are crucial in the synthesis and breakdown of malic
acid and citric acid during fruit development [22,23]. To examine their regulatory roles, we
measured the activity of these enzymes. PEPC activity in the pericarp of Cerasus humilis
initially increased, then decreased, and later increased again during development. By
contrast, enzyme activity in the pulp exhibited a rise followed by a decline. This suggests
the differing regulatory effects of PEPC on organic acid metabolism in the pericarp and
the pulp. Additionally, malic acid content in both parts was positively correlated with
PEPC activity, with a strong correlation in the pericarp. However, citric acid content
was either negatively correlated or not correlated, indicating that PEPC activity primarily
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 15 of 22
influences malic acid accumulation without affecting citric acid accumulation. This aligns
with previous findings [24].
Malate dehydrogenase (NAD-MDH) supports malic acid accumulation, while NADP-
malic enzyme (NADP-ME) facilitates malic acid breakdown [25]. In this study, malic acid
accumulation in both the pericarp and the pulp followed the same trend as NAD-MDH
activity, showing an initial increase followed by a decrease, and was significantly positively
correlated. This suggests that NAD-MDH promotes malic acid synthesis in both the
pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis. NADP-ME activity in the pericarp was negatively
correlated with malic acid accumulation, indicating that it promotes malic acid breakdown.
By contrast, NADP-ME activity in the pulp did not correlate with malic acid content,
possibly due to the high activity of PEPC and NAD-MDH, leading to overproduction of
malic acid and disturbing the balance between synthesis and degradation. NADP-ME
activity in the pulp was significantly higher than in the pericarp during the transition from
the hard seed stage to the fully ripe stage, promoting increased breakdown of malic acid in
the pulp. This likely accounts for the higher acidity in the pericarp compared to the pulp.
NADP-ME plays a critical role in the difference in malic acid content between the pericarp
and the pulp.
Previous studies have suggested that CS and ACO play key roles in regulating cit-
ric acid levels, with CS promoting citric acid accumulation and ACO involved in its
degradation [26]. In this study, CS activity in the pericarp of Cerasus humilisfirst increased
and then decreased, while ACO activity initially decreased and then increased. The two
enzyme activities were positively correlated and negatively correlated with citric acid
content, respectively. This indicates that CS promotes citric acid accumulation, and ACO
is a key enzyme regulating citric acid content in the pericarp. In the pulp, CS activity
increased initially and then decreased, while ACO activity gradually increased, both nega-
tively correlating with citric acid content. This pattern may be due to lower ACO activity at
the young fruit stage, resulting in a higher proportion of citric acid. The higher citric acid
concentration inhibits CS activity through feedback, a phenomenon also seen in passion
fruit [22] and plums [27]. Throughout development, CS activity was significantly higher
in the pericarp than in the pulp, while ACO activity exhibited little difference, explaining
the higher citric acid content in the pericarp. CS is the key enzyme responsible for the
difference in citric acid content between the pericarp and the pulp.
3.3. Acid Accumulation, Metabolic Enzymes, and Gene Expression Dynamics During Pericarp and
Pulp Development in Cerasus humilis
Organic acid content, enzyme activity, and the expression of their encoding genes are
dynamically correlated [15]. In this study, ChPEPC positively regulates PEPC activity in
both the pericarp and the pulp. PEPC activity strongly correlates with malic acid content,
especially in the pericarp (p < 0.01), and negatively correlates with citric acid content in
both tissues. This suggests that ChPEPC enhances PEPC synthesis, promoting malic acid
accumulation and playing a crucial role in regulating its differential metabolism in the
pericarp and the pulp. Both the ChMDH1 and ChMDH2 genes positively regulate MDH
activity in the pericarp and the pulp. MDH activity correlates positively with malic acid
content, suggesting that the expression of these genes promotes the synthesis of MDH,
regulating malic acid metabolism and its accumulation. The high expression levels of
ChMDH1 and ChMDH2 in both tissues indicate that these genes are essential for malic
acid synthesis in the pericarp and the pulp. In the pericarp, ChME expression is positively
correlated with ME activity, which negatively correlates with malic acid content. In the
pulp, however, ChME expression is inversely related to ME activity, which also negatively
correlates with malic acid content. This indicates that the differential expression of ChME
in the pericarp and the pulp affects enzyme activity and malic acid content, making ChME
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 16 of 22
a key gene responsible for variations in malic acid levels between these two tissues. In
the pericarp, ChCS1 and ChCS2 enhance CS activity, while ChCS3 inhibits it. CS activity
positively correlates with citric acid content. In the pulp, ChCS1 and ChCS3 promote CS
activity, while ChCS2 suppresses it. CS activity, in turn, negatively correlates with citric
acid content. These findings suggest that the differential expression of ChCS1, ChCS2, and
ChCS3 between the pericarp and the pulp influences CS activity, which in turn affects citric
acid accumulation in each tissue. ChCS3 and ChCS2 are key genes responsible for citric acid
synthesis in the pericarp and the pulp, respectively, and contribute to the differential citric
acid content between these two tissues. In both tissues, ChACO1 enhances ACO activity,
while ChACO2 suppresses it. ACO activity negatively correlates with citric acid content,
with a significant correlation observed in the pericarp (p < 0.05). These results suggest that
ChACO1 and ChACO2 together regulate citric acid content by modulating ACO activity.
To sum up, ChMDH1 and ChMDH2 are essential for promoting malic acid synthesis in
both the pericarp and the pulp, ChME is a differential gene responsible for variations in
malic acid content, and ChCS3 and ChCS2 are key genes regulating citric acid synthesis in
the pericarp and the pulp, respectively, contributing to the differential citric acid content
between the two tissues. These findings provide a foundation for further research.
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Experimental Site
In this experiment, the MY-23 cultivar of Cerasus humiliswas used as the material.
These materials were planted at the Cerasus humilisresearch base of Inner Mongolia Agri-
cultural University, located in Hohhot, Inner Mongolia, at a longitude of 111.65 ◦ and a
latitude of 40.82◦. The region has a mid-temperate continental monsoon climate with four
distinct seasons, an average annual temperature of about 6.5 ◦C, annual precipitation of
about 400 mm, warm and humid summers with lots of rain, and cold and dry winters with
a large temperature difference between day and night.
4.2. Sample Collection
From June to September 2023, the MY-23 cultivar ofCerasus humiliswas used as the
experimental material. Flowering time was recorded on 24 April. The fruit development
stages include the young fruit stage (S1, 10 June), the hard seed stage (S2, 10 July), the
coloring–enlargement stage (S3, 20 August), the hard–ripe stage (S4, 5 September), and
the fully ripe stage (S5, 20 September). Harvested fruit are uniformly consistent in quality
and size, and dark red in color. Disease-free, pest-free, and mechanically undamaged fruits
were selected for study. The fruits were washed with distilled water, air-dried, and then
evenly divided into three parts. The fruits were separated into pericarp and pulp, then
quickly frozen with liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 ◦C for further analysis.
4.3. Experimental Index Measurement
4.3.1. Determination of Organic Acids
Organic acid content was determined using the method described by Nour [ 28],
with modifications.
The organic acid content of the pulp was measured as follows: 3.0 g of pulp, thoroughly
ground and homogenized with 3 mL of ultrapure water, was transferred to a 10 mL
centrifuge tube. The mixture was heated in a water bath at 80 ◦C for 45 min for water
bath extraction and then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 ◦C. The supernatant
was collected. Then, 2 mL of ultrapure water was added to the residue, mixed thoroughly,
and extracted again under the same conditions for 45 min. After centrifugation, the
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 17 of 22
two supernatants were combined, adjusted to a volume of 5 mL, and filtered through a
0.45 µm membrane. The extract was analyzed by UPLC.
The organic acid content of the pericarp was measured as follows: 0.5 g of pericarp,
thoroughly ground and homogenized with 2 mL of ultrapure water, was transferred to a
10 mL centrifuge tube. The mixture was heated in a water bath at 80◦C for 45 min for water
bath extraction and then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 ◦C. The supernatant
was collected. Then, 2 mL of ultrapure water was added to the residue, mixed thoroughly,
and extracted again under the same conditions for 45 min. After centrifugation, the above
procedure was repeated again and the three supernatants were combined, adjusted to
a volume of 6 mL and filtered through a 0.45 µm membrane. The extract was analyzed
by UPLC.
HPLC conditions: Chromatographic separation was carried out on an Ultimate LP-C18
column (4.6 × 300 mm, 5 µm). The mobile phase consisted of 0.01 mol/L potassium dihy-
drogen phosphate aqueous solution and methanol (95: 5, v/v). The column temperature
was maintained at 30 ◦C, with a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. A 10 µL aliquot was injected for
each run, and detection was performed at a wavelength of 210 nm. The total run time for
each analysis was 30 min.
4.3.2. Measurement of the Activity of Acid Metabolism-Related Enzymes
The activities of NADP-ME, NAD-MDH, CS, PEPC, and ACO in the pericarp and
the pulp of Cerasus humilis were measured using assay kits for malate dehydrogenase
(NADP-ME, BC1120-50T/48S), malate dehydrogenase (NAD-MDH, BC1055-100T/96S),
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC, BC3315-100T/96S), citrate synthase (CS, BC1065-
100T/48S), and aconitase (Mit-ACO, BC4485-100T/96S) (Solarbio Biochemical Assay Kits,
Beijing, China, https://www.solarbio.com/).
4.4. Correlation Analysis Methods
Using Pearson correlation analysis, the Pearson correlation coefficient takes values
between [-1 and 1]; when r > 0, it indicates that there is a positive correlation between
the two variables; when r < 0, there is a negative correlation between the two variables.
Significant correlation was defined as |rho| ≥ 0.5 and p < 0.05. The data matrix was
constructed based on the experimental part and the observation phase, and all variables
were included in a single matrix for analysis.
4.5. Screening of Genes Related to Organic Acid Metabolism Was Conducted Using
Transcriptome Sequencing
4.5.1. Experimental Materials
The pericarp of the fruit at the coloring–enlargement stage is abbreviated as S3GP , the
pulp of the fruit at the coloring–enlargement stage is abbreviated as S3GR; the pericarp
of the fruit at the hard–ripe stage is abbreviated as S4GP , and the pulp of the fruit at the
hard–ripe stage is abbreviated as S4GR.
4.5.2. RNA Extraction
The plant total RNA was extracted using the RNAprep Pure Plant Kit (Tiangen, Beijing,
China) according the instructions provided by the manufacturer.
4.5.3. Library Construction
After the samples were qualified, library construction was carried out, and the main
processes were as follows: enrich eukaryotic mRNA with magnetic beads with Oligo (dT);
add fragmentation buffer to interrupt the mRNA randomly; use mRNA as a template,
synthesize the first cDNA strand and the second strand, and carry out cDNA purification;
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 18 of 22
purified double-stranded cDNA was then subjected to end repair, addition of A tail, and
ligation of sequencing junctions; then, use AMPure XP beads for fragment size selection;
and then, use AMPure XP beads to select the fragment size. The purified double-stranded
cDNA was then subjected to end repair, addition of A-tail, and ligation of sequencing
junctions, followed by fragment size selection with AMPure XP beads; finally, the cDNA
library was enriched by PCR.
4.5.4. RNA Quantification and Qualification
RNA concentration and purity was measured using NanoDrop™ 2000 (Thermo Fisher
Scientific, Wilmington, DE, USA). RNA integrity was assessed using the RNA Nano
6000 Assay Kit of the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara,
CA, USA).
4.5.5. Library Preparation for Transcriptome Sequencing
A total amount of 1 µg RNA per sample was used as input material for the RNA
sample preparations. Sequencing libraries were generated using Hieff NGS ™ Ultima
Dual-mode mRNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina (Yeasen Biotechnology (Shanghai) Co.,
Ltd., Shanghai, China), following the manufacturer’s recommendations, and index codes
were added to attribute sequences to each sample. Briefly, mRNA was purified from total
RNA using poly-T oligo-attached magnetic beads. First strand cDNA was synthesized
and second strand cDNA synthesis was subsequently performed. Remaining overhangs
were converted into blunt ends via exonuclease/polymerase activities. After adenylation
of 3′ ends of DNA fragments, NEBNext Adaptor with hairpin loop structure were ligated
to prepare for hybridization. The library fragments were purified with AMPure XP system
(Beckman Coulter, Beverly, CA, USA). Then 3µL USER Enzyme (NEB, Ipswich, MA, USA)
was used with size-selected, adaptor-ligated cDNA at 37◦C for 15 min followed by 5 min at
95 ◦C before PCR. Then PCR was performed with Phusion High-Fidelity DNA polymerase,
Universal PCR primers and Index (X) Primer. At last, PCR products were purified (AMPure
XP system), and library quality was assessed on the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 system.
4.5.6. Sequencing
The library was sequenced on the Illumina NovaSeq platform, generating 150 bp
paired-end reads. The transcriptome sequencing was completed by Beijing Biomarker
Technologies Co., Ltd., Beijing, China.
Quality Control
Raw data (raw reads) of fastq format were firstly processed through in-house perl
scripts. In this step, clean data (clean reads) were obtained by removing reads containing
adapter, reads containing ploy-N, and low quality reads from raw data. At the same time,
Q20, Q30, GC-content, and sequence duplication level of the clean data were calculated.
All the downstream analyses were based on clean data with high quality.
Reads Mapping to the Reference Genome
This project used the specified genome as a reference for sequence alignment
and subsequent analysis. The version information of the reference genome is the
Prunus_humilis.v1.genome.fa.
Baimaike used the HISAT2 [29] software to rapidly and accurately align the clean reads
to the reference genome, obtaining the positional information of the reads on the reference
genome. Then, StringTie [30] was used to assemble the aligned reads and reconstruct the
transcriptome for subsequent analysis.
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 19 of 22
Novel Transcripts Prediction and Gene Functional Annotation
The StringTie Reference Annotation-Based Transcript (RABT) assembly method was used
to construct and identify both known and novel transcripts from Hisat2 alignment results.
Gene function was annotated based on the following databases: Nr (NCBI non-
redundant protein sequences); Pfam (Protein family); KOG/COG (Clusters of Orthologous
Groups of proteins); Swiss-Prot (A manually annotated and reviewed protein sequence
database); KO (KEGG Ortholog database); GO (Gene Ontology).
Quantification of Gene Expression Levels
The number of mapped reads and transcript length in the samples were normalized.
Here, we used StringTie with the maximum flow algorithm and employed FPKM (frag-
ments per kilobase of transcript per million fragments mapped) for normalization, which
serves as an indicator for measuring the expression level of transcripts or genes.
FPKM = cDNA Fragments
Mapped Fragments(Millions)×TranscriptLength(kb) (1)
Differential Expression Analysis
Differential expression analysis of two conditions/groups was performed using the
DESeq2. DESeq2 provides statistical routines for determining differential expression in
digital gene expression data using a model based on the negative binomial distribution. The
resulting p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg approach for controlling
the false discovery rate.
Genes with an adjusted p-value < 0.01 and fold change ≥ 2 found by DESeq2 were
assigned as differentially expressed.
GO Enrichment Analysis
Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of the differentially expressed genes (DEGs)
was implemented by the clusterProfiler packages based Wallenius non-central hyper-
geometric distribution, which can adjust for gene length bias in DEGs.
KEGG Pathway Enrichment Analysis
KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) is a resource that helps in under-
standing the high-level functions and utilities of biological systems, such as cells, organ-
isms, and ecosystems, from molecular-level information, particularly large-scale molecular
datasets generated by genome sequencing and other high-throughput experimental tech-
niques (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/, accessed on 23 January 2025). In this study, we
used the KOBAS database and the clusterProfiler (4. 14. 6) software to test the statistical
enrichment of differentially expressed genes in KEGG pathways.
4.5.7. RT-qPCR Validation
For RT-qPCR validation, screened genes related to organic acid metabolism were
selected and primers were created for specific genes using the Actin1 gene as an internal
standard using the NCBI website, the primers were synthesized Sangon Biotech (Sangon
Biotech (Shanghai) Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China) (Table 3). RT-qPCR reactions were performed
using the 2×HQ SYBR qPCR Mix (Low ROX), (ZF502, Beijing Zoman Biotechnology Co.,
Ltd., Beijing, China) and the Q2000C Real-Time qPCR System (Hangzhou LongGene
Scientific Instruments Co., Ltd., Hangzhou, China).
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 20 of 22
Table 3. List of primers.
Numbering of New Genes Forward Primer Reverse Primer
NewGene_1191.1 (ChMDH1) gcg gtg ctg caa tca tca agg aga agg aac att gta cga gcc atc a
NewGene_6957.1 (ChMDH2) gaa gtt gga tgc aac cgc ag aac tta gaa cca cgc cca gg
NewGene_20719.2 (ChME) agg cga aga cca ttg tca ag tca gaa atg gcg gca aaa gc
NewGene_10906.1 (ChPEPC) gta aac gca gtg cag gca aa cca gga gga acg aca agc at
NewGene_3681.1 (ChACO1) atc aca act gac cac atc tca cct g atc tca tca cca cgg cga ctt c
NewGene_13406.1 (ChACO2) gta aac gca gtg cag gca aa cca gga gga acg aca agc at
NewGene_14300.1 (ChCS1) gct gct ctg aag caa cca ac ctc gtg caa acg cga tca at
NewGene_18025.5 (ChCS2) gag gtg gag atg ggt ggt tg atg ctg ttc cca agt cgg tc
NewGene_14300.1 (ChCS3) gga cta tgg tag ctg gag gag gt gca caa tca atc aca act ctg gca t
Actin1 gca gcg act gaa gac ata caa g ggt ggc att agc aag ttc ctt
4.5.8. Data Analysis
Data analysis was performed using Excel and IBM SPSS Statistics 27, and graphs were
generated using GraphPad Prism 8.
The raw reads were processed further using the bioinformatics pipeline tool on the
BMKCloud online platform (www.biocloud.net).
5. Conclusions
Malic acid is the predominant organic acid, with citric acid being the secondary one,
in both the pericarp and the pulp of Cerasus humilis. The difference in acidity between the
two is jointly determined by the malic acid and citric acid content. MAD-MDH and CS are
the key enzymes involved in the synthesis of malic acid and citric acid in the fruit pericarp
and the pulp. The activity levels of NADP-ME and CS are the primary factors determining
the differences in malic acid and citric acid content in the pericarp and the pulp. ChMDH1
and ChMDH2 are the key genes promoting malic acid synthesis in both the pericarp and
the pulp, while ChME is the differential gene responsible for the variation in malic acid
content between the pericarp and the pulp. ChCS3 and ChCS2 are the key genes for citric
acid synthesis in the pericarp and the pulp, respectively, and are also the differential genes
responsible for the differences in citric acid content.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.G; methodology, B.G. and L.Z.; formal analysis, B.G.;
investigation, L.Z.; resources, B.G.; data curation, B.G. and L.Z.; writing—original draft prepa-
ration, B.G.; writing—review and editing, B.G. and J.G.; supervision, project administration,
and funding acquisition, J.G. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This work was funded by a special project for leading scientific and technological talent
and innovation team construction of universities directly under the Inner Mongolia autonomous
region: “Research and application of key technologies for breeding and propagation of new va-
rieties of high-quality Cerasus Humilis with Inner Mongolia Characteristics” (BR22-11-11), Inner
Mongolia autonomous region “Grassland Talents” project (2024), and Inner Mongolia science
and technology achievement transformation special project: “Demonstration and promotion of
new varieties of Cerasus Humiliswith Inner Mongolia characteristics and high-yield cultivation
techniques” (2019CG067).
Data Availability Statement: The data are contained within this article.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 21 of 22
References
1. Shi, J.H.; Cao, J.H.; Xu, L.J. Evaluation and analysis of yield and nutritional content in Cerasus humilis. J. Hebei Sci. Technol.2021,
2, 23–26.
2. Li, W.D.; Gu, J.R. Research progress on healthy function and pharmacological effect inCerasus humilisof fruit medicine dualpur-
pose type. Mod. Chin. Med.2017, 19, 1336–1340.
3. Cao, H.Q.; Liu, S.Y.; Wang, G.Y.; Liao, G.Z.; Bai, J. Nutritional composition and development ofPrunus humilisBunge. Farm. Prod.
Process. 2015, 24, 70–72.
4. Chen, F.X.; Liu, X.H.; Chen, L.S. Advances in research on organic acid metabolism in fruits. J. Fruit Sci.2005, 22, 526–531.
5. Koch, R.; Alleweldt, G. Der Gaswechsel reifender Weinbeeren. VITIS-J. Grapevine Res.1978, 17, 30.
6. Etienne, A.; Génard, M.; Lobit, P .; Mbeguié-A-Mbéguié, D.; Bugaud, C. What controls fleshy fruit acidity? A review of malate and
citrate accumulation in fruit cells. J. Exp. Bot.2013, 64, 1451–1469.
7. Mu, X.P .; Wang, P .F.; Du, J.J. Comparison of fruit organic acids and metabolism-related gene expression betweenCerasus humilis
(Bge.) Sok and Cerasus glandulosa(Thunb.) Lois. PLoS ONE2018, 13, e0196537.
8. Sun, D. Soluble Sugar and Organic Acid Contents Evalution of Different Citrus Germplasm Resources. Master’s Thesis, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, China, 2013.
9. Lamikanra, O.; Inyang, I.D.; Leong, S. Distribution and effect of grape maturity on organic acid content of red muscadine grapes.
J. Agric. Food Chem.1991, 43, 3026–3028.
10. Monselise, S.P .; Galily, D. Organic acids in grapefruit fruit tissues. J. Am. Soc. Hortic. Sci.1979, 104, 895–897.
11. Saradhuldhat, P .; Paull, E.R. Pineapple organic acid metabolism and accumulation during fruit development.Sci. Hortic.2006,
112, 297–303.
12. Zhou, J.Y.; Zhang, K.; Wang, Y.; Song, P .H.; Zhang, H.F.; Luo, X.; Hao, Y.X.; Deng, Q.X. Comparison of malic acid metabolism
between ’Guozhenhao 1’ and its parent ’Dawuxing’ loquat fruits. J. Sichuan Agric. Univ.2024, 42, 546–553.
13. Yang, G.K.; Xun, S.Y.; Li, J.Z. Analysis of organic acid components and malic acid metabolizing enzyme activity in Hongbaoshi
apple fruits. J. Fruit Sci.2023, 40, 884–892.
14. Tang, X.; Huang, M.; Deng, L. Comparative transcriptome analysis reveals potential molecular regulation of organic acid
metabolism during fruit development in Late-maturing hybrid citrus varieties. Int. J. Mol. Sci.2025, 26, 803. [CrossRef]
15. Chen, M.; Xie, X.; Lin, Q. Differential expression of organic acid degradation-related genes during fruit development of navel
oranges (Citrus sinensis) in two habitats. Int. J. Mol. Sci.2013, 31, 1131–1140. [CrossRef]
16. Wang, P .F.; Xue, X.F.; Mu, X.P .; Zhang, J.C.; Cao, Q.; Du, J.J. Analysis of organic acid accumulation characteristics and organic
acid-metabolizing enzyme activities of chinese dwarf cherry (Cerasus humilisBunge) fruit. Sci. Agric. Sin.2013, 46, 4101–4109.
17. Tang, M.; Bie, Z.; Wu, M. Changes in organic acids and acid metabolism enzymes in melon fruit during development. Sci. Hortic.
2010, 123, 360–365.
18. Zampini, M.; Wantling, E.; Phillips, N.; Spence, C. Multisensory flavor perception: Assessing the influence of fruit acids and color
cues on the perception of fruit-flavored beverages. Food Qual. Prefer.2008, 19, 335–343.
19. Zhang, L.; Zhang, W.; Guo, J.L. Relationships between organic acid metabolism and the accumulation of sugars and calcium in
fruits of Cerasus humilisduring different development stages. Plants 2024, 13, 3053. [CrossRef]
20. Fernie, R.A.; Carrari, F.; Sweetlove, J.L. Respiratory metabolism: Glycolysis, the TCA cycle and mitochondrial electron transport.
Curr. Opin. Plant Biol.2004, 7, 254–261.
21. Wu, B.H.; Genard, M.; Lescourret, F.; Gomez, L.; Li, S.H. Influence of assimilate and water supply on seasonal variation of acids
in peach (cv Suncrest). J. Sci. Food Agric.2002, 82, 1829–1836.
22. Zhang, X.X.; Wei, X.X.; Moaaz, A.M.; Muhammad, R.H.; Li, B.Q.; Li, H.; Jia, K.J.; Yang, X.L.; Ma, S.F.; Li, S.J.; et al. Changes
in the content of organic acids and expression analysis of citric acid accumulation-related genes during fruit development
of yellow ( Passiflora edulis f. flavicarpa ) and Purple ( Passiflora edulis f. edulis) Passion Fruits. Int. J. Mol. Sci.2021, 22, 5765.
[PubMed]
23. Tong, P .P .; Lu, D.Y.; Liao, G.L.; Wu, C.Y.; Wang, J.B. Identification and functional analysis of key genes regulating organic acid
metabolism in jujube fruit. Agronomy 2024, 14, 2515.
24. Moing, A.; Rothan, C.; Svanella, L.; Just, D.; Diakou, P .; Raymond, P .; Gaudillère, J.P .; Monet, R. Role of phospho enol pyruvate
carboxylase in organic acid accumulation during peach fruit development. Physiol. Plant.2000, 108, 1–10.
25. Chen, L.; Qi, X.L.; Shi, C.S.; Dong, Y.X.; Song, L.L.; Liu, C.L.; Li, M. Advances in research of malate metabolism and regulation in
fruit of hor ticultural crops. J. Fruit Sci.2023, 40, 2598–2609.
26. Sadka, A.; Dahan, E.; Cohen, L.; Marsh, B.M. Aconitase activity and expression during the development of lemon fruit. Physiol.
Plant. 2000, 108, 255–262.
27. Jiang, C.C.; Fang, Z.Z.; Zhou, D.R.; Pan, S.L.; Ye, X.F. Changes in secondary metabolites, organic acids and soluble sugars during
the development of plum fruit cv. ’Furongli’ (Prunus salicina Lindl). J. Sci. Food Agric.2019, 99, 1010–1019.
Plants 2025, 14, 1105 22 of 22
28. Nour, V .; Trandafir, I.; Ionica, E.M. HPLC organic acid analysis in different citrus juices under reversed phase conditions.Not. Bot.
Horti Agrobot. Cluj-Napoca2010, 38, 44.
29. Kim, D.; Langmead, B.; Salzberg, S.L. HISAT: A fast spliced aligner with low memory requirements. Nat. Methods 2015,
12, 357–360. [CrossRef]
30. Pertea, M.; Pertea, G.M.; Antonescu, C.M.; Chang, T.C.; Mendell, J.T.; Salzbery, S.L. StringTie enables improved reconstruction of
a transcriptome from RNA-seq reads. Nat. Biotechnol.2015, 33, 290–295.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.