Citation: You, D.; Rasul, F.; Wang, T.;
Daroch, M. Insufficient Acetyl-CoA
Pool Restricts the Phototrophic
Production of Organic Acids in Model
Cyanobacteria. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024,
25, 11769. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms252111769
Academic Editor: Biswajita Pradhan
Received: 2 October 2024
Revised: 26 October 2024
Accepted: 28 October 2024
Published: 1 November 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Review
Insufficient Acetyl-CoA Pool Restricts the Phototrophic
Production of Organic Acids in Model Cyanobacteria
Dawei You
 , Faiz Rasul
 , Tao Wang
 and Maurycy Daroch *
School of Environment and Energy, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China;
dw.you@stu.pku.edu.cn (D.Y.); frasul@pku.edu.cn (F.R.); wangtaojosh@stu.pku.edu.cn (T.W.)
* Correspondence: m.daroch@pkusz.edu.cn
Abstract: Cyanobacteria are promising biological chassis to produce biochemicals such as carboxylic
acids and their derivatives from CO2. In this manuscript, we reflected on cyanobacterial acetyl-CoA
pool and TCA cycle as an important source of precursor molecules for the biosynthesis of carboxylic
acids such as 3-hydroxypropionate, 3-hydroxybutyrate, succinate, malate, fumarate and free fatty
acids, each of which is an important platform chemical for bioeconomy. We further highlighted
specific features of the cyanobacterial TCA cycle, how it differs in structure and function from widely
described TCA cycles of heterotrophic model organisms, and methods to make it more suitable for the
production of carboxylic acids from CO2. Currently, the yields of these compounds are significantly
lower than those in heterotrophic organisms and it was concluded that the primary cause of this
can be attributed to the limited flux toward acetyl-CoA. Strategies like overexpressing pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex or introducing synthetic bypasses are being explored to overcome these
limitations. While significant progress has been made, further research is needed to enhance the
metabolic efficiency of cyanobacteria, making them viable for the large-scale, sustainable production
of carboxylic acids and their derivatives.
Keywords: cyanobacteria; 3-hydroxypropionate; 3-hydroxybutyrate; succinate; fumarate; malate;
TCA cycle; acetyl-CoA; bioeconomy; Synechococcus
1. Sustainable Production of Carboxylic Acids and Their Hydroxy Derivatives
Using Cyanobacteria
The production of chemical building blocks using microorganisms has long been
considered an important step toward a more sustainable bioeconomy [1]. Typical feedstocks
to produce these compounds are carbohydrates derived from food crops and, to a lesser
extent, waste streams such as glycerol or hydrolysates from lignocellulosic residues. On the
other hand, the latter are problematic in processing and typically result in lower yields [2,3].
Moreover, the application of food crops as primary carbon feedstocks comes with additional
environmental and moral issues, resulting in undesirable changes in land use and elevated
food prices.
In contrast, cyanobacteria are photosynthetic autotrophic bacteria, which can yield
energy and essential building blocks directly from sunlight and atmospheric carbon diox-
ide. Recent advances in genetic engineering have enabled the integration of heterologous
enzymes and metabolic pathways for a variety of biofuels and biochemicals in cyanobacte-
ria [4,5]. To date, the most notable examples of coupling the photosynthetic carbon fixation
to the production of biochemicals are isoprene [ 6], ethanol [ 7], 2,3-butanediol [ 8], and
sucrose [9]. Moreover, while the genetic engineering of cyanobacteria significantly lags
behind model heterotrophic chassis, entire pathways have been successfully expressed in
model unicellular cyanobacteria [10].
Among essential chemical building blocks, carboxylic acids and their hydroxy deriva-
tives play a pivotal role in the transition toward bioeconomy [ 1]. These compounds
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms252111769 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 2 of 18
can be broadly divided into those that are directly synthesized from acetyl-CoA like
3-hydroxypropionate and 3-hydroxybutyrate and the intermediates of the tricarboxylic
acid cycle (TCA or Krebs cycle). Both classes of compounds are important precursor
molecules that could be used for the synthesis of various more complex chemicals that
have applications as bioplastics, polymers, solvents, adhesives, coatings, food additives,
pharmaceuticals, and many more [ 11]. The application of these platform chemicals in
various industries highlights their importance in promoting sustainable solutions, reducing
reliance on fossil fuels, and contributing to a circular economy. Meanwhile, fatty acids,
essential building blocks of all cells, are considered as both important platform chemicals
and compounds of high potential as nutraceuticals [12]. Depending on their chain length
they could be classified as short-chain (up to 6 carbon atoms), medium-chain (between 6
and 10 carbon atoms) and long-chain fatty acids (over 12 carbon units). These molecules
can be further integrated in an array of secondary metabolites with potentially unique
properties [13].
To effectively produce these organic acids in cyanobacteria, it is important to under-
stand the biosynthesis of the precursor molecules in these phototrophic organisms, the
peculiarities of their acetyl-CoA-derived metabolism, and the cellular import and export
characteristics of cyanobacteria.
2. Acetyl-CoA Pool in Cyanobacteria
Acetyl-CoA is one of the major central metabolic precursors alongside glyceraldehyde-
3 phosphate and pyruvate. The acetyl group is linked to coenzyme A through a thioester
linkage, the hydrolysis of which releases a substantial amount of energy to fuel cellular
metabolism [14]. The molecule provides two carbon units for the biosynthesis of many
compounds, including fatty acids and amino acids, and is the gateway to the TCA cycle.
Intracellular acetyl-CoA pool is generated via the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate,
a process facilitated by the tightly regulated pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHc),
or through the anaerobic pyruvate ferredoxin oxidoreductase (PFOR) [ 15] or pyruvate
formate lyase pathway (PFL) [16]. The pyruvate formate lyase pathway is more commonly
found in anaerobic or facultatively anaerobic bacteria, where it plays a role in fermentative
metabolism, and is not typically found in cyanobacteria.
Escherichia coli is the most utilized organism for the biosynthesis of biochemicals and
biofuels derived from acetyl-CoA [17–19]. In heterotrophic organisms, such asE. coli, acetyl-
CoA is the main metabolite formed from glycolytic carbon flow through pyruvate into
PDH, and supplemented with building blocks from the breakdown of amino acids and fats.
Meanwhile, cyanobacteria exclusively rely on the stream of de novo-synthesized photo-
synthetates through the central metabolic pathway. Since the energy needs of an organism
are fulfilled by photosystems, the reaction catalyzed by PDHc is tightly controlled [ 20].
One of the limitations of the PDH complex is its strict regulation at both transcriptional
and translational levels. Moreover, it is also influenced by NADH/NAD+ redox ratios and
substrate level allosteric inhibitions, which can significantly limit the carbon flux to the
acetyl-tight regulation of the complex, negatively impacting the carbon flux toward the
TCA cycle and all the products that are derived from the intermediates of the cycle. This
is probably because the reaction results in carbon losses and the generation of reducing
equivalents that, under photoautotrophic conditions, are not essential.
3. TCA Cycle in Cyanobacteria Differs from That in Heterotrophs
The tricarboxylic acid cycle is a key metabolic route consisting of a series of catabolic
reactions that generate reducing equivalents for ATP formation and important precursor
molecules for the biosynthesis of cellular components. The cycle is also embedded into a
broader metabolic network, making the TCA cycle essential for other metabolic processes,
including nitrogen metabolism.
In aerobic bacteria (including cyanobacteria), the TCA cycle has two main roles:
(a) generating NADH through the oxidation of carbon derived from acetyl-CoA, which
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 3 of 18
then supplies electrons to oxidative phosphorylation; and (b) the formation of intermediates
such as oxaloacetate, 2-oxoglutarate (2-OG) or succinate, all of which are necessary for the
generation of cellular building blocks such as amino acids [21,22].
The TCA cycle is initiated through a citrate synthase-catalyzed reaction of acetyl-CoA
and oxaloacetate (OAA). It subsequently goes through a series of reactions that release two
carbon atoms as CO2, and concludes with regeneration of the OAA [ 23]. The canonical
TCA cycle has eight steps catalysed by citrate synthase, aconitase, isocitrate dehydrogenase,
2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, succinyl CoA ligase, succinate dehydrogenase,
fumarase, and malate dehydrogenase [24]. Interestingly, studies have shown that cyanobac-
teria have an intact but unconventional TCA cycle [ 25]. In this alternative variant, the
absence of 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (2-OGDH) and succinyl-CoA synthetase is com-
pensated with other reactions. Two alternative enzymes, 2-oxoglutarate decarboxylase
(2-OGDC, OgdA) and succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SSADH, SsaD), catalyze
the transformation of 2-oxoglutarate (2-OG) into succinate. These two reactions, present
in nearly all cyanobacteria, corrected the long-held misconception that these organisms
have an incomplete TCA cycle. It also provided important insights into the physiological
significance of the TCA cycle in these microbes [25–27].
The absence of 2-OGDH in cyanobacterial metabolism has significant effects, leading
to the emergence of several bypass pathways that compensate for this missing enzyme.
These alternative routes involve the metabolism of succinic semialdehyde, γ-aminobutyric
acid (GABA) or glyoxylate [ 28–30]. For instance, in Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002 (now
reclassified as Picosynechococcus sp. PCC 7002), succinic semialdehyde dehydrogenase and
2-oxoglutarate decarboxylase are expressed in place of 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase and
succinyl-CoA ligase, respectively [26]. In contrast, Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 compensates
for the absence of these enzymes by utilizing a GABA shunt [27,31]. Another important
finding has been in model strain Synechocystis PCC 6803, where analysis of the enzymatic
kinetics of the two putative enzymes completing the TCA cycle revealed that the majority
of the flux in the TCA cycle of this cyanobacterium is channeled through malic enzyme into
pyruvate rather than through malate dehydrogenase into oxaloacetate [32]. Nevertheless,
another variant of the TCA cycle in cyanobacteria, found in strains such as Chlorogloeopsis
fritschii PCC 9212, relies on the glyoxylate shunt [33]. Interestingly, it has been observed
that enzymes like fumarase, succinate dehydrogenase, and malic enzyme are dispensable
under both dark and light conditions [30].
While diazotrophic cyanobacteria can fix atmospheric N2, many other species rely on
its assimilation from ammonium, nitrite, nitrate, urea, arginine and glutamine, and the
TCA cycle is fundamentally connected to this nitrogen metabolism through the production
of essential molecules from its intermediates oxaloacetate and 2-oxoglutarate. In non-
diazotrophic cyanobacteria, ammonium is assimilated via the glutamine synthetase cycle,
where 2-oxoglutarate serves as the final nitrogen acceptor [34].
The metabolism of nitrogen and the TCA cycle in cyanobacteria are thus connected
and largely reliant on the availability of the former. Consequently, under nitrogen-starved
conditions, cyanobacteria cannot produce sufficient proteins for growth and instead pri-
oritize glycogen synthesis as carbon storage. In such a situation, the activity of the TCA
cycle, which normally generates precursor metabolites, is reduced. Instead, more carbon
flux is directed upstream toward the biosynthesis of ADP-glucose, which is subsequently
used for glycogen polymerization [35]. Another role of the TCA cycle is the regeneration
of fumarate, but in some cyanobacteria such as S. elongatus PCC 7942, this function of the
pathway is dispensable, resulting in its secretion into the growth medium [36]. Meanwhile,
in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, it has been observed that the flow of metabolites [29,30] via
2-oxoglutarate to succinate is lower than in a regular TCA cycle, as it is rerouted through the
GABA shunt [24,29,30]. The flux balance analyses have shown that under photoautotrophic
conditions, only a marginal flux occurs through these bypass pathways [37].
In conclusion, cyanobacterial metabolism shows a strong connection between the
carbon-fixing Calvin–Benson–Bassham (CBB) cycle and the TCA cycle. Since the CBB cycle
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 4 of 18
plays the primary role in carbon delivery and photosystems are essential for energy genera-
tion, the TCA cycle is less critical for maintaining cellular energy balance in cyanobacteria
than it is in heterotrophic organisms. On one hand, this reduced reliance on the TCA
cycle suggests that cyanobacteria, at least when grown autotrophically, could tolerate more
extensive genetic modifications in this pathway compared to heterotrophs [ 21]. On the
other hand, the naturally lower flux toward the TCA cycle could have a negative impact on
the productivity of compounds derived from the molecules downstream of pyruvate when
cells are grown autotrophically.
4. Photosynthetic Production of Short Acetyl-CoA-Derived Organic Acids
In phototrophically grown cyanobacteria, the biosynthesis of organic acids occurs
through either reductive or oxidative processes. Short-chain organic acids, such as 3-
hydroxypropionate (3HP) and 3-hydroxybutyrate (3HB), are synthesized directly from
acetyl-CoA. These reactions require an input of energy in the form of NAD(P)H and can be
enhanced with ATP , allowing for the conservation of photosynthetically fixed carbon (see
Table 1).
Table 1. Resources needed for the biosynthesis of organic acids derived from acetyl-CoA and TCA
cycle intermediates.
Chemical Pathway Enzymes Involved Resources Needed from
Acetyl CoA
3HP (C3) Malonyl-CoA pathway
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase (Acc), Malonyl-CoA
reductase (Mcr), Malonate semialdehyde
reductase (Msr)
HCO3−, 1 ATP , 2 NADPH
3HP (C3) β-alanine pathway
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PepC),
aspartate aminotransferase (AspC),
PLP-independent aspartate decarboxylase
(PanD), PLP-dependent aspartate
decarboxylase (Adc), β-alanine
aminotransferase (SkPYS4), Malonate
semialdehyde reductase (Msr)
HCO3−, 1 ATP , 2 NAD(P)H
3HB (C4) 3-hydroxybutyrate (3HB)
pathway
Thiolase (PhaA), Acetoacetyl-CoA
reductase (PhaB) 1 Acetyl-CoA, 1 NADPH
3HB (C4) ATP driving module
for 3HB
Acetoacetyl-CoA synthase (NphT7),
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase (Acc)
1 Acetyl-CoA, 1 ATP ,
1 NADPH
Succinate (C4) Oxidative branch of
TCA cycle
Citrate synthase (GltA), Aconitase (AcnA),
Isocitrate dehydrogenase (Icd), 2-oxoglutarate
decarboxylase (OgdA) and succinate
semialdehyde dehydrogenase (SsaD)
Oxidative branch reaction,
NADH and CO2 formation
Succinate (C4) Oxidative branch of
TCA cycle
Oxidative branch of TCA cycle supplemented
blocked with succinate dehydrogenase
deletion (∆sdh)
Oxidative branch reaction,
NADH and CO2 formation
Succinate (C4) Oxidative branch of TCA
cycle + kgd, gabD
Oxidative branch of TCA cycle supplemented
with 2-ketoglutarate decarboxylase (Kgd),
succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase (GabD)
Oxidative branch reaction,
NADH and CO2 formation
Succinate (C4) Oxidative branch of TCA
cycle + aceA, aceB
Oxidative branch of TCA cycle supplemented
with isocitrate lyase (AceA); malate
synthase (AceB)
Oxidative branch reaction,
NADH and CO2 formation
Free Fatty Acids
(palmitate) (C16)
Fatty acid synthesis II +
tesA
Acetyl-CoA carboxylase (Acc), Malonyl-CoA
transacylase (Mcat) 3-Ketoacyl-ACP synthase
(Kas), 3-Ketoacyl-ACP reductase (FabG),
3-Hydroxyacyl-ACP dehydrase (FabZ, FabA),
Enoyl-ACP reductase (FabI FabK), Acyl carrier
protein (ACP), acyl- ACP thioesterase (tesA)
7 Acetyl-CoA, 7 ATP ,
14 NAD(P)H
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 5 of 18
Acetate is the simplest organic acid that is an exception from this rule. The molecule
can be synthesized from acetyl-CoA using three different mechanisms. Many cyanobacteria
possess two of these pathways: acetyl-CoA synthetase, and a combination of phospho-
transacetylase and acetate kinase [38]. This metabolic toolkit enables both the uptake of
acetate during mixotrophic growth [39,40] and its secretion [41,42]. Since both pathways
generate ATP , they typically do not operate under photosynthetic conditions; instead, they
are common during dark self-fermentation. Studies on dark self-fermentation and mixotro-
phy are ubiquitous, yet beyond the scope of this manuscript that focuses exclusively on the
photosynthetic production of organic acids. Interestingly, to date, only a single study in
which a glycogen-deficient strain of Picosynechococcus sp. PCC 7002 was found to secrete
acetate under photoautotrophic conditions [43]. To the best of our knowledge, no further
targeted engineering efforts have been performed to maximize acetate production under
photoautotrophic conditions. There are, however, considerable metabolic engineering
efforts focusing on longer and more functional organic acids, which are presented below.
4.1. 3-Hydroxypropionate
3-hydroxypropionate (3HP), a C3 hydroxycarboxylic acid, is an important platform
chemical in bioeconomy. 3HP was selected as one of the top chemical building blocks
derived from biomass by the Department of Energy (DOE) [1]. It also attracted significant
interest from the scientific community and industry alike. 3HP is a versatile compound
with numerous synthetic applications. Many essential chemicals, including acrylic acid,
1,3-propanediol, acrylamide and methyl acrylates, can be derived from 3HP . These com-
pounds are key building blocks for the manufacturing of many important products such as
fibers, contact lenses, diapers, fabric coatings, super absorbent polymers and biodegrad-
able plastics.
Current microbial production methods rely on heterotrophic organisms such as Es-
cherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae. These organisms primarily utilize glucose and
glycerol as fermentation substrates [44]. Since these carbon sources are originally produced
from food crops, such as corn or rapeseed, it is desirable to investigate even more sustain-
able carbon alternatives and develop the technologies of their direct production from CO2
and sunlight using phototrophic microorganisms.
In principle, 3HP in cyanobacterial chassis could be synthesized using three alternative
approaches (Figure 1). The three biosynthetic routes include the glycerol, malonyl-CoA and
β-alanine pathways. To date, only two latter pathways have been successfully explored
for the heterologous synthesis of 3HP in cyanobacteria. The limited use of the glycerol
pathway in cyanobacteria can be attributed to the oxygen sensitivity of its key enzyme,
glycerol dehydratase. The most common approach to synthesize 3HP in cyanobacterial
chassis is using the malonyl-CoA pathway. The flow of acetyl-CoA is initially directed
into malonyl-CoA, subsequently into malonyl-CoA semialdehyde and ultimately into
3-hydroxypropionate. These biochemical reactions are performed using two enzymes,
Malonyl-CoA reductase ( Mcr) and Malonate semialdehyde reductase ( Msr). The two
enzymes are not found in native cyanobacteria and need to be expressed heterologously.
These genes are typically present in thermophilic chemolithoautotrophic archaea such as
Metalospheraea sedula or Sulfolobus tokodaii or in anoxygenic thermophilic photosynthetic
bacteria, e.g., Chloroflexus aurantiacus. In each of these organisms, they constitute essential
sections of their respective carbon fixation cycles. The heterologous expression of Mcr-Msr
that enables 3HP production from CO 2 has been successfully shown in two unicellular
model cyanobacteria: Synechococcus PCC 7942 and Synechocystis PCC 6803 (Table 2).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 6 of 18
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 19 
 
 
essential sections of their respective carbon ﬁxation cycles. The heterologous expression 
of Mcr-Msr that enables 3HP production from CO 2 has been successfully shown in two 
unicellular model cyanobacteria: Synechococcus PCC 7942 and Synechocystis PCC 6803 (Ta-
ble 2). 
 
Figure 1. Cyanobacterial carbon metabolism pathways for carboxylic acid production. Tricarboxylic 
acid cycle and its components are marked in gold, 3-hydroxypropionate in purple, 3 hydroxybutyr-
ate synthesis pathways in grey, Calvin–Benson– Bassham cycle in green, oxidative pentose phos-
phate in blue, non-CBB glycolysis pathway in orange and glycogen metabolism in red. 
Figure 1. Cyanobacterial carbon metabolism pathways for carboxylic acid production. Tricarboxylic
acid cycle and its components are marked in gold, 3-hydroxypropionate in purple, 3 hydroxybutyrate
synthesis pathways in grey, Calvin–Benson–Bassham cycle in green, oxidative pentose phosphate in
blue, non-CBB glycolysis pathway in orange and glycogen metabolism in red.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 7 of 18
Table 2. Summary of the photosynthetic production of carboxylic acids in cyanobacteria.
Chemical Producer Strain Genotype Titer Reference
3HP Synechococcus elongatus PCC
7942_DC3 PTrc: msr (M. sed), mcr (S. tok) in NSI (Synpcc7942_2498) 659 mg L−1 [45]
3HP Synechococcus elongatus PCC
7942_DC1
PLlacO1: Ae_adc, Skpyd4, msr (M. sed), ppc, aspC in NSII
(Synpcc7942_0084) 186 mg L−1 [45]
3HP Synechococcus elongatus PCC
7942_EL63
PTrc: msr (M. sed), mcr (S. tok) in NSI (Synpcc7942_2498)
PTrc: msr (M. sed), mcr (S. tok) in NSI (Synpcc7942_2498) 665 mg L−1 [45]
3HP Synechocystis sp. PCC
6803_SMPA
Pcpc560-mcr-pntAB-TrbcL in S2 (slr1704 and sll1575) and
accBCAD-birA through pJS 837.18 mg L−1 [46]
3HB Synechocystis sp. PCC
6803_TABd
∆phaE (slr1829), ∆phaC (slr1830), Ptac-tesB-kanR at site S2 (slr1704
and sll1575), CmR-Ptac-phaA (slr1993)-phaB (slr1994) at S4 (slr1992) 533.4 mg L−1 [47]
3HB Synechococcus elongatus PCC
7942_KU21
Ptrc nphT7, tesB, phaB, phaA in NSI (Synpcc7942_2498)
PLlacO1:pptesB in NSII (Synpcc7942_0084) 1200 mg L−1 [48]
3HB Synechocystis sp. PCC
6803_R154
CmR-Ptac-phaA-(RBSopt)-phaB1 at S1 (slr1495 and sll1397),
PpsbA12-Ptac-tesB-T1-KanR at S2 (slr1362 and sll1274), ∆phaE
(slr1829), ∆phaC (slr1830)
1840 mg L−1 [49]
Fumarate Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 ∆fumC (slr0018) and ∆zwf (slr1843) 116 mg L−1 [50]
Malate S. elongatus UTEX 2973_FH389 ∆nblA::AsPck (L), ∆TP70::AsMdh (L), EmR, CmR; pEM-CF53 : pEM,
T5-pck, T5-mdh, T5-prk, T5-CA (H), T5-RbcL, pEM-CF53, 34.86 mg L−1 [51]
Malate Synechocystis sp. PCC
6803_WD199 ∆mdh (sll0891), ∆me (slr0721), OE fumC (JW1603) 160.91 mg L−1 [52]
Succinate Synechococcus elongatus PCC
7942_CR8
Ptrc::gabD, kgd, gltA, ppc; SpecR in NSI (Synpcc7942_2498)
PLlacO1::dCas9; Ptrc::sgRNA(glgC-1); Ptrc:: sgRNA(sdhB-2); KanR in
NSII (Synpcc7942_0084)
8900 mg L−1 [53]
Succinate Synechococcus elongatus PCC
7942_LAN3
Ptrc::gabD (JW2636), kgd (SYNPCC7002_A2770), gltA, ppc; in NSI
(Synpcc7942_2498) 430 mg L−1 [54]
Succinate Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803_
2P_C ∆psbA2::pepC-KmR pepC-pepC slr1068::CmR 1616 ± 183 mg L−1 [55]
Succinate Synechocystis sp. PCC
6803_∆sll1625 ∆sll1625 420 mg L−1 [56]
Succinate Synechococcus elongatus PCC
11801_SA9
△DOP62_03525:: SmR PpsbaI OgdA (Synpcc7002_A2770) Trbcl
PpsbaIII SsaD (P25526) Trrnb Pcpcb300 pepc (Synpcc7942_2252) Trbcl,
∆DOP62_03790::Prbcl400 gltA (Synpcc7942_0612) Trbcl Prbcl400
SBPase (Synpcc7942_0505) Trbcl KanR, ∆DOP62_11515::GmR
Pprbcl300M Trbcl yjjP(POADD2) Pcpcb200 yjjB (POADD5) Tlac
930 mg L−1 [57]
Succinate Synechococcus elongatus PCC
7942-∆glgc::ppc::gltA 0XN
∆glgc (Synpcc7942_0603)::ppc (Synpcc7942_2252)::gltA
(Synpcc7942_0612) 0XN 0.435 ± 0.035 mg L−1 [58]
Succinate Synechocystis sp. PCC
6803_∆sll1625 ∆sll1625 472 mg L−1 [59]
Succinate Synechococcus elongatus PCC
7942 ∆sdhA (sll1625 and slr1233), ∆sdhB (sll0823) 0.58–0.63 mg L−1 [56]
Succinate Synechococcus elongatus PCC
11801_SL3338 NSI::PcpcB-efe-TrrnB
1044.18 µmole
gDCW −1 h−1 * [46]
Free Fatty Acids Synechocystis sp. PCC
6803_SD277
slr1609::PpsbA2 ‘tesA∆(slr1993-slr1994)::Pcpc-accBC Prbc accDA
∆sll1951::*PpsbA2 Uc fatB1 Prbc Ch
fatB2∆(slr2001-slr2002)::*PpsbA2 ChfatB2∆slr1710::PpsbA2* Cc
fatB1∆slr2132::Ptrc tesA137
197 mg L−1 [60]
Free Fatty Acids Synechococcus elongatus PCC
7942 ∆Synpcc7942_0918::E. coli (‘tesA) 75 mg gDCW−1 * [61]
Free Fatty Acids Synechococcus elongatus PCC
7942
∆Synpcc7942_0918::E. coli (‘tesA); Ptrc-fat1 (XM_001696567)-rbcLS
(Synpcc7942_1426, Synpcc7942_1427), PLlacO1-accBCDA
(Cre17.g715250.t1; Cre08.g359350.t1; Cre12.g519100.t1;
Cre12.g484000.t1)
25 mg L−1 [62]
Free Fatty Acids Picosynechococcus elongatus
PCC 7002
∆fadD (SYNPCC7002_A0675); Ptrc-‘tesA-PpsbAI-rbcLS
(Synpcc7942_1426, Synpcc7942_1427) 131 mg L−1 [63]
Free Fatty Acids Picosynechococcus elongatus
PCC 7002 ∆glgC::aphII, ∆fadD::PcpcBA-fatB1-aadA 95 mg L−1 [64]
Free Fatty Acids Synechococcus elongatus PCC
7942_dAS1T∆wzt ∆aas::PnirA-‘tesA ∆wzt 100 mg L−1 [65]
Free Fatty Acids Synechocystis sp. PCC
6803_mACT PmAcT pBS-NSU0168-PcpcB-ssSecLacLgt-AcTesA-PcpcB-Km-NSD0168 331 mg L−1 [66]
* can not be converted into mg/L using data provided in the article.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 8 of 18
In Synechococcus PCC 7942, multiple combinations of Msr and Mcr were tested to
determine the optimal selection of genes to produce 3HP . Among all the combinations
tested, the DC3 strain comprising M. sedula Msr and S. tokodaii Mcr, expressed under the
control of a single IPTG-inducible PTrc promoter, resulted in the highest observed 3HP titer
of 659 mg/L after 16 days of cultivation, albeit at a considerable growth penalty [45]. Even
higher titers were possible through the engineering of another model strain: Synechocystis
PCC 6803. The organism was modified by introducing a gene of Mcr derived from C.
aurantiacus under the control of a strong Pcpc560 promoter combined with the overexpression
of a native NAD(P)+ transhydrogenase (pntAB) that provides a pool of optimal reductant
to achieve a 3HP production of 751.86 mg/L. This construct was further improved with the
strengthening of the flux toward malonyl-CoA thanks to the overexpression of Acetyl-CoA
carboxylase composed of AccB, AccC, AccA and AccD supplemented with the biotinilase-
encoding gene (birA). This combination of genes yielded the highest productivity reported
to date of 837 mg/L. Interestingly, the deletions of potentially competitive pathways
toward PHB and acetate biosynthesis yielded only marginal gains and were not statistically
significant improvements.
When it comes to the alternative approach for 3HP production, with the β-alanine
pathway, the most productive strain of this type, the DC1 variant of Synechococcus PCC
7942, could reach a titer of 186 mg/L after 16 days of cultivation without exhibiting growth
penalty [45]. Interestingly, introducing this modification into malonyl-CoA-dependent
strain DC3, resulting in strain EL63, yielded no further improvement in the titer of 3HP .
This implies that the activities of enzymes comprising the heterologous pathway were not
a limiting factor in 3HP production in cyanobacteria. The likely causes of low productivity
could be attributed to product toxicity, limitations in precursor molecule availability or
other factors.
Despite employing, and sometimes integrating, these two approaches, typical titers
of 3HP obtained in cyanobacteria do not exceed 1 g per liter. These productivities fall
significantly short of those in heterotrophic model organisms where productivities are
typically in tens of grams per day [67]. This can be primarily attributed to a relatively low
acetyl-CoA pool in autotrophic organisms. An additional factor could be the lack of tem-
perature alignment between the optimal growth temperature of mesophilic cyanobacterial
chassis and enzymes derived from thermophilic bacteria and archaea.
4.2. 3-Hydroxybutyrate
Longer hydroxy acids branching directly from acetyl-CoA have also been synthesized
in the cyanobacterial chassis. 3-hydroxybutyrate (3HB), a C4 hydroxycarboxylic acid, is
another important platform chemical. It primarily serves as a monomer for the synthesis of
biodegradable bioplastics used in an array of packaging, medical, agricultural, and textile
industries. Currently, 4-hydroxybutyrate is primarily produced from the hydrolysis of
microbially produced polyhydroxybutyrate using acids or enzymes [68,69]. The process,
despite its efficiency, first requires the microbial production of the biopolymer, often using
heterotrophic strains and feedstocks derived from food crops. This is followed by the multi-
phase hydrolysis of polyhydroxyalkanoate granules and purification of the hydrolysate to
yield monomers that are later repolymerized into a more tailored bioplastic. A simplified
process that directly converts CO2 into monomeric building blocks using energy derived
from sunlight is, therefore, desired.
This C4 carboxylic acid, one carbon longer than 3HP , is synthesized from acetoacetyl-
CoA (Figure 1), a result of a condensation of two acetyl-CoA molecules. Its biochemical
pathway is composed of thiolase (phaA) and acetoacetyl-CoA reductase (phaB) genes
typically found in the operon phaCAB responsible for the biosynthesis of polyhydrox-
yalkanoates. This operon is present in many PHB-producing cyanobacteria, including
Synechocystis PCC 6803.
Early works on Synechocystis PCC 6803 have shown that whilst the simple expression
of an E. coli thioesterase results in a titer of 20.6 mg/L during photosynthetic produc-
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 9 of 18
tion [47], few relatively straightforward genetic modifications can significantly improve
the productivity of the strain. The deletion of endogenous PHB synthases phaC and
phaE, combined with the amplification of the native flux toward PHB through the over-
expression of phaA and phaB under the control of a relatively strong Ptac promoter, was
effective in yielding 533.4 mg/L of 3HB after 21 days of cultivation. In a follow-up study,
acetoacetyl-CoA reductase (phaB) was identified as the primary bottleneck restricting pro-
ductivity. Addressing this bottleneck through optimization of the gene’s ribosome binding
site and making it complementary to the 3′-terminal sequence of Synechocystis PCC 6803
16S rRNA resulted in a (R)-3HB titer of 1.84 g L−1 within 10 days and peak productivity of
263 mg L−1 day−1 [49].
In another model unicellular strain, Synechococcus PCC 7942, the baseline titer of
120 mg/L of 3HB in 5 days of cultivation was achieved through the expression of the
essential phaA, phaB and Thl genes [48]. Major improvements in this productivity were
possible through the introduction of the ATP-driving force module that replaced phaA with
nphT7, a gene encoding acetoacetyl-CoA synthase. NphT7, together with native acetyl-CoA
carboxylase, drives the irreversible synthesis of acetoacetyl-CoA. An additional driving
force boosted the productivity two-fold but resulted in growth inhibition, which could
be alleviated in the subsequent iteration by increasing thioesterase expression. The final
and most successful strain capable of synthesizing 1.2 g/L 3HB contained both the driving
force module resulting from the activity of nphT7 and phaA from the original construct
that allows for the better control of the flux.
Overall, the productivities of cyanobacteria optimized for the biosynthesis of 3HB
exceed 1 g L −1 and are higher than those of 3HP , but still fall short when compared to
heterotrophic organisms such as E. coli or S. cerevisiae, where the productivities typically
exceed a gram per hour [70]. There may be many reasons why phototrophs offer lower
productivities of 3HB, most notably lower cellular densities in the bioreactor scale and a
lower pool of acetyl CoA.
5. Photosynthetic Production of Organic Acids Derived from the TCA Cycle
In contrast to the production of organic acids from acetyl-CoA, which typically con-
sumes cellular resources like ATP and NAD(P)H while retaining fixed carbon, organic acids
derived from the TCA cycle, such as fumarate, malate, and succinate, are synthesized via
the oxidative forward branch of the cycle under photosynthetic conditions. This oxidative
process generates NADH and releases previously photosynthetically fixed carbon. This
differs from the production of the same compounds through dark self-fermentation where
the reductive branch of the TCA cycle is used, NADH is consumed and carbon is conserved.
Since this manuscript is centered around the photosynthetic production of organic acids,
subsequent discussion will focus on the oxidative branch of the pathway.
5.1. Fumarate and Malate
Fumarate is a C4 hydroxycarboxylic diacid and an important platform chemical
selected among the top 12 value-added chemicals from biomass. Traditionally, it has been
chemically synthesized from maleic acid and its precursor maleic anhydride [ 71]. It is
primarily used as an acidity regulator in the food industry but also in detergents, animal
feed, and pharmaceuticals. Because of the need to transition into greener production, a
direct process of its biosynthesis from CO2 would be desired, but reports on direct fumarate
production using cyanobacteria are scarce.
Fumarate, an essential component of the TCA cycle (Figure 1), is produced during
anabolism. Recently, a growth-coupled strategy was developed that allowed for the pho-
tosynthetic production of 1 mM titer (116 mg L −1) of fumarate thanks to the deletion
of the fumC gene of Synechocystis PCC 6803 [50]. The gene is responsible for converting
fumarate into malate in the TCA cycle. This productivity was later slightly improved by
deleting the zwf gene encoding glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase in the oxidative pen-
tose phosphate pathway. The protein encoded by the gene converts glucose-6-phosphate
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 10 of 18
into 6-phosphoglucono-δ-lactone. A productivity boost associated with the deletion of the
zwf gene was observed primarily at night and was attributed to the redirection of cellular
energy reserves into the TCA cycle, when light harvesting does not provide ATP .
Another TCA cycle-derived C4 hydroxycarboxylic diacid from the DOE Top 12 value-
added chemicals from biomass is malate (Figure 1) [1]. The molecule is used in the food,
pharmaceutical, and agriculture industries, and, like other C4 diacids, is an important
chemical precursor typically produced chemically from maleic anhydride. An interesting
approach to the photosynthetic production of malate was proposed by Hu et al. [51]. In
this work, fast-growing Synechococcus UTEX 2973 was engineered by introducing phospho-
enolpyruvate carboxykinase (pck) and malate dehydrogenase (mdh) genes to generate a
shunt that provides additional ATP and carbon fixation capacity during the photosynthetic
production of malate [51]. In the first iteration of this solution, engineered strain SH006
could produce approximately 200 µM (27 mg L−1) malate after 9 days of cultivation, which
was further increased to 260 µM (35 mg L−1) in strain SH008 after introducing a stronger
promoter for phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase.
Elsewhere, in a follow-up study to the one on fumarate [50], a growth-coupled strategy
was developed for the biosynthesis of 1.2 mM (161 mg L−1) of malate in a double-deletion
mutant of Synechocystis PCC 6803 lacking malic enzyme (me) and malate dehydrogenase
(mdh) [52]. A near-complete degree of the conversion of fumarate into malate was achieved
with the expression of fumarase gene fumC originating from E. coli to boost the native flux
toward malate.
5.2. Succinate
Succinate is the final of three dicarboxylic acids from the DOE Top 12 chemicals
from biomass that is a TCA cycle-derived intermediate (Figure 1) [ 1]. It is an essential
platform chemical that can be converted into major industrial compounds 1,4-butanediol,
butadiene, gamma-butyrolactone and tetrahydrofuran. Just like other diacids, malate and
fumarate, it is primarily produced chemically from maleic anhydride, but its fermentative
production using Actinobacillus succinogenes, Escherichia coli or Corynebacterium glutamicum is
also mature. Applications of succinate are vast, spanning food, cosmetics, pharmaceutical
and biopolymer applications.
The photosynthetic production of succinate in Synechococcus PCC 7942 has been
achieved by expressing genes encoding α-ketoglutarate decarboxylase ( kgd) and succi-
nate semialdehyde dehydrogenase (gabD) in S. elongatus PCC 7942 under the control of
Ptrc promoter. The biosynthesis of 120 mg/L of succinate was achieved with a signifi-
cant growth penalty, most likely due to α-ketoglutarate depletion [54]. This shortage of
the essential precursor has been alleviated with the expression of phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxylase (ppc) and citrate synthase (gltA) from Corynebacterium glutamicum in said
cyanobacterial strain. The strategy was successful, and the final producer strain, LAN3,
was capable of biosynthesizing 430 mg/L of succinate in 8 days without a significant
growth penalty. In a parallel study, another group utilized the CRISPR-Cas9 system for
the simultaneous knockout of glucose-1-phosphate adenylyl transferase (glgC) responsible
for glycogen synthesis and replacing it with ppc-gltA cassette [58] analogous to the one
described above [54]. The engineered strain cultivated under nitrogen deprivation was
capable of synthesizing 0.435 mg/L of succinate, a value significantly lower than the one
based on an alternative approach proposed by another group [54]. The exact reasons for
this discrepancy are unknown. Another CRISPR-based study utilized CRISPRi to down-
regulate the genes glgc, sdhA and sdhB responsible for glycogen and fumarate biosynthesis
in S. elongatus PCC 7942, respectively. The most successful strategies employed in this
work were based on the suppression of both succinate dehydrogenases sdhA and sdhB, and
resulted in titers between 0.580 and 0.630 mg/L [72], similar to other studies employing
CRISPR-Cas technology.
In the final paper from these studies [58], a similar approach resulted in drastically
different outcomes. The best-producing strain from this line of research, LAN3 [54], was
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 11 of 18
subjected to a series of CRISPRi experiments targeting the key competing pathways of
succinate production [53]. In line with the previous study, the repression of sdhA and sdhB
resulted in the highest gains of succinate yield, exceeding 30% in each case and reaching
a succinate titer of 576 mg/L in the case of the latter. In the next step, the compound
effect of sdhB and glgC suppression was studied. The resulting strain, CR8, was capable
of synthesizing 632 mg/L of fumarate in 8 days without any growth penalties. When
scaling up the cultivation of CR8 from flask to photobioreactor, the succinate titer reached
4.8 g/L after 28 days when air was supplemented with 5% CO2, a major improvement that
also indicates the need for testing multiple cultivation and carbon delivery approaches.
Interestingly after a month of cultivation, cells became non-viable due to unknown reasons.
The culture medium itself could be reinoculated with new cells to continue succinate
production for a final of four cycles and a titer of 8.9 g/L, representing, by far, the highest
succinate titer reported to date.
When it comes to another model cyanobacterium, Synechocystis PCC 6803, the ap-
proaches were similar. In early works, a series of Sdh-deletion mutants were prepared to
increase the succinate productivity of this model strain [56]. One of the deletions targeting
the sll1625 gene resulted in a maximal titer of 420 mg L−1 succinate. The deletion mutant
grown in high CO2 accumulated both succinate and glycogen and, unlike the wild-type
under the same cultivation conditions, did not undergo bleaching. In the follow-up study,
different cultivation conditions of the same were tested [ 59]. A detailed study suggests
that light–dark cycles promote succinate titers and that no pH control during the photosyn-
thetic production of succinate has a positive impact on the production of the metabolite.
Elsewhere, the introduction of glyoxylate to Synechocystis PCC 6803 shunt two genes, aceA
and aceB, encoding isocitrate lyase and malate synthase, respectively [55]. The engineered
strain, constructed in the background of phosphoenolpyruvate-overexpression strain 2P
constructed earlier [73], resulted in the strain capable of synthesizing 140 µg mL OD under
20 µE m−2 s−1 in a nitrogen-depleted medium. This is two-fold higher than the same
cells grown in a nitrogen-rich medium, but also only a third of the dark fermentation in a
nitrogen-replete medium. Even better results were obtained when nitrogen limitation was
replaced by an addition of succinate dehydrogenase inhibitor, 2-thenoyltrifluoroacetone
(TTA). Production exceeding 400 µg mL−1 OD−1 was obtained in this setting and further
increased over three-fold by transitioning to mixotrophic growth using acetate [73]. Similar
combinations were even more successful when transitioning from photosynthetic growth
into dark and dark anoxic self-fermentation, but these studies are beyond the scope of
the manuscript.
With the continuous development of new cyanobacteria for the production of bio-
chemicals, attention has shifted toward the application of fast-growing chassis. One of
these organisms is Synechococcus elongatus PCC 11801, recently proposed as a promising
salt-tolerant and rapidly growing phototroph [74]. A very respectable yield of 0.6 g L −1
in 5 days has been achieved through a previously suggested combination of the overex-
pression of α-ketoglutarate decarboxylase, succinate semialdehyde dehydrogenase and
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase [57], resulting in the strain SA3. Based on this construct,
further improvements were made. The combined overexpression of seven genes (OgdA,
SsaD, PEPC, gltA, SBPase, YjjP and YjjB) and the deletion of glgA and sdhB allowed for a
succinate titer of 0.93 g L−1 in variant SA9. The resultant strain was also characterized by
similar growth parameters to the wild-type and low fumarate titers.
6. Photosynthetic Production of Free Fatty Acids
Fatty acids are long-chain carboxylic acids synthesized through the condensation
of acetyl- and malonyl-CoA precursors. The process involves the repetitive addition of
two-carbon units derived from malonyl-CoA, which itself is formed from acetyl-CoA. This
mechanism of synthesis requires considerable investment of ATP and NAD(P)H, and makes
fatty acids one of the most chemically reduced hydrocarbons formed through biological
pathways. As a result, fatty acid synthesis has been the subject of extensive basic and
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 12 of 18
applied research. In the early 2000s, the concept of microalgal biodiesel, based on the
transesterification of fatty acids stored in the triglycerides of oleaginous microalgae, gained
considerable attention [ 75]. However, the promise of large-scale sustainable biodiesel
production from microalgae ultimately fell short of the high initial expectations.
Unlike oleaginous microalgae, cyanobacteria do not synthesize considerable amounts
of triglycerides and alternative strategies, based on genetic engineering, have been devel-
oped for the export and harvesting of long-chain fatty acids. An originally innovative
and now ubiquitous approach involves engineering cyanobacteria to secrete free fatty
acids (FFAs), which can later serve as valuable bioproducts or biofuel precursors. The
interest in FFA secretion originates from earlier work on E. coli, where disrupting fatty acid
β-oxidation led to their extracellular secretion [60]. However, due to the fundamental differ-
ences in carbon metabolism and the incomplete β-oxidation pathway in cyanobacteria [63],
a different strategy was needed. In cyanobacteria, fatty acid recycling is governed by
acyl–acyl carrier protein synthases (Aas) [60]. Therefore, deleting these proteins, alongside
overexpressing thioesterases, has become a successful strategy to increase FFA production
and secretion in these microorganisms [60,63].
Early works demonstrated an effective synthesis of 197 mg of FFAs per liter of growth
medium by an extensively engineered strain of Synechocystis PCC 6803 (variant SD277) [60].
The strain, featuring a combination of heterologous thioesterases and the deletion of
endogenous carbon sinks, is, to this date, one of the best producers of free fatty acids
reported in the literature. Initial attempts to achieve similar productivities in another
model strain, Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942, were less successful. The expression of a
truncated E. coli in a strain, denoted as SE02, yielded an organism capable of achieving titers
exceeding 70 mg of free fatty acids per gram of dry biomass [61]. In the follow-up study,
attempts were made to increase the flux toward fatty acids. The two putative rate-limiting
steps in channeling the carbon flow toward fatty acid synthesis, the overexpression of
Rubisco and acetyl-CoA carboxylase, were tested. Although volumetric productivity did
not improve, carbon partitioning (measured as FFA mass versudry cell weight) was superior
to the parental strain [62]. These findings suggest that exploring various thioesterases and
reducing carbon flow into competing sinks, like polyhydroxyalkanoates and cyanophycin,
may be more effective for FFA production than inducing metabolic flux toward fatty
acid synthesis.
Further studies applied this strategy to other photosynthetic organisms. A fast-
growing marine strain, Synechococcus PCC 7002 ( Picosynechococcus sp. PCC 7002), was
engineered with a knockout of fadD, combined with the expression of truncated E. coli
thioesterase (‘tesA) and Rubisco (rbcLS) under the control ofS. elongatus PCC 7942 psbAI pro-
moter. The resultant strain was capable of synthesizing 131 mg/L of FFAs [63]. Elsewhere,
the same strain was used as a producer of medium-chain free fatty acids by exchanging
E.coli thioesterase with one with an altered substrate specificity. The resultant strain could
produce 4.4 mg L−1 day−1 of lauric acid (C12) and a total fatty acid titer of approximately
95 mg L−1 [64]. Interestingly, attempts to further increase carbon partitioning through the
deletion of ADP–glucose pyrophosphorylase responsible for glycogen synthesis were only
marginally successful. This reinforces previous finding that indicates that the deletion of
downstream metabolic carbon sinks is more useful in increasing the flux toward fatty acids
than altering glycogen metabolism that is placed upstream of carbon-fixation reactions.
Initial works have shown that the titers of secreted free fatty acids in Synechocccus elon-
gatus PCC 7942 lagged behind other cyanobacteria and resulted in growth impairment, but
the exact causes were unclear [65]. More detailed studies revealed excessive intracellular
free fatty acid accumulation as a leading cause of this phenomenon. An approach that
helped alleviate the issue was the deletion of the wzt gene, responsible for the synthesis
of hydrophilic O-antigen on the cell surface. This genetic manipulation increased free
fatty acid productivity to 2.7 mg L −1 h−1. Despite the productivity improvement, the
engineered strain showed growth retardation and ultimately short-lived phenotype due to
the instability of PSII, indicating the need for alternative approaches to free fatty acid secre-
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 13 of 18
tion [65]. One approach, tested in Synechocystis PCC 6803, involved targeting thioesterases
to the inner membrane using a membrane scaffolding system based on Synechocystis Lgt
protein. This significantly increased FFA production to 331 mg/L, nearly three times that of
a strain expressing free thioesterase (121 mg/L) [66], highlighting the importance of cellular
localization for free fatty acid synthesis. Recent strategies for improving FFA secretion in
transgenic cyanobacteria include integrating lipase A to hydrolyze membrane lipids. This
approach, tested in Synechocystis PCC 6803, resulted in 24.5% carbon partitioning as FFAs
per dry cell weight [76], confirming its potential to boost FFA production.
7. Outlook
Photosynthetic production of carboxylic acids in cyanobacteria has been an active area
of research in the last decade. The overview of the current state of the field reveals that the
volumetric productivities are very low compared to the heterotrophic counterparts. There
may be numerous ways how this situation could be addressed, and multiple approaches
can be taken to improve it. Here, we will reflect on the current selection of producer strains
and discuss the potential solutions to low yields.
Two model organisms, Synechocystis PCC 6803 and Synechococcus PCC 7942, still
dominate as primary production hosts for organic acids, most likely due to more mature
genetic engineering methods. Interestingly, in recent years, alternative organisms such as
fast-growing Synechococcus UTEX 2973 and Synechococcus PCC 11801, were also used.
When it comes to overall titers achieved during photosynthetic production, they
are typically within a range of high mg to low g per liter of medium. Among all the
organic acids, the highest yields have been achieved in cases of 3HB (1840 mg/L), fumarate
(2700 mg/L) and succinate (8900 mg/L). These three compounds have been produced
in organisms that already have most of the desired pathway components in place and
typically require rechanneling the carbon flux toward a higher conversion efficiency. There-
fore, looking into the future selecting among native strains that already have essential
components of the pathway in place may be a promising strategy.
The photobiosynthesis and secretion of free fatty acids from cyanobacteria have been
an active field of work for over a decade, and despite numerous attempts to engineer stable
and efficient producers of these molecules, similar issues persist. The overall productivity
remains in low hundreds of mg per liter of growth medium; albeit due to their hydrophobic
character, their purification is greatly simplified. Moreover, most approaches that reduce the
intracellular content of fatty acids and promote their secretion result in unstable phenotypes
that are mostly applicable to short production cycles. Better control of the secretion process
with inducible promoters, riboswitches of dedicated circuits could be a way forward in
obtaining higher yields of free fatty acids from these phototrophic bacteria.
Generally, the yield per unit volume achieved with cyanobacteria is much lower, some-
times by three orders of magnitude, than that achieved by heterotrophs. For example, the
biotechnological production of succinate using heterotrophic organisms is within several
grams per liter per hour [77], whereas the typical per-hour productivity of photosyntheti-
cally grown cyanobacteria is between 3 and 6 mg of succinate in most recent works [53].
These comparisons, while showing one side of the gap to fill before photoautotrophic
chassis can match the current performance of model heterotrophic chassis, neglect im-
portant differences between the two systems: cell densities. Heterotrophic cells can be
grown in high cellular densities that cannot be achieved by photoautotrophs due to their
need for a constant supply of light. Whilst heterotrophic cultures can typically exceed
50 g L−1 in batch cultivation [78], actively growing cyanobacterial cultures rarely approach
10 g L−1 [79]. In this context, per cell comparison between the phototrophic chassis and
model heterotrophs becomes an order of magnitude better but still two orders of magnitude
lower than those of heterotrophs. The underlying causes must, therefore, be different.
An abundant precursor pool is essential for the high-level production of desired chem-
icals. Analysis of genome-scale models reveals that the acetyl-CoA level in Synechocystis
PCC 6803 is lower than that inEscherichia coli. The potential reason may be differences in the
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 14 of 18
overall structure of the metabolic network. For example, acetyl-CoA is used in 22 reactions
in Escherichia coli and only 14 reactions in Synechocystis PCC 6803. These differences may
explain the restriction of acetyl-CoA levels in Synechocystis PCC 6803 and its lower quantity
than in Escherichia coli [80].
We, therefore, speculate that the major factor that prevents the high-yield production
of organic acids and their derivatives from CO 2 using cyanobacterial chassis is the low
flux toward the TCA cycle. When a biosynthesis pathway in cyanobacteria is introduced
or overexpressed, titers of chemicals derived from pyruvate, e.g., 5.5 g L −1 ethanol [7],
are much higher than those derived from acetyl-CoA, e.g., 100 mg L−1 fatty alcohols [81],
because the intracellular content of acetyl-CoA is less than 5% of the abundant pyruvate
content [5].
Acetyl-CoA in cyanobacteria is primarily produced from pyruvate by a pyruvate
dehydrogenase complex [82]. The low acetyl-CoA content may, therefore, result from the
potential low catalytic efficiency of PDHc or a weak driving force due to the generally
low activity of the TCA cycle in cyanobacteria under photoautotrophic conditions [ 26].
Alternatively, the acetyl-CoA control network differs in autotrophs and heterotrophs to limit
the excessive transfer of carbon into an intermediate that has a secondary role in central
metabolism [82]. Consequently, several earlier studies applied dark-fermentation nutrient-
deficient conditions to enhance the intracellular acetyl-CoA availability via activating
glycogen degradation [83]. Alternatively, introducing co-substrates that directly feed into
the acetyl-CoA pool has also been tested as a promising strategy to increase the product
yield [84]. Despite the potential of these approaches to increase the yield, these cultivation
strategies do not allow for continuous growth and stable productivity.
Thus, enriching the flux to the acetyl-CoA pool appears to be a key step to enhance
the production of downstream products [80] without restricting the process to anaerobic
cultivation conditions [82].
Therefore, overcoming the regulation and increasing flux from pyruvate to acetyl-CoA
has been a strategy to enlarge the acetyl-CoA pool. A study on Synechococcus elongatus
PCC 7942 showed that by overexpressing the native PDHc, total PDHc activity was in-
creased two-fold and intracellular acetyl-CoA content reached 2.6-fold that in the control
strain. When biosynthesis pathways for two acetyl-CoA-derived products, acetate and
isopropanol, were introduced into the acetyl-CoA-enhanced strain separately, this resulted
in a 7-fold and a 3.8-fold improvement in product titer, respectively. In addition, the
overexpression of different PDH genes in S. elongatus PCC 7942 was tested but resulted in
no improvement in PDH activities. The introduced genes originated from Escherichia coli
(aceEF, lpd), Synechocystis PCC 6803 (pdhABCD) [85].
Intriguingly, eukaryotic yeast has evolved to solve the tight regulations through the
existence of organelles such as mitochondrion and peroxisome [86]. Thus, the metabolic
engineering of a key node between pyruvate and acetyl-CoA mimicking such compartmen-
talization is desired for the construction of efficient bio-solar cell factories that require the
high-level acetyl-CoA as a precursor [87]. To further explore this concept, a synthetic acetate-
acetyl-CoA/malonyl-CoA (AAM) bypass to overcome a rate-limiting step of PDHc and
increase the acetyl-CoA pools to acetone has been introduced [88]. The AAM-bypass was
designed to combine a synthetic acetoacetyl-CoA (AA)-bypass that generates acetyl-CoA
and NADPH from pyruvate and an artificial PPS/PPC/MMC-CO 2-fixing module com-
posed of phosphoenolpyruvate synthetase (PPS), phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PPC)
and methyl malonyl-CoA carboxyltransferase (MMC). The module fixes CO2 through PPC
and rearranges the carbons of pyruvate and malonyl-CoA into oxaloacetate and acetyl-CoA
using MMC [88]. By integrating a pyruvate decarboxylase, an aldehyde dehydrogenase and
an acetylation-tolerant acetyl-CoA synthase into the wild-type strain, acetyl-CoA content
increased 6.5-fold by day 8 of cultivation and, interestingly, the pyruvate content was also
2-fold higher than the wild-type strain [88].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 15 of 18
8. Conclusions
The photosynthetic production of carboxylic acids in cyanobacteria holds promise, and
titers exceeding 1 g L−1 are currently achievable for some of these products. These values,
however, are still below the productivity characteristic of heterotrophic microorganisms.
Whilst significant improvements have been made in recent years and numerous approaches
have been tested, the major issue that prevent the high-yield production of carboxylic
acids and their derivatives from CO2 appears to be the low metabolic flux toward acetyl-
CoA, which limits the yield of acetyl-CoA-derived products. Hopefully, in the future,
existing strategies involving overexpressing the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDHc)
or introducing synthetic bypasses to overcome the tight limitation of the flux will be widely
applied, and new strategies enabling the replenishing of the acetyl-CoA pool with inorganic
carbon will be developed.
Author Contributions: All authors (D.Y., F.R., T.W., M.D.) conceived the manuscript, performed the
literature review, co-wrote, critically reviewed the draft manuscript and prepared the final manuscript.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China, grants
3221101094 to M.D. and 32250410289 to F.R.
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in the study are included in the
article; further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Werpy, T.; Petersen, G.Top Value Added Chemicals from Biomass Volume I: Top Value Added Chemicals From Biomass Volume I: Results of
Screening for Potential Candidates from Sugars and Synthesis Gas; National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL): Golden, CO, USA,
2004.
2. Broda, M.; Yelle, D.J.; Serwa ´ nska, K. Bioethanol Production from Lignocellulosic Biomass—Challenges and Solutions.Molecules
2022, 27, 8717. [CrossRef]
3. Andler, S.M.; Goddard, J.M. Transforming Food Waste: How Immobilized Enzymes Can Valorize Waste Streams into Revenue
Streams. NPJ Sci. Food 2018, 2, 19. [CrossRef]
4. Nozzi, N.E.; Oliver, J.W.K.; Atsumi, S. Cyanobacteria as a Platform for Biofuel Production.Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2013, 1, 7.
[CrossRef]
5. Knoot, C.J.; Ungerer, J.; Wangikar, P .P .; Pakrasi, H.B. Cyanobacteria: Promising Biocatalysts for Sustainable Chemical Produc-tion.
J. Biol. Chem. 2018, 293, 5044–5052. [CrossRef]
6. Gao, X.; Gao, F.; Liu, D.; Zhang, H.; Nie, X.; Yang, C. Engineering the Methylerythritol Phosphate Pathway in Cyanobacteria for
Photosynthetic Isoprene Production from CO2. Energy Environ. Sci. 2016, 9, 1400–1411. [CrossRef]
7. Gao, Z.; Zhao, H.; Li, Z.; Tan, X.; Lu, X. Photosynthetic Production of Ethanol from Carbon Dioxide in Genetically Engineered
Cyanobacteria. Energy Environ. Sci. 2012, 5, 9857–9865. [CrossRef]
8. Nozzi, N.E.; Case, A.E.; Carroll, A.L.; Atsumi, S. Systematic Approaches to Efficiently Produce 2,3-Butanediol in a Marine
Cy-anobacterium. ACS Synth. Biol. 2017, 6, 2136–2144. [CrossRef]
9. Lin, P .C.; Zhang, F.; Pakrasi, H.B. Enhanced Production of Sucrose in the Fast-Growing CyanobacteriumSynechococcus elongatus
UTEX 2973. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10, 390. [CrossRef]
10. Zheng, Y.; Xue, C.; Chen, H.; Jia, A.; Zhao, L.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, L.; Wang, Q. Reconstitution and Expression of Mcy Gene Cluster
in the Model Cyanobacterium Synechococcus 7942 Reveals a Role of MC-LR in Cell Division. New Phytol. 2023, 238, 1101–1114.
[CrossRef]
11. Vuoristo, K.S.; Mars, A.E.; Sanders, J.P .M.; Eggink, G.; Weusthuis, R.A. Metabolic Engineering of TCA Cycle for Production of
Chemicals. Trends Biotechnol. 2016, 34, 191–197. [CrossRef]
12. Pradhan, B.; Nayak, R.; Patra, S.; Jit, B.P .; Ragusa, A.; Jena, M. Bioactive Metabolites from Marine Algae as Potent Pharmaco-phores
against Oxidative Stress-Associated Human Diseases: A Comprehensive Review. Molecules 2021, 26, 37. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Kahn, A.; Oliveira, P .; Cuau, M.; Leão, P .N. Incorporation, Fate, and Turnover of Free Fatty Acids in Cyanobacteria. FEMS
Microbiol. Rev. 2023, 47, fuad015. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Choi, Y.-N.; Wook Lee, J.; Woo Kim, J.; Moon Park, J. Acetyl-CoA-Derived Biofuel and Biochemical Production in Cyanobacteria:
A Mini Review. J. Appl. Phycol. 2020, 32, 1643–1653. [CrossRef]
15. Wang, Y.; Chen, X.; Spengler, K.; Terberger, K.; Boehm, M.; Appel, J.; Barske, T.; Timm, S.; Battchikova, N.; Hagemann, M.;
et al. Pyruvate:Ferredoxin Oxidoreductase and Low Abundant Ferredoxins Support Aerobic Photomixotrophic Growth in
Cya-nobacteria. eLife 2022, 11, e71339. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 16 of 18
16. Patel, M.S.; Nemeria, N.S.; Furey, W.; Jordan, F. The Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complexes: Structure-Based Function and
Reg-ulation. J. Biol. Chem. 2014, 289, 16615–16623. [CrossRef]
17. Lee, S.Y.; Lee, K.M.; Chan, H.N.; Steinbüchel, A. Comparison of Recombinant Escherichia coli Strains for Synthesis and Accumu-
lation of Poly-(3-hydroxybutyric Acid) and Morphological Changes. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 1994, 44, 1337–1347. [CrossRef]
18. Hanai, T.; Atsumi, S.; Liao, J.C. Engineered Synthetic Pathway for Isopropanol Production in Escherichia Coli. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2007, 73, 7814–7818. [CrossRef]
19. Atsumi, S.; Cann, A.F.; Connor, M.R.; Shen, C.R.; Smith, K.M.; Brynildsen, M.P .; Chou, K.J.Y.; Hanai, T.; Liao, J.C. Metabolic
Engineering of Escherichia coli for 1-Butanol Production. Metab. Eng. 2008, 10, 305–311. [CrossRef]
20. Lee, H.J.; Son, J.; Sim, S.J.; Woo, H.M. Metabolic Rewiring of Synthetic Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Bypasses for Acetone Produc-tion
in Cyanobacteria. Plant Biotechnol. J. 2020, 18, 1860–1868. [CrossRef]
21. Steinhauser, D.; Fernie, A.R.; Araújo, W.L. Unusual Cyanobacterial TCA Cycles: Not Broken Just Different. Trends Plant Sci. 2012,
17, 503–509. [CrossRef]
22. Bott, M. Offering Surprises: TCA Cycle Regulation in Corynebacterium glutamicum. Trends Microbiol. 2007, 15, 417–425. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
23. Weitzman, J.K.-P .Krebs Citric Acid Cycle: Half a Century and Still Turning; Biochemical Society Symposia No 54; University of Press:
Cambridge, UK, 1987; p. 195.
24. Knoop, H.; Gründel, M.; Zilliges, Y.; Lehmann, R.; Hoffmann, S.; Lockau, W.; Steuer, R. Flux Balance Analysis of Cyanobacterial
Metabolism: The Metabolic Network of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. PLoS Comput. Biol. 2013, 9, e1003081. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Zhang, S.; Bryant, D.A. Learning New Tricks from an Old Cycle: The TCA Cycle in Cyanobacteria, Algae and Plants. Perspect.
Phycol. 2014, 1, 73–86. [CrossRef]
26. Zhang, S.; Bryant, D.A. The Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle in Cyanobacteria. Science 2011, 334, 1551–1553. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Zhang, S.; Qian, X.; Chang, S.; Dismukes, G.C.; Bryant, D.A. Natural and Synthetic Variants of the Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle in
Cyanobacteria: Introduction of the GABA Shunt into Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002. Front. Microbiol. 2016, 7, 1–13. [CrossRef]
28. Ciebiada, M.; Kubiak, K.; Daroch, M. Modifying the Cyanobacterial Metabolism as a Key to Efficient Biopolymer Production in
Photosynthetic Microorganisms. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 7204. [CrossRef]
29. Mills, L.A.; McCormick, A.J.; Lea-Smith, D.J. Current Knowledge and Recent Advances in Understanding Metabolism of the
Model Cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Biosci. Rep. 2020, 40, 1–33. [CrossRef]
30. Broddrick, J.T.; Rubin, B.E.; Welkie, D.G.; Du, N.; Mih, N.; Diamond, S.; Lee, J.J.; Golden, S.S.; Palsson, B.O. Unique Attributes of
Cyanobacterial Metabolism Revealed by Improved Genome-Scale Metabolic Modeling and Essential Gene Analysis. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 2016, 113, E8344–E8353. [CrossRef]
31. Knoop, H.; Zilliges, Y.; Lockau, W.; Steuer, R. The Metabolic Network of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803: Systemic Properties of
Autotrophic Growth. Plant Physiol. 2010, 154, 410–422. [CrossRef]
32. Katayama, N.; Iwazumi, K.; Suzuki, H.; Osanai, T.; Ito, S. Malic Enzyme, Not Malate Dehydrogenase, Mainly Oxidizes Malate
That Originates from the Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle in Cyanobacteria. mBio 2022, 13, e0218722. [CrossRef]
33. Zhang, S.; Bryant, D.A. Biochemical Validation of the Glyoxylate Cycle in the Cyanobacterium Chlorogloeopsis fritschii Strain PCC
9212. J. Biol. Chem. 2015, 290, 14019–14030. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Flores, E.; Herrero, A. Nitrogen Assimilation and Nitrogen Control in Cyanobacteria. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 2005, 33, 164–167.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Qian, X.; Zhang, Y.; Lun, D.S.; Dismukes, G.C. Rerouting of Metabolism into Desired Cellular Products by Nutrient Stress: Fluxes
Reveal the Selected Pathways in Cyanobacterial Photosynthesis. ACS Synth. Biol. 2018, 7, 1465–1476. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Hickman, J.W.; Kotovic, K.M.; Miller, C.; Warrener, P .; Kaiser, B.; Jurista, T.; Budde, M.; Cross, F.; Roberts, J.M.; Carleton, M.
Glycogen Synthesis Is a Required Component of the Nitrogen Stress Response in Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942. Algal Res.
2013, 2, 98–106. [CrossRef]
37. Hendry, J.I.; Prasannan, C.B.; Joshi, A.; Dasgupta, S.; Wangikar, P .P . Metabolic Model ofSynechococcus sp. PCC 7002: Prediction of
Flux Distribution and Network Modification for Enhanced Biofuel Production. Bioresour. Technol. 2016, 213, 190–197. [CrossRef]
38. Akiyama, M.; Osanai, T. Regulation of Organic Acid and Hydrogen Production by NADH/NAD+ Ratio in Synechocystis sp. PCC
6803. Front. Microbiol. 2023, 14, 1332449. [CrossRef]
39. Thiel, K.; Vuorio, E.; Aro, E.M.; Kallio, P .T. The Effect of Enhanced Acetate Influx onSynechocystis sp. PCC 6803 Metabolism.
Microb. Cell Fact. 2017, 16, 21. [CrossRef]
40. Yan, R.; Zhu, D.; Zhang, Z.; Zeng, Q.; Chu, J. Carbon Metabolism and Energy Conversion ofSynechococcus sp. PCC 7942 under
Mixotrophic Conditions: Comparison with Photoautotrophic Condition. J. Appl. Phycol. 2012, 24, 657–668. [CrossRef]
41. Hasunuma, T.; Matsuda, M.; Kato, Y.; Vavricka, C.J.; Kondo, A. Temperature Enhanced Succinate Production Concurrent with
Increased Central Metabolism Turnover in the Cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Metab. Eng. 2018, 48, 109–120.
[CrossRef]
42. Osanai, T.; Shirai, T.; Iijima, H.; Nakaya, Y.; Okamoto, M.; Kondo, A.; Hirai, M.Y. Genetic Manipulation of a Metabolic Enzyme
and a Transcriptional Regulator Increasing Succinate Excretion from Unicellular Cyanobacterium. Front. Microbiol. 2015, 6, 1064.
[CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 17 of 18
43. Therien, J.B.; Zadvornyy, O.A.; Posewitz, M.C.; Bryant, D.A.; Peters, J.W. Growth ofChlamydomonas reinhardtii in Acetate-Free
Medium When Co-Cultured with Alginate-Encapsulated, Acetate-Producing Strains of Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002. Biotechnol.
Biofuels 2014, 7, 154. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Jers, C.; Kalantari, A.; Garg, A.; Mijakovic, I. Production of 3-Hydroxypropanoic Acid from Glycerol by Metabolically Engi-neered
Bacteria. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2019, 7, 124. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Lan, E.I.; Chuang, D.S.; Shen, C.R.; Lee, A.M.; Ro, S.Y.; Liao, J.C. Metabolic Engineering of Cyanobacteria for Photosynthetic 3-
Hydroxypropionic Acid Production from CO2 Using Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942. Metab. Eng. 2015, 31, 163–170. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
46. Wang, Y.; Sun, T.; Gao, X.; Shi, M.; Wu, L.; Chen, L.; Zhang, W. Biosynthesis of Platform Chemical 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid
(3-HP) Directly from CO2 in Cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Metab. Eng. 2016, 34, 60–70. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Wang, B.; Pugh, S.; Nielsen, D.R.; Zhang, W.; Meldrum, D.R. Engineering Cyanobacteria for Photosynthetic Production of
3-Hydroxybutyrate Directly from CO2. Metab. Eng. 2013, 16, 68–77. [CrossRef]
48. Ku, J.T.; Lan, E.I. A Balanced ATP Driving Force Module for Enhancing Photosynthetic Biosynthesis of 3-Hydroxybutyrate from
CO2. Metab. Eng. 2018, 46, 35–42. [CrossRef]
49. Wang, B.; Xiong, W.; Yu, J.; Maness, P .C.; Meldrum, D.R. Unlocking the Photobiological Conversion of CO2 to (R)-3-Hydroxy-
butyrate in Cyanobacteria. Green. Chem. 2018, 20, 3772–3782. [CrossRef]
50. Du, W.; Jongbloets, J.A.; Guillaume, M.; Van De Putte, B.; Battaglino, B.; Hellingwerf, K.J.; Branco Dos Santos, F. Exploiting Day-
and Night-Time Metabolism of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 for Fitness-Coupled Fumarate Production around the Clock. ACS
Synth. Biol. 2019, 8, 2263–2269. [CrossRef]
51. Hu, G.; Zhou, J.; Chen, X.; Qian, Y.; Gao, C.; Guo, L.; Xu, P .; Chen, W.; Chen, J.; Li, Y.; et al. Engineering Synergetic CO2-Fixing
Pathways for Malate Production. Metab. Eng. 2018, 47, 496–504. [CrossRef]
52. Battaglino, B.; Du, W.; Pagliano, C.; Jongbloets, J.A.; Re, A.; Saracco, G.; Branco dos Santos, F. Channeling Anabolic Side Prod-ucts
toward the Production of Nonessential Metabolites: Stable Malate Production in Synechocystis sp. PCC6803. ACS Synth. Biol.
2021, 10, 3518–3526. [CrossRef]
53. Lai, M.J.; Tsai, J.C.; Lan, E.I. CRISPRi-Enhanced Direct Photosynthetic Conversion of Carbon Dioxide to Succinic Acid by
Met-abolically Engineered Cyanobacteria. Bioresour. Technol. 2022, 366, 128131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Lan, E.I.; Wei, C.T. Metabolic Engineering of Cyanobacteria for the Photosynthetic Production of Succinate. Metab. Eng. 2016, 38,
483–493. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Durall, C.; Kukil, K.; Hawkes, J.A.; Albergati, A.; Lindblad, P .; Lindberg, P . Production of Succinate by Engineered Strains of
Synechocystis PCC 6803 Overexpressing Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxylase and a Glyoxylate Shunt. Microb. Cell Fact. 2021, 20, 39.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Mock, M.; Schmid, A.; Bühler, K. Photoautotrophic Production of Succinate via the Oxidative Branch of the Tricarboxylic Acid
Cycle Influences Glycogen Accumulation in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. Algal Res. 2019, 43, 101645. [CrossRef]
57. Sengupta, S.; Jaiswal, D.; Sengupta, A.; Shah, S.; Gadagkar, S.; Wangikar, P .P . Metabolic Engineering of a Fast-Growing Cyano-
bacterium Synechococcus elongatus PCC 11801 for Photoautotrophic Production of Succinic Acid. Biotechnol. Biofuels 2020, 13, 89.
[CrossRef]
58. Li, H.; Shen, C.R.; Huang, C.H.; Sung, L.Y.; Wu, M.Y.; Hu, Y.C. CRISPR-Cas9 for the Genome Engineering of Cyanobacteria and
Succinate Production. Metab. Eng. 2016, 38, 293–302. [CrossRef]
59. Mock, M.; Schmid, A.; Bühler, K. Directed Reaction Engineering Boosts Succinate Formation of Synechocystis sp. PCC
6803_∆sll1625. Biotechnol. J. 2020, 15, e2000127. [CrossRef]
60. Liu, X.; Sheng, J. Curtiss III Roy Fatty Acid Production in Genetically Modified Cyanobacteria. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2011,
108, 6899–6904. [CrossRef]
61. Ruffing, A.M.; Jones, H.D.T. Physiological Effects of Free Fatty Acid Production in Genetically EngineeredSynechococcus elon-gatus
PCC 7942. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2012, 109, 2190–2199. [CrossRef]
62. Ruffing, A.M. Borrowing Genes from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii for Free Fatty Acid Production in Engineered Cyanobacteria. J.
Appl. Phycol. 2013, 25, 1495–1507. [CrossRef]
63. Ruffing, A.M. Improved Free Fatty Acid Production in Cyanobacteria withSynechococcus sp. PCC 7002 as Host. Front. Bioeng.
Biotechnol. 2014, 2, 17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Work, V .H.; Melnicki, M.R.; Hill, E.A.; Davies, F.K.; Kucek, L.A.; Beliaev, A.S.; Posewitz, M.C. Lauric Acid Production in a
Glycogen-Less Strain of Synechococcus sp. PCC 7002. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2015, 3, 48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Kato, A.; Use, K.; Takatani, N.; Ikeda, K.; Matsuura, M.; Kojima, K.; Aichi, M.; Maeda, S.I.; Omata, T. Modulation of the Balance of
Fatty Acid Production and Secretion Is Crucial for Enhancement of Growth and Productivity of the Engineered Mutant of the
Cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus. Biotechnol. Biofuels 2016, 9, 91. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Afrin, S.; Khan, M.R.I.; Zhang, W.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, W.; He, L.; Ma, G. Membrane-Located Expression of Thioesterase from
Acinetobacter baylyi Enhances Free Fatty Acid Production with Decreased Toxicity inSynechocystis sp. PCC6803. Front. Microbiol.
2018, 9, 2842. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Li, Y.; Wang, X.; Ge, X.; Tian, P . High Production of 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid in Klebsiella Pneumoniae by Systematic Optimi-
zation of Glycerol Metabolism. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 26932. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 11769 18 of 18
68. Yu, J.; Plackett, D.; Chen, L.X.L. Kinetics and Mechanism of the Monomeric Products from Abiotic Hydrolysis of Poly[(R)-3-
Hydroxybutyrate] under Acidic and Alkaline Conditions. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2005, 89, 289–299. [CrossRef]
69. Kovalcik, A.; Obruca, S.; Kalina, M.; Machovsky, M.; Enev, V .; Jakesova, M.; Sobkova, M.; Marova, I. Enzymatic Hydrolysis of
Poly(3-Hydroxybutyrate-Co-3-Hydroxyvalerate) Scaffolds. Materials 2020, 13, 2992. [CrossRef]
70. Guevara-Martínez, M.; Gällnö, K.S.; Sjöberg, G.; Jarmander, J.; Perez-Zabaleta, M.; Quillaguamán, J.; Larsson, G. Regulating the
Production of (R)-3-Hydroxybutyrate in Escherichia coli by N or P Limitation. Front. Microbiol. 2015, 6, 844. [CrossRef]
71. Hronska, H.; Michalikova, S.; Rosenberg, M. Microbial Production of Specialty C4 Dicarboxylic Acids from Maleic Anhydrate. J.
Food Nutr. Res. 2017, 56, 219–231.
72. Huang, C.H.; Shen, C.R.; Li, H.; Sung, L.Y.; Wu, M.Y.; Hu, Y.C. CRISPR Interference (CRISPRi) for Gene Regulation and Suc-cinate
Production in Cyanobacterium S. elongatus PCC 7942. Microb. Cell Fact. 2016, 15, 196. [CrossRef]
73. Durall, C.; Rukminasari, N.; Lindblad, P . Enhanced Growth at Low Light Intensity in the CyanobacteriumSynechocystis PCC 6803
by Overexpressing Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxylase. Algal Res. 2016, 16, 275–281. [CrossRef]
74. Jaiswal, D.; Sengupta, A.; Sohoni, S.; Sengupta, S.; Phadnavis, A.G.; Pakrasi, H.B.; Wangikar, P .P . Genome Features and Bio-
chemical Characteristics of a Robust, Fast Growing and Naturally Transformable Cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus PCC
11801 Isolated from India. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 16632. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75. Chisti, Y. Biodiesel from Microalgae. Biotechnol. Adv. 2007, 25, 294–306. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Eungrasamee, K.; Incharoensakdi, A.; Lindblad, P .; Jantaro, S. Overexpression oflipA or glpD_RuBisCO in the Synechocystis sp.
Pcc 6803 Mutant Lacking the Aas Gene Enhances Free Fatty-Acid Secretion and Intracellular Lipid Accumulation. Int. J. Mol. Sci.
2021, 22, 1468. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77. Ahn, J.H.; Jang, Y.S.; Lee, S.Y. Production of Succinic Acid by Metabolically Engineered Microorganisms.Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.
2016, 42, 54–66. [CrossRef]
78. Fan, Q.; Waldburger, S.; Neubauer, P .; Riedel, S.L.; Gimpel, M. Implementation of a High Cell Density Fed-Batch for Heterolo-gous
Production of Active [NiFe]-Hydrogenase in Escherichia coli Bioreactor Cultivations. Microb. Cell Fact. 2022, 21, 193. [CrossRef]
79. Alagesan, S.; Gaudana, S.B.; Krishnakumar, S.; Wangikar, P .P . Model Based Optimization of High Cell Density Cultivation of
Nitrogen-Fixing Cyanobacteria. Bioresour. Technol. 2013, 148, 228–233. [CrossRef]
80. Asplund-Samuelsson, J.; Janasch, M.; Hudson, E.P . Thermodynamic Analysis of Computed Pathways Integrated into the
Met-abolic Networks of E. Coli and Synechocystis Reveals Contrasting Expansion Potential. Metab. Eng. 2018, 45, 223–236.
[CrossRef]
81. Yunus, I.S.; Jones, P .R. Photosynthesis-Dependent Biosynthesis of Medium Chain-Length Fatty Acids and Alcohols.Metab. Eng.
2018, 49, 59–68. [CrossRef]
82. Miao, R.; Xie, H.; Liu, X.; Lindberg, P .; Lindblad, P . Current Processes and Future Challenges of Photoautotrophic Production of
Acetyl-CoA-Derived Solar Fuels and Chemicals in Cyanobacteria. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2020, 59, 69–76. [CrossRef]
83. Hirokawa, Y.; Suzuki, I.; Hanai, T. Optimization of Isopropanol Production by Engineered Cyanobacteria with a Synthetic
Met-abolic Pathway. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 2015, 119, 585–590. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84. Ku, J.T.; Chen, A.Y.; Lan, E.I. Metabolic Engineering Design Strategies for Increasing Acetyl-CoA Flux.Metabolites 2020, 10, 166.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Hirokawa, Y.; Kubo, T.; Soma, Y.; Saruta, F.; Hanai, T. Enhancement of Acetyl-CoA Flux for Photosynthetic Chemical Produc-
tion by Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex Overexpression in Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942. Metab. Eng. 2020, 57, 23–30.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Nielsen, J. Synthetic Biology for Engineering Acetyl Coenzyme A Metabolism in Yeast. mBio 2014, 5, e02153-14. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
87. Luan, G.; Lu, X. Tailoring Cyanobacterial Cell Factory for Improved Industrial Properties. Biotechnol. Adv. 2018, 36, 430–442.
[CrossRef]
88. Chwa, J.; Kim, W.J.; Sim, S.J.; Um, Y.; Woo, H.M. Engineering of a Modular and Synthetic Phosphoketolase Pathway for Photo-
synthetic Production of Acetone from CO 2 in Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942 under Light and Aerobic Condition. Plant
Biotechnol. J. 2016, 14, 1768–1776. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.