Citation: Pers-Kamczyc, E.; Kamczyc,
J. Study of the Pollen Grain
Metabolome under Deposition of
Nitrogen and Phosphorus in Taxus
baccata L. and Juniperus communis
L. Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms232214105
Academic Editor: Xiao-Fei Wang
Received: 30 September 2022
Accepted: 11 November 2022
Published: 15 November 2022
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
 International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences
Article
Study of the Pollen Grain Metabolome under Deposition of
Nitrogen and Phosphorus in Taxus baccataL. and
Juniperus communisL.
Emilia Pers-Kamczyc 1, *
 and Jacek Kamczyc 2
1 Department of Genetics and Environmental Interactions, Institute of Dendrology, Polish Academy of Sciences,
5 Parkowa Str., 62-035 Kórnik, Poland
2 Department of Game Management and Forest Protection, Faculty of Forestry and Wood Technology,
Poznan University of Life Sciences, 71 Wojska Polskiego Str., 60-625 Pozna ´ n, Poland
* Correspondence: epk@man.poznan.pl
Abstract: Nitrogen plays an important role in both quantitative and qualitative aspects of plant
reproduction, including pollen grain compounds and seed production. Recent studies have pointed
out that pollen grains produced by male plants ofT. baccataand J. communissubjected to a long period
of fertilizer supplementation have lower in vitro germination ability and higher nitrogen content. To
gain molecular insights into these observations, we conducted GC–MS analysis of both species to
characterize the metabolomes of dry, mature pollen grains, which allowed for the identiﬁcation and
quantiﬁcation of more than 200 metabolites. The results demonstrated that fertilizer supplementation
impacts the relative content of 14 metabolites in J. communis(9 downregulated and 5 upregulated)
and 21 in T. baccata(6 downregulated and 15 upregulated). Although plants showed little similarity
in patterns, in metabolite proﬁles, both up and down fold-changes were observed. This is the ﬁrst
report on the gymnosperm pollen grain metabolomic proﬁle and changes induced by long-term
nitrogen and phosphorus supplementation. Pollen grains produced by fertilizer-supplemented male
individuals had signiﬁcantly lower relative content of linolenic acid, 5,6-dihydrouracil, maltotriose,
galactonic acid, D-xylulose, and glycerol-α-phosphate but higher content of sorbitol, glucosamine,
and 1,5-anhydro-D-glucitol as well as n-acetyl-d-hexosamine, dimethyl phthalate, glycine, galactose-6-
phosphate, D-fructose-6-phosphate, pyroglutamic acid, and 3-(3-hydroxyphenyl)-3-hydroxypropionic
acid. Thus, in pollen grain samples earlier shown to have different germination abilities, the presence
of different metabolites indicates a signiﬁcant environmental impact on the quality of gymnosperm
pollen grains.
Keywords: quality of pollen grain; trees; pollen metabolome; nitrogen deposition; pollen germina-
tion; gymnosperm
1. Introduction
Nitrogen (N) availability in the forest is considered the primary growth-limiting factor
in most of the European continental and northern forests [1,2], although other nutrients,
such as phosphorus (P) [3] and potassium (K) [4], are also very important for plant growth
and development. Although fertilizer supplementation is not widely used in forestry,
interest has been increasing due to its application in timber production [ 5]. Moreover,
recent studies have pointed to the increasing deposition of anthropogenic N and P , and
N deposition is projected to signiﬁcantly increase in the next 30 years compared with the
1900s [6], and nitrogen deposition in soil is also found to be currently increasing [ 7]. N
deposition has been indicated as a key driver for increased forest growth, in addition to
widespread tree mortality and decreased plant biodiversity [8]. The reason for the higher
nutrient deposition is related to the excessive and unwarranted use of fertilizers, and many
areas worldwide have been affected by excessive nitrogen levels [9].
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms232214105 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 2 of 16
In our previous studies, we showed that an increase in nutrient availability improves
the reproductive potential of female Taxus baccataL. and Juniperus communisL. plants by
increasing the number of produced seeds and seed mass [10]. Moreover, increased male
reproductive potential was also observed, and thus the productivity of male ﬂowers and
produced pollen grains when plants were grown in soil conditions of higher nutrient
availability (especially nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and magnesium) was at least
two times higher compared with their non-fertilized counterparts [11,12]. However, there
were also negative consequences; namely, plants receiving additional fertilizer for a longer
time were characterized by signiﬁcantly lower quality of produced pollen grains and seeds.
The in vitro germination rates of pollen grains are signiﬁcantly lower in fertilized plants
than non-fertilized plants. Similarly, long-term fertilization improves the productivity
of seeds by female T. baccataplants, but they are characterized by lower germination
ability [10,13]. Nutritional availability was shown to affect the chemical composition of
both pollen grains and seeds and the metabolome proﬁles of fertilized seeds compared
with their non-fertilized counterparts [10–13].
Untargeted metabolomics is a powerful tool for detecting numerous metabolites
within a tissue and allows comparison of the metabolite proﬁles between analyzed samples.
Thus, environmental as well as genetic effects and their interactions on pollen grains’
development can also be investigated [14,15]. Metabolomics helps to identify and quantify
the complete set of metabolites present in a cell at a speciﬁc time and has been used to
determine the potential allergen content in pollen grains [16]. Metabolite proﬁling with
untargeted gas (or liquid) chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry can be used
to detect and quantify numerous metabolites (e.g., sugars, amino acids, organic acids,
and secondary metabolites). It allows for comprehensive qualitative and quantitative
analysis, which further helps in understanding plant physiology and development or stress
reactions [17].
Pollen grains are the sexual reproductive units of plants; therefore, their quantity plays
an important role in seed production and population stability. The effect of pollen quality
and quantity can have a wide-ranging impact on the reproduction of wind-pollinated trees,
as pollen grains can migrate for very long distances [18–20]. Therefore, changes in pollen
grain productivity and quality can have an ecological and evolutionary impact on the
future of plant populations [21–23]. Pollen quality can be described in terms of volume or
shape, pollen tube growth, enzymatic activity, and the carbon-to-nitrogen ratio [12,24–26].
Pollen grains have also recently been analyzed using metabolomic approaches to describe
the developmental changes occurring within [14,27,28].
In the present study, we continue our research on the long-term effects related to
nutrient availability on the male reproductive features of T. baccataand J. communisplants.
Both species can be described as evergreen, wind-pollinated, dioecious gymnosperm plants
but have different life histories [29,30]. We have chosen evergreen trees as a model species
as evergreen species do not shed needles each year and therefore elements are accumulated
in needles for a longer period; furthermore, a visible environmental impact on plant
growth may be observed. Therefore, because we observed a negative impact of higher
nutritional availability of nitrogen, phosphorus, and other elements on the germination
ability of coniferous, wind-pollinated trees, we decided to analyze the metabolome proﬁles
of dry, mature pollen grains that differed in theirin vitro germination ability. We assumed
that the higher content of nitrogen in the pollen grains of long-term-fertilized T. baccata
and J. communisplants would result in differences compared with their non-fertilized
counterparts and that the two species would have a similar pattern of differentiating
metabolites when comparing corresponding treatments.
2. Results
2.1. Pollen Grain Metabolites
GC–MS analysis indicated the presence of 224 metabolites in the pollen grains of
both species (Table S1). Metabolites from pollen grains were engaged in 56 metabolomic
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 3 of 16
pathways (Table S2). The numerous identiﬁed metabolites are predicted to be involved
in galactose metabolism (sucrose, rafﬁnose, melibiose, α-lactose, glucose 1-phosphate,
D-fructose, galactitol, glycerol, sorbitol, and myo-inositol), aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthe-
sis (L-aspartate, L-phenylalanine, glycine, L-aspartic acid, L-serine, L-valine, L-alanine,
L-lysine, L-isoleucine, L-threonine, L-tryptophan, L-tyrosine, L-proline, and L-glutamic
acid), starch and sucrose metabolism (D-fructose, sucrose, glucose, 1-phosphate, glucose
6-phosphate, trehalose, D-maltose, and fructose 6-phosphate), alanine, aspartate, and
glutamate metabolism (L-aspartic acid, L-asparagine, L-alanine, L-glutamic acid, and γ-
aminobutyric acid (GABA), citric acid, succinic acid, and oxoglutaric acid), glyoxylate
and dicarboxylate metabolism (glycolic acid, citric acid, L-serine, glycine, L-glutamic
acid, and isocitric acid), amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism (N-acetyl-D-
glucosamine, N-acetylmannosamine, glucose 1-phosphate, fructose 6-phosphate, glucose
6-phosphate, D-fructose, and glucosamine), phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan
biosynthesis (L-phenylalanine, L-tyrosine, and 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvic acid), pentose
and glucuronate interconversions (D-xylulose, L-arabinose, D-xylitol, glucose 1-phosphate,
D-xylose, and D-glucuronic acid), the pentose phosphate pathway (glucose 6-phosphate, D-
ribose 5-phosphate, gluconic acid, and glyceric acid), arginine biosynthesis (L-glutamic acid,
L-aspartic acid, oxyglutaric acid, and urea), and butanoate metabolism (GABA, L-glutamic
acid, oxyglutaric acid, and succinic acid) (Figures 1 and 2).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 16 
 
 
2. Results 
2.1. Pollen Grain Metabolites 
GC–MS analysis indicated the presence of 224 metabolites in the pollen grains of both 
species (Table S1). Metabolites from pollen grains were engaged in 56 metabolomic path-
ways (Table S2). The numerous identified metabolites are predicted to be involved in ga-
lactose metabolism (sucrose, raffinose, melibiose, α-lactose, glucose 1-phosphate, D-fruc-
tose, galactitol, glycerol, sorbitol, and myo-inositol), aminoacyl-tRNA biosynthesis (L-as-
partate, L-phenylalanine, glycine, L-aspartic acid, L-serine, L-valine, L-alanine, L-lysine, 
L-isoleucine, L-threonine, L-tryptophan, L-ty rosine, L-proline, and L-glutamic acid), 
starch and sucrose metabolism (D-fructose, su crose, glucose, 1-phosphate, glucose 6-
phosphate, trehalose, D-maltose, and fructose 6-phosphate), alanine, aspartate, and glu-
tamate metabolism (L-aspartic acid, L-asparagine, L-alanine, L-glutamic acid, and γ-ami-
nobutyric acid (GABA), citric acid, succinic acid, and oxoglutaric acid), glyoxylate and 
dicarboxylate metabolism (glycolic acid, citric acid, L-serine, glycine, L-glutamic acid, and 
isocitric acid), amino sugar and nucleotide sugar metabolism (N-acetyl-D-glucosamine, 
N-acetylmannosamine, glucose 1-phosphate, fructose 6-phosphate, glucose 6-phosphate, 
D-fructose, and glucosamine), phenylalanine, tyrosine, and tryptophan biosynthesis (L-
phenylalanine, L-tyrosine, and 4-hydroxyphe nylpyruvic acid), pentose and glucuronate 
interconversions (D-xylulose, L-arabinose, D-xylitol, glucose 1-phosphate, D-xylose, and 
D-glucuronic acid), the pentose phosphate pathway (glucose 6-phosphate, D-ribose 5-
phosphate, gluconic acid, and glyceric acid),  arginine biosynthesis (L-glutamic acid, L-
aspartic acid, oxyglutaric acid, and urea), and butanoate metabolism (GABA, L-glutamic 
acid, oxyglutaric acid, and succinic acid) (Figures 1 and 2). 
 
Figure 1. Results of over-representation analysis of the metabolite compounds present in Juniperus 
communis L. and Taxus baccata L. pollen grains. The red color indicates a significant level ( p < 0.01) 
while the yellow color indicates a significant level at p = 0.10. The circles represent the number of 
metabolites involved or enriched in the pathway. The enrichment ratio refers to the ratio of the 
number of metabolites detected by GC–MS analysis to the total number of metabolites annotated by 
the pathway. The enrichment overview presents the top 25 metabolic pathways. 
Figure 1. Results of over-representation analysis of the metabolite compounds present in
Juniperus communisL. and Taxus baccataL. pollen grains. The red color indicates a signiﬁcant level
(p < 0.01) while the yellow color indicates a signiﬁcant level at p = 0.10. The circles represent the
number of metabolites involved or enriched in the pathway. The enrichment ratio refers to the ratio of
the number of metabolites detected by GC–MS analysis to the total number of metabolites annotated
by the pathway. The enrichment overview presents the top 25 metabolic pathways.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 4 of 16
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 16 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Results of the metabolome analysis of ( a,b) Juniperus communis L. and ( c,d) Taxus baccata 
L. pollen grains. (a,c) Principal component analysis scores—p lot between the selected principal com-
ponents (PC). (b,d) Partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA)—plot between the selected 
principal components (PC) showing separation between pollen grains collected from plants grown 
in fertilized (green) and non-fertilized (red) cond itions. The percentages of explained variance are 
shown in brackets. 
2.2. Effect of Long-Term Fertilization on Metabolites of Pollen Grains 
In all samples of both analyzed species, all 224 metabolites were detected using a 
nontargeted GC–MS metabolomic strategy. In both analyzed species, partial least squares 
discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), but not unsupervised PCA, showed separations between 
treatment groups (Figure 2). Long-term treatment of paternal plants with nitrogen, phos-
phorus, and other minerals influenced the metabolites of J. communis and T. baccata pollen 
grains, as demonstrated by the clear separation between pollen grains collected from fer-
tilized and non-fertilized plants (Figure 2b,d). 
In J. communis, unpaired fold change (FC) analysis with an FC threshold equal to 2.0 
pointed to the presence of metabolites with at least two-fold differences between fertilized 
and non-fertilized pollen grains. Pollen grains collected from fertilized J. communis plants 
were characterized by the presence of 106 downregulated and 47 upregulated metabolites 
compared with their non-fertilized counterparts (Table S3). However, t-test analysis with 
equal group variance of raw data identified 14 metabolite s that were differentially 
Figure 2. Results of the metabolome analysis of (a,b) Juniperus communisL. and (c,d) Taxus baccata
L. pollen grains. ( a,c) Principal component analysis scores—plot between the selected principal
components (PC). ( b,d) Partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA)—plot between the
selected principal components (PC) showing separation between pollen grains collected from plants
grown in fertilized (green) and non-fertilized (red) conditions. The percentages of explained variance
are shown in brackets.
2.2. Effect of Long-Term Fertilization on Metabolites of Pollen Grains
In all samples of both analyzed species, all 224 metabolites were detected using a
nontargeted GC–MS metabolomic strategy. In both analyzed species, partial least squares
discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), but not unsupervised PCA, showed separations between
treatment groups (Figure 2). Long-term treatment of paternal plants with nitrogen, phos-
phorus, and other minerals inﬂuenced the metabolites of J. communisand T. baccatapollen
grains, as demonstrated by the clear separation between pollen grains collected from
fertilized and non-fertilized plants (Figure 2b,d).
In J. communis, unpaired fold change (FC) analysis with an FC threshold equal to 2.0
pointed to the presence of metabolites with at least two-fold differences between fertilized
and non-fertilized pollen grains. Pollen grains collected from fertilized J. communisplants
were characterized by the presence of 106 downregulated and 47 upregulated metabolites
compared with their non-fertilized counterparts (Table S3). However,t-test analysis with
equal group variance of raw data identiﬁed 14 metabolites that were differentially expressed
between experimental groups (p < 0.05), but none could be classiﬁed as differential when
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 5 of 16
data were analyzed based on the false discovery rate (FDR). Combining the results of fold
change analysis and t-tests in a volcano plot allowed the selection of nine downregulated
and ﬁve upregulated metabolites in fertilized vs. non-fertilized pollen grains when raw
data were used (Tables 1 and S1), and none when based on FDR (p < 0.05).
Table 1. Differential metabolites of Juniperus communisL. and Taxus baccataL. pollen grains produced
by comparison between plants grown in fertilized (F) and non-fertilized (NF) conditions.
Compound Log2 (FC F/NF) 1 p-Value VIP Value 2
Juniperus communisL.
Linolenic acid −37.13 0.015 2.157
γ-Linolenic acid −36.54 0.036 1.753
5,6-Dihydrouracil −27.03 0.033 1.594
Maltotriose −26.86 0.008 2.181
Threonine −26.71 0.044 1.429
Galactonic acid −24.94 0.011 2.008
D-Xylulose −23.84 0.034 1.552
3-Hydroxyisovaleric acid −5.10 0.047 1.184
(−)-Shikimic acid −1.54 0.042 1.414
Methanolphosphate 2.19 0.020 0.771
5-Methylcytosine 3.39 0.019 0.818
1,5-anhydro-D-Glucitol 30.12 0.018 2.480
D-(−)-Sorbitol 31.54 0.006 2.607
D-(+)-Glucosamine 34.64 0.002 2.826
Taxus baccataL.
Glycerol-α-phosphate −21.81 1.93 × 10−6 3.927
Allose 1 −2.66 0.006 1.367
Cysteamine −2.39 0.002 1.284
Quinic acid −2.06 0.004 1.036
Trisaccharide −2.00 0.008 0.991
L-Ascorbic acid −1.93 0.009 1.087
Isoleucine 1.19 0.039 0.706
4-Hydroxybenzoic acid 1.25 0.018 0.799
Nicotinic acid 2.04 0.022 1.194
Methylmalonic acid 2.25 0.029 0.874
5-Methylcytosine 2.26 0.036 0.875
N-Methyl-DL-alanine 2.50 0.013 1.250
3-Hydroxyisovaleric acid 2.50 0.016 1.106
L(+)-Cystathionine 3.90 0.027 1.157
n-Acetyl-d-hexosamine 13.71 0.026 1.995
Dimethyl phthalate 13.85 0.026 2.253
Glycine 14.65 0.047 1.855
Galactose-6-phosphate 15.57 0.016 2.370
D-Fructose 6-phosphate 16.09 0.015 2.422
Pyroglutamic acid 16.70 0.014 2.352
3-(3-Hydroxyphenyl)-
3-hydroxypropionic acid 20.38 0.037 2.246
1 Fold changes in different metabolites between F and NF pollen grains are reported as Log2 (FC F/NF).2 VIP
value—weighted sum of squares of the PLS weight, which indicates the importance of the variable to the
whole model.
J. communisfertilizer-supplemented plants produced pollen grains with lower concen-
trations of fatty acids (linolenic acid and γ-linolenic acid), organic acids (galactonic acid,
3-hydroxyisovaleric acid, and shikimic acid), oligosaccharide (maltotriose), monosaccha-
ride (D-xylulose and D-(−)-sorbitol), amino acid (threonine), and 5,6-dihydrouracil but
higher concentrations of monosaccharide (D-(+)-glucosamine, 1,5-anhydro-D-glucitol), and
pyrimidine (5-methylcytosine). Linolenic acid and D-(+)-glucosamine were indicated as
the most important compounds identiﬁed by PLS-DA (Figure 3a).
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 6 of 16
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 16 
 
 
acid, 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid, and shikimic acid), oligosaccharide (maltotriose), mono-
saccharide (D-xylulose and D-(−)-sorbitol), amino acid (threonine), and 5,6-dihydrouracil 
but higher concentrations of monosacchari de (D-(+)-glucosamine, 1,5-anhydro-D-gluci-
tol), and pyrimidine (5-methylcytosine). Linolenic acid and D-(+)-glucosamine were indi-
cated as the most important compounds identified by PLS-DA (Figure 3a). 
 
Figure 3. Results of the metabolome analysis of ( a) Juniperus communis L. and ( b) Taxus baccata L. 
pollen grains. VIP scores show the top 15 important metabolites that contribute the most to the PLS-
DA plots of pollen grains. Colors in the variable importance in the projection plot represent relative 
intensities, where red and blue symbolize higher and lower values, respectively. 
In T. baccata, on the basis of unpaired fold change analysis with an FC threshold equal 
to 2.0, we also observed the presence of metabolites with at least two-fold differences be-
tween pollen grains of fertilized and non-fertilized plants. Pollen grains collected from T. 
baccata fertilized plants were characterized by the presence of 50 downregulated and 68 
upregulated metabolites compared with their non-fertilized counterparts (Table S4). 
However, two-sample t-test analysis with equal group variance of raw data pointed to 21 
metabolites that were differentially expressed between experimental groups (p < 0.05), and 
one of them (glycerol-α-phosphate) could be classified as differential when the data were 
analyzed based on FDR. Combining the results from fold change analysis and t-tests in a 
volcano plot allowed the selection of 6 do wnregulated and 15 upregulated metabolites 
when raw data were used (Table 1, Table S1), and none when based on FDR (p < 0.05). 
Taxus baccata fertilized plants produc ed pollen grains with lower concentrations of 
glycerol-α-phosphate, cysteamine, and sugar (allose), organic acids (quinic acid and L-
ascorbic acid), and trisaccharide but higher concentrations of amino acids (isoleucine, gly-
cine and 5-methyl-DL-alanine, and L(+)-cysta thionine), organic acids (4-hydroxybenzoic 
acid, nicotinic acid, methylmalonic acid, 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid, and pyroglutamic 
acid), and derivatives such as n-acetyl-d-h exosamine, dimethyl phthalate, galactose-6-
phosphate, and D-fructose-6-phosphate. Glycerol-α-phosphate was indicated as the most 
important compound identified by PLS-DA (Figure 3b). 
Although hierarchical clustering in the form of a dendrogram as well as heat map 
showed that both the genotype and the envi ronment impacted the metabolites in pollen 
grains, there was no unique influence of genotype and/or environment in J. communis (Fig-
ures 4a and 5a). Hierarchical clustering in the form of a dendrogram, as well as a heat 
map, showed that the environment had a significant impact on the profiles of metabolites 
in pollen grains of T. baccata (Figures 4b and 5b). 
Figure 3. Results of the metabolome analysis of ( a) Juniperus communisL. and (b) Taxus baccataL.
pollen grains. VIP scores show the top 15 important metabolites that contribute the most to the
PLS-DA plots of pollen grains. Colors in the variable importance in the projection plot represent
relative intensities, where red and blue symbolize higher and lower values, respectively.
In T. baccata, on the basis of unpaired fold change analysis with an FC threshold equal
to 2.0, we also observed the presence of metabolites with at least two-fold differences
between pollen grains of fertilized and non-fertilized plants. Pollen grains collected from
T. baccatafertilized plants were characterized by the presence of 50 downregulated and
68 upregulated metabolites compared with their non-fertilized counterparts (Table S4).
However, two-sample t-test analysis with equal group variance of raw data pointed to
21 metabolites that were differentially expressed between experimental groups (p < 0.05),
and one of them (glycerol-α-phosphate) could be classiﬁed as differential when the data
were analyzed based on FDR. Combining the results from fold change analysis and t-tests
in a volcano plot allowed the selection of 6 downregulated and 15 upregulated metabolites
when raw data were used (Tables 1 and S1), and none when based on FDR (p < 0.05).
Taxus baccata fertilized plants produced pollen grains with lower concentrations
of glycerol-α-phosphate, cysteamine, and sugar (allose), organic acids (quinic acid and
L-ascorbic acid), and trisaccharide but higher concentrations of amino acids (isoleucine,
glycine and 5-methyl-DL-alanine, and L(+)-cystathionine), organic acids (4-hydroxybenzoic
acid, nicotinic acid, methylmalonic acid, 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid, and pyroglutamic acid),
and derivatives such as n-acetyl-d-hexosamine, dimethyl phthalate, galactose-6-phosphate,
and D-fructose-6-phosphate. Glycerol-α-phosphate was indicated as the most important
compound identiﬁed by PLS-DA (Figure 3b).
Although hierarchical clustering in the form of a dendrogram as well as heat map
showed that both the genotype and the environment impacted the metabolites in pollen
grains, there was no unique inﬂuence of genotype and/or environment in J. communis
(Figures 4a and 5a). Hierarchical clustering in the form of a dendrogram, as well as a heat
map, showed that the environment had a signiﬁcant impact on the proﬁles of metabolites
in pollen grains of T. baccata(Figures 4b and 5b).
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 7 of 16
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 16 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Dendrogram of the metabolome of (a) Juniperus communis L. and (b) Taxus baccata L. pollen 
grains collected from fertilized and non-fertilized male plants, generated with measured Euclidean 
distances and ward.D algorithm. Numbers in green  indicate number of genotypes grown in ferti-
lized conditions, whereas numbers in red indicate number of genotypes grown in non-fertilized 
conditions. 
 
Figure 5. Results of ( a) Juniperus communis L. and ( b) Taxus baccata L. pollen grain metabolomes 
collected from analysis of long-term-fertilized (green) and non-fertilized (red) male plants with hi-
erarchical clustering in the form of heat map prepared with measured Euclidean distance and 
ward.D clustering algorithm. The colored boxes in dicate the relative concentration of the corre-
sponding metabolite in each analyzed sample, where red and blue symbolize higher and lower val-
ues, respectively. 
3. Discussion 
It has been shown that nutrient soil availability related to fertilizer supplementation 
impacts the in vitro germination abilities of pollen grains and, thus, pollen grains pro-
duced by long-term fertilizer-supplemented male plants of both species. In this study, we 
compared the metabolomic profiles of the mature pollen grains of two gymnosperm spe-
cies, T. baccata and J. communis, collected from vegetatively propagated clone plants grown 
in long-term pot experiments within differentiated fertilizer conditions. We identified and 
Figure 4. Dendrogram of the metabolome of (a) Juniperus communisL. and (b) Taxus baccataL. pollen
grains collected from fertilized and non-fertilized male plants, generated with measured Euclidean
distances and ward.D algorithm. Numbers in green indicate number of genotypes grown in fertilized
conditions, whereas numbers in red indicate number of genotypes grown in non-fertilized conditions.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 16 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Dendrogram of the metabolome of (a) Juniperus communis L. and (b) Taxus baccata L. pollen 
grains collected from fertilized and non-fertilized male plants, generated with measured Euclidean 
distances and ward.D algorithm. Numbers in green  indicate number of genotypes grown in ferti-
lized conditions, whereas numbers in red indicate number of genotypes grown in non-fertilized 
conditions. 
 
Figure 5. Results of ( a) Juniperus communis L. and ( b) Taxus baccata L. pollen grain metabolomes 
collected from analysis of long-term-fertilized (green) and non-fertilized (red) male plants with hi-
erarchical clustering in the form of heat map prepared with measured Euclidean distance and 
ward.D clustering algorithm. The colored boxes in dicate the relative concentration of the corre-
sponding metabolite in each analyzed sample, where red and blue symbolize higher and lower val-
ues, respectively. 
3. Discussion 
It has been shown that nutrient soil availability related to fertilizer supplementation 
impacts the in vitro germination abilities of pollen grains and, thus, pollen grains pro-
duced by long-term fertilizer-supplemented male plants of both species. In this study, we 
compared the metabolomic profiles of the mature pollen grains of two gymnosperm spe-
cies, T. baccata and J. communis, collected from vegetatively propagated clone plants grown 
in long-term pot experiments within differentiated fertilizer conditions. We identified and 
Figure 5. Results of ( a) Juniperus communisL. and ( b) Taxus baccataL. pollen grain metabolomes
collected from analysis of long-term-fertilized (green) and non-fertilized (red) male plants with
hierarchical clustering in the form of heat map prepared with measured Euclidean distance and
ward.D clustering algorithm. The colored boxes indicate the relative concentration of the corre-
sponding metabolite in each analyzed sample, where red and blue symbolize higher and lower
values, respectively.
3. Discussion
It has been shown that nutrient soil availability related to fertilizer supplementation
impacts the in vitro germination abilities of pollen grains and, thus, pollen grains produced
by long-term fertilizer-supplemented male plants of both species. In this study, we com-
pared the metabolomic proﬁles of the mature pollen grains of two gymnosperm species,
T. baccataand J. communis, collected from vegetatively propagated clone plants grown
in long-term pot experiments within differentiated fertilizer conditions. We identiﬁed
and quantiﬁed 224 metabolites in pollen grains and according to metabolome proﬁles,
and some observed changes were related to the different fertilizer conditions. Moreover,
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 8 of 16
differentiated metabolites can be a ﬁngerprint of higher nitrogen content and a lower C:N
ratio in fertilized pollen grains [11,12].
Pollen grains are male microgametophytes and play a crucial role in the sexual re-
production of plants. Pollen grain development is a complex process that depends on
many factors, including environmental factors. In both studied species, the development
of male reproductive structures starts in the late summer of the year before pollination.
In the case of T. baccata, pollination starts in February/March, whereas J. communispollen
grains are released in April/May. During the period of pollen grain development, resources
required for germination and pollen tube growth—such as sugars, lipids, and proteins—are
accumulated [31]. Anemophilous pollen grains tend to accumulate starch as their main
energy reserve, whereas entomophilous pollen grains tend to accumulate relatively more
storage oils (after [32]). J. communisand T. baccatapollen grains are distributed by wind and,
therefore, starch is considered as their the main energy reserve. In this study, pollen grains
were collected from vegetatively propagated clone plants grown under long-term fertilizer
supplementation in the same experimental conditions, such as regarding light, water, etc.
Moreover, pollen grains produced by individuals that received fertilizer supplementation
each year were previously characterized as having a signiﬁcantly lower germination rate
in vitro and higher nitrogen content. Although pollen grains from fertilized plants had
a 0.2% increased ratio of nitrogen for T. baccataand a 0.41% increase for J. communisand
similar carbon content when compared with the pollen grains of non-fertilized plants, the
germination ability was decreased by 15% [10] for T. baccataand by 33% for J. communis[11].
However, this could be related to the low C:N ratio and the decrease in the enzymatic
activity of enzymes involved in carbohydrate metabolism [33], as well as the strategy of
resource allocation in pollen as the primary source of energy [34].
Information about the metabolomes of pollen grains is mostly related to the devel-
opmental potential of pollen grains [ 14,27]. Our study is an attempt to ﬁll the gap in
knowledge regarding the impact of environmental factors on the quality of pollen grains in
relation to metabolite proﬁles and to understand the reasons for the lower germination abil-
ity of pollen grains produced by male plants supplemented with fertilizer. Therefore, our
obtained results can be used as a ﬁngerprint for pollen grains that develop in plants grown
in stress conditions of higher nitrogen and phosphorus deposition in soil. Although we did
not observe a similar pattern of changes in the pollen metabolome proﬁles of J. communis
and T. baccatadue to nutritional availability, this could be related to the different environ-
mental requirements of species, as T. baccataprefers rich habitats, whereas J. communisis a
pioneer species [29,35]. Previously published data also point to different patterns of change
in the metabolite proﬁles within the seeds of these two species in response to different
nutritional treatments. Seeds produced by long-term-fertilized plants compared with their
non-fertilized counterparts are characterized by the presence of 18 differential metabolites
in J. communis and none in T. baccataplants [10]. In both pollen grains and seeds, the
differential metabolites were related to N detoxiﬁcation and/or N storage.
We have not observed a similar pattern of fertilizer supplementation on the metabolome
profiles of J. communisand T. baccatapollen grains considering both qualitative and quantita-
tive aspects (Table 1). However, hierarchical clustering pointed to a significant impact of the
environment on the T. baccatametabolome. All the samples of pollen grains produced by
T. baccataplants clustered together, i.e., fertilized as well as non-fertilized. However, not all
analyzed samples within the treatment group were characterized by the same quantitative
changes and, thus, possible genotype impacts could also be observed (Figure 5a,b). However,
it is also worth noting thatJ. communisplants grown in fertilized conditions had a more than
20- or even 30-fold increase or decrease in the relative content of some metabolites when
clone individuals grown in two different nutritional regimes were compared. InT. baccata,
the fold-change was up to a 20-fold difference (Figure 6). This could be partially due to fact
that J. communisis a pioneer species that evolved to grow in environments with low quality
of soils. Therefore, J. communiscould be exposed to higher abiotic stress than T. baccata.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 9 of 16
Higher nutrition availability could cause osmotic stress in the pollen grains of both species;
thus, the accumulation of soluble sugars was observed [36].
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 16 
 
 
were compared. In T. baccata, the fold-change was up to a 20-fold difference (Figure 6). 
This could be partially due to fact that J. communis is a pioneer species that evolved to 
grow in environments with low quality of soils. Therefore, J. communis could be exposed 
to higher abiotic stress than T. baccata. Higher nutrition availability could cause osmotic 
stress in the pollen grains of both species; thus, the accumulation of soluble sugars was 
observed [36]. 
 
Figure 6. Comparison of number of (a) total differentiated metabolites of J. communis and T. baccata 
pollen grains; (b) number of up- and downregulated differentiated metabolites; ( c) number of me-
tabolites in fold-change classes. 
When only metabolites described as differentiated between treatment groups in each 
species were selected and compared, we observed that both species had different metab-
olite profiles (Table 1, Figure 6). However, two metabolites (5-methylcytosine and 3-hy-
droxyisovaleric acid) were present in both species. Firstly, 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid was 
downregulated in J. communis but upregulated in T. baccata. However, in both species, 5-
methylcytosine was observed to be significantly increased in pollen grains collected from 
fertilizer-supplemented plants. We observed a 3.4-fold increase in J. communis and a 2.3-
fold increase in T. baccata of 5-methylcytosine in the pollen grains of fertilized plants. Fur-
ther, 5-methylcytosine is an epigenetic marker  that plays a pivotal role in the transcrip-
tional regulation of genes in plants and mammals, as well as the silencing of transposable 
elements. Studies based on A. thaliana have shown that male fertility and therefore sexual 
reproduction in plants is dependent on the active DNA demethylation of genes that con-
trol pollen tube function [37]. These increases could be related to the widespread methyl-
ation of numerous genes and therefore the significantly lower ratio of pollen grain germi-
nation or even lack of pollen tube formation during in vitro germination [11,12]. 
Fertilizer supplementation impacts carbohydrate metabolism in J. communis and T. 
baccata pollen grains (Figure 7). The main sources of pollen grains’ sugars present in J. 
communis pollen grains are galactose, glucose, arabinose, and xylose [38]. J. communis pol-
len grains from fertilized male individuals had a more than 20-fold decrease in maltotriose 
and D-xylulose, as well as the sugar acid galactonic acid, in addition to a more than 30-
fold increase in sugar acids: D-(−)-sorbitol and 1,5-anhydro-D-glucitol. Sorbitol is a sugar 
alcohol whose primary photosynthetic products are involved in responses to stress, low-
temperature, or salt stress [39]. The metabolite profiles of T. baccata pollen grains of ferti-
lized plants were characterized by a more th an two-fold decrease in allose, a two-fold 
increase in methylmalonic acid, a 13-fold increase in n-acetyl-d-hexosamine, and more 
Figure 6. Comparison of number of (a) total differentiated metabolites of J. communisand T. baccata
pollen grains; ( b) number of up- and downregulated differentiated metabolites; ( c) number of
metabolites in fold-change classes.
When only metabolites described as differentiated between treatment groups in
each species were selected and compared, we observed that both species had different
metabolite proﬁles (Table 1, Figure 6). However, two metabolites (5-methylcytosine and
3-hydroxyisovaleric acid) were present in both species. Firstly, 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid
was downregulated in J. communisbut upregulated in T. baccata. However, in both species,
5-methylcytosine was observed to be signiﬁcantly increased in pollen grains collected from
fertilizer-supplemented plants. We observed a 3.4-fold increase inJ. communisand a 2.3-fold
increase in T. baccataof 5-methylcytosine in the pollen grains of fertilized plants. Further,
5-methylcytosine is an epigenetic marker that plays a pivotal role in the transcriptional
regulation of genes in plants and mammals, as well as the silencing of transposable ele-
ments. Studies based on A. thalianahave shown that male fertility and therefore sexual
reproduction in plants is dependent on the active DNA demethylation of genes that control
pollen tube function [37]. These increases could be related to the widespread methylation
of numerous genes and therefore the signiﬁcantly lower ratio of pollen grain germination
or even lack of pollen tube formation during in vitro germination [11,12].
Fertilizer supplementation impacts carbohydrate metabolism in J. communis and
T. baccatapollen grains (Figure 7). The main sources of pollen grains’ sugars present
in J. communispollen grains are galactose, glucose, arabinose, and xylose [38]. J. communis
pollen grains from fertilized male individuals had a more than 20-fold decrease in mal-
totriose and D-xylulose, as well as the sugar acid galactonic acid, in addition to a more
than 30-fold increase in sugar acids: D-(−)-sorbitol and 1,5-anhydro-D-glucitol. Sorbitol is
a sugar alcohol whose primary photosynthetic products are involved in responses to stress,
low-temperature, or salt stress [39]. The metabolite proﬁles of T. baccatapollen grains of
fertilized plants were characterized by a more than two-fold decrease in allose, a two-fold
increase in methylmalonic acid, a 13-fold increase in n-acetyl-d-hexosamine, and more than
15-fold increases in galactose-6-phosphate, D-fructose 6-phosphate, and pyroglutamic acid.
Moreover, a more than 20-fold increase in 3-(3-hydroxyphenyl)-3-hydroxypropionic acid
was also observed. Individuals of both species produced pollen grains with signiﬁcantly
high content of sugars and sugar acids, which could serve as energy resources during
germination processes.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 10 of 16
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 16 
 
 
than 15-fold increases in ga lactose-6-phosphate, D-fructose 6-phosphate, and pyroglu-
tamic acid. Moreover, a more than 20-fold increase in 3-(3-hydroxyphenyl)-3-hydroxypro-
pionic acid was also observed. Individuals of  both species produced pollen grains with 
significantly high content of sugars and su gar acids, which could serve as energy re-
sources during germination processes. 
 
Figure 7. Y-axis shows the differences among the relati ve content of differentiated metabolites be-
tween pollen grains produced by long-term fertilizer-supplemented male individuals of ( a) Juni-
perus communis L. and ( b) T. baccata plants. Dark blue and red colo r shows the relative content of 
Figure 7. Y-axis shows the differences among the relative content of differentiated metabo-
lites between pollen grains produced by long-term fertilizer-supplemented male individuals of
(a) Juniperus communisL. and (b) T. baccataplants. Dark blue and red color shows the relative con-
tent of metabolites in pollen grains produced by fertilized and non-fertilized plants, respectively.
3-(3-Hydroxyphenyl)- . . . * indicates 3-(3-Hydroxyphenyl)-3-hydroxypropionic acid. Vertical bars
represent standard error among ﬁve independent replicates. Data are the mean ± SEM of ﬁve
replicates. All metabolites were signiﬁcantly different at p < 0.05.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 11 of 16
We also observed changes within fatty acid metabolism, with more than 35-fold de-
creases in linolenic acid and γ-linolenic acid in J. communis(Table 1, Figure 7). Moreover,
we observed a 20-fold decrease in glycerol-α-phosphate, which is a starting material for the
de novo synthesis of lipids that could also act as antioxidants in T. baccatapollen grains of
fertilizer-supplemented plants. Lipidic or lipid-derived structures are an important compo-
nent of all pollen grains, e.g., extracellular pollen walls, intracellular membrane systems,
and storage oil bodies [32]. The lower content of linolenic acids and gamma-linolenic acid
observed in J. communis is in line with the results obtained in Arabidopsis thalianashowing
that linolenic acid is a critical requirement for pollen development. A. thalianamutant
plants lacking the production of linolenic acid produce pollen grains that are able to mature
to the tricellular stage but experience signiﬁcantly decreased pollen grain development
beyond this stage, as well as seed production [40]. Similarly, higher levels of linolenic acid
are associated with pollen tube formation [41]. Therefore, the low content of unsaturated
fatty acids in pollen grains from fertilized J. communisplants could be one of the causes of
the low germination ability of pollen grains under in vitro conditions. Moreover, it could
also result from a higher level of free radicals within the tissue of fertilized plants, caused
by the higher nitrogen content in needles [42], as well as in dry, mature pollen grains [11],
compared with their non-fertilized counterparts. Higher nitrogen content and a lower C:N
ratio in pollen grains can affect the maintenance of homeostasis by increasing the level of
reactive nitrogen species (RNS) [43]. Although RNS, similarly to reactive oxygen species
(ROS), are involved in maintaining homeostasis at the cellular level, they are also involved
in various biological reactions, such as nitration, nitrosation, oxidation, and nitrosylation.
The metabolism of amino acids and amino acid derivatives inJ. communisand T. baccata
pollen grains was also affected by fertilizer supplementation. J. communispollen grains
from fertilized plants were characterized by a 35-fold increase in glucosamine and more
than 20-fold decreases in 3-hydroxyisovaleric acid and threonine (Table 1, Figure 7). Glu-
cosamine, an amino sugar, is a prominent precursor of all nitrogen-containing sugars and
is involved in the biochemical synthesis of glycosylated proteins and lipids. Threonine
and its metabolites have a signiﬁcant role in chemical defense against abiotic stress, such
as from salt and drought, and its metabolites are also involved in cell division and plant
growth and development [44]. T. baccatapollen grains from fertilizer-supplemented indi-
viduals had decreased cysteamine content and increased content of N-methyl-DL-alanine
(>two-fold), 3-hydrohyisovaleric acid, L(+)-cystathionine (>3-fold), glycine (>14-fold), and
pyroglutamic acid (>16-fold). The higher pollen grain nitrogen content in both species [12]
could be related to the higher ratio of metabolites containing nitrogen in their structure,
e.g., pyroglutamic acid, n-acetyl-α-hexosamine, and glycine. Pyroglutamic acid, which is
also known as 5-oxoproline, is a ubiquitous amino acid involved in abiotic stress responses.
Moreover, pollen grains of fertilized T. baccatacould be linked with environmental
pollutants; thus, samples had a 10-fold increase in diethyl phthalate (DEP). DEP is consid-
ered to have a toxic effect on human health [45] but, however, has no effect on pollen grain
germination and tube formation [46].
Long-term fertilizer supplementation had a signiﬁcant impact on pollen grains’ energy
metabolism as some of the carbohydrates were affected, as well as pollen grains’ devel-
opment and resistance against stresses as the content of some of amino acids and lipids
was also changed. Therefore, according to the obtained results, it can be pointed out that
the increased deposition of nitrogen, phosphorus, or sulfur in the soil environment, and
their higher accumulation in seeds and/or pollen grains, can result in decreases in plant
reproductive features. A higher level of nitrogen in the pollen grains of both species is
related to a decrease in the germination ability of pollen grains and can be marked by the
higher content of metabolites involved in the metabolism of glutathione, amino acids
(glycine, serine, and threonine; valine, leucine, and isoleucine; and cysteine and
methionine), and sugars.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 12 of 16
4. Materials and Methods
The study was conducted on male individuals ofT axus baccataL. and Juniperus communisL.
plants that were obtained by rooting, as previously described [11,12]. Plants were grown in two
different nutritional conditions from 2013 to 2018. The experiment was conducted on plants
grown in two levels of nutrient conditions, since half of the plants received an application
of fertilizer each year in March. Osmocote Exact 5-6 M (ICL, Tel Aviv , Israel) fertilizer was
applied at the recommended dose of 6 g/L, and the fertilized plants received 0.75 g N (0.33 g
N-NO3, 0.42 g N-NH4), 0.45 g P2O5, 0.6 g K2O, 0.125 g MgO, and microelements (22.5 mg Fe,
3.0 mg Mn, 1.0 mg B, 2.5 mg Cu, 1.0 mg Mo, and 0.75 mg Zn) per liter of soil. The control
group of non-fertilized plants was grown without the use of any fertilizer or other supplements.
Plants were grown in identical light, soil, and water conditions. Plants produced pollen grains
that were characterized by differentin vitrogermination abilities, as was previously shown,
and non-fertilized plants produced higher-quality pollen grains compared with their fertilized
counterparts [11,12].
Materials used for metabolomic analysis were collected from Taxus baccataplants in
March 2016 and from Juniperus communisplants in May 2017, at the same time as the pollen
grains that were used in our previous studies [11,12]. A biological replicate consisted of a
pool of pollen grains derived from male ﬂowers of three to ﬁve plants of the same genotype,
and, each time, samples were collected from plants of the same genotype grown under two
different experimental conditions. We analyzed ﬁve biological replicates for each of the
treatment conditions. Pollen grains were weighed and frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored
at −80 ◦C until further analysis (Figure 8).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 16 
 
 
plant reproductive features. A higher level of nitrogen in the pollen grains of both species 
is related to a decrease in the germination ability of pollen grains and can be marked by 
the higher content of metabolites involved in the metabolism of glutathione, amino acids 
(glycine, serine, and threonine; valine, leucine, and isoleucine; and cysteine and methio-
nine), and sugars. 
4. Materials and Methods 
The study was conducted on male individuals of Taxus baccata L. and Juniperus com-
munis L. plants that were obtained by rooting, as previously described [11,12]. Plants were 
grown in two different nutritional conditions from 2013 to 2018. The experiment was con-
ducted on plants grown in two levels of nutr ient conditions, since half of the plants re-
ceived an application of fertilizer each ye ar in March. Osmocote Exact 5-6 M (ICL, Tel 
Aviv, Israel) fertilizer was applied at the re commended dose of 6 g/L, and the fertilized 
plants received 0.75 g N (0.33 g N-NO3, 0.42 g N-NH4), 0.45 g P2O5, 0.6 g K2O, 0.125 g MgO, 
and microelements (22.5 mg Fe, 3.0 mg Mn, 1.0 mg B, 2.5 mg Cu, 1.0 mg Mo, and 0.75 mg 
Zn) per liter of soil. The control group of non-fertilized plants was grown without the use 
of any fertilizer or other supplements. Plants were grown in identical light, soil, and water 
conditions. Plants produced pollen grains that were characterized by different in vitro ger-
mination abilities, as was previously shown, and non-fertilized plants produced higher-
quality pollen grains compared with their fertilized counterparts [11,12]. 
Materials used for metabolomic analysis were collected from Taxus baccata plants in 
March 2016 and from Juniperus communis plants in May 2017, at the same time as the pol-
len grains that were used in our previous studies [11,12]. A biological replicate consisted 
of a pool of pollen grains derived from male flowers of three to five plants of the same 
genotype, and, each time, samples were collected from plants of the same genotype grown 
under two different experimental conditions. We analyzed five biological replicates for 
each of the treatment conditions. Pollen grains were weighed and frozen in liquid nitrogen 
and stored at −80 °C until further analysis (Figure 8). 
 
Figure 8. Experimental design. 1—year of pollen grains  collection; 2—data were presented in Pers-
Kamczyc et al. [11,12]. 
We used 150 mg of pollen grains per biological sample for metabolome analysis, and 
recently published extraction protocols [17,47] were followed for preparing samples for 
GC–MS analysis. Briefly, the pollen grain sample (150 mg) was weighed and ground into 
a fine powder in liquid nitrogen. Next, 1 mL ice-cold methanol/chloroform solution (3:1, 
v/v) was added. Samples were then vortexed at 6000 rpm for 15 s (repeated three times). 
After this, samples were centrifuged at 15,000× g for 10 min, and 300 µL supernatant of 
each sample was transferred to a new vial and vacuum-dried at room temperature. 
Figure 8. Experimental design. 1—year of pollen grains collection; 2—data were presented in
Pers-Kamczyc et al. [11,12].
We used 150 mg of pollen grains per biological sample for metabolome analysis, and
recently published extraction protocols [17,47] were followed for preparing samples for
GC–MS analysis. Brieﬂy, the pollen grain sample (150 mg) was weighed and ground into
a ﬁne powder in liquid nitrogen. Next, 1 mL ice-cold methanol/chloroform solution (3:1,
v/v) was added. Samples were then vortexed at 6000 rpm for 15 s (repeated three times).
After this, samples were centrifuged at 15,000× g for 10 min, and 300 µL supernatant of
each sample was transferred to a new vial and vacuum-dried at room temperature.
For derivatization, 80µL of 20 mg/mL methoxyamine hydrochloride (dissolved in pyri-
dine) was added to the vial, and samples were then transferred into an oven and incubated
at 37 ◦C for 1.5 h. Then, 80 µL of MSTFA (N-methyl-N-(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide)
was added, followed by incubation at 37◦C for 1 h. Supernatants of all samples were mixed,
vacuum-dried, and derivatized in the same manner to prepare QC samples. Derived extract
(1 µL) of each sample was analyzed using a TRACE 1310 GC oven with TSQ8000 triplequad
MS from Thermo Scientific (Waltham, Massachusetts, USA), coupled with a DB-5MS cap-
illary column (30 m × 0.25 mm × 0.25 µm, J&W Scientific). Chromatographic separation
conditions in gradient mode were kept as follows: 70◦C for 2 min, followed by 10 ◦C/min
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 13 of 16
up to 300 ◦C, at 300 ◦C (10 min). A PTV injector was used for sample injection with a
temperature gradient from 40 to 250◦C, the column interface temperature was maintained
at 250 ◦C, and the source temperature was 250◦C. The ion source was operating in the m/z
range 50–850 in EI positive mode and with electron energy set to 70 eV and a carrier gas
(He) flow rate of 1.2 mL/min. The mixture of Supelco C7–C40 saturated alkane standard
was run before the samples to calculate the retention index of each feature. The QC samples
were run at the start, middle, and end of the analysis (every 5 samples).
Raw MS data were converted to abf format and analyzed using MSDial software
package v. 3.96. To eliminate the retention time (Rt) shift and to determine the retention
indexes (RI) for each compound, the alkane series mixture (C-10 to C-36) was injected
into the GC–MS system. Identiﬁed artifacts (alkanes, column bleed, plasticizers, MSTFA,
and reagents) were excluded from further analyses. Obtained normalized (using total
ion current (TIC) approach and LOWESS algorithm) results were then exported to Excel
for pre-formatting and then subjected to statistical analyses. Analysis was conducted by
the Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish Academy
of Sciences.
Then, a data matrix containing the feature name (identiﬁed compound name), sample
information (four biological replicates per sample), and relative abundance (calculated by
peak area) was prepared and submitted to MetaboAnalyst (https://www.metaboanalyst.
ca/, access on 5 September 2022). All data collected for T. baccataand J. communisplants
were separately analyzed for each species. Data obtained from GC–MS describing pollen
grain metabolites, principal component analysis, and correlation and pattern analyses
were assessed using MetaboAnalyst 5.0, a comprehensive tool suite for metabolomic data
analysis (http://metaboanalyst.ca/, access on 5 September 2022; [ 48]), following data
log10 transformation and scaling manipulations. For metabolomic analysis, ﬁve biological
replicates per treatment were used. Each time, pollen grains were sampled from the same
male genotype that were grown in different treatment conditions.
The data matrix was prepared for three categories of normalization, including normal-
ization by median, square root data transformation, and Pareto via online data analysis
software MetaboAnalyst and using the embedded algorithm. The differential metabolites
were screened by parameters including fold change (FC > |2.0|), the variable inﬂuence
on projection (VIP , VIP value > 1), andp-value < 0.05. The VIP value > 1 for a metabolite
demonstrates that it contributes greatly to the separation of sample groups in the PLS-DA
models. Then, these ‘candidates’ were marked for pathway identiﬁcation to explore their
biological roles during seed germination.
Metabolic pathway enrichment analysis was used to interpret the biological significance
associated with metabolites detected in pollen grains. Pathway analysis was conducted on
the basis of the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) metabolic pathway
analysis with MetaboAnalyst 5.0. The enrichment analysis considered the metabolomic
pathway ID number, pathway name, the number of metabolites involved in the pathway,
the p-value of the metabolic pathway, the false discovery rate (FDR), the correctedp-value,
and -log (p-value).
5. Conclusions
In summary, male reproductive performance, considered on the basis of pollen grain
quality, was disrupted by the long-term deposition of nitrogen, phosphorus, and other
minerals in two gymnosperm species, Juniperus communisL. and Taxus baccataL. Pollen
grain carbohydrate, amino acid, and fatty acid metabolism were signiﬁcantly affected by
the high availability of N and P . This study also showed that the impact of the long-term
fertilization of long-living trees can have a signiﬁcant effect on pollen grain compounds
and seed production. Nevertheless, in the face of the increasing deposition of nitrogen,
phosphorus, and sulfur in soil due to increasing fertilizer usage, further studies performed
on a wide range of species are needed to understand the speciﬁc relationship between
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 14 of 16
the soil nutrient availability and pollen development and germination ability in each of
these species.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at https:
//www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/ijms232214105/s1.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, methodology, resources, data curation, supervision,
project administration, funding acquisition, and writing—original draft preparation, E.P .-K.; in-
vestigation, data analysis, and visualization, E.P .-K. and J.K.; writing—review and editing, J.K. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the National Science Centre, grant number 2019/03/X/
NZ8/01887, and ﬁnanced by the Institute of Dendrology, Polish Academy of Sciences (DEC-2022/03/
ZB/FBW/00008).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or
in the decision to publish the results.
References
1. Tsiouris, S.; Marshall, E.J.P . Observations on patterns of granular fertiliser deposition beside hedges and its likely effects on the
botanical composition of ﬁeld margins. Ann. Appl. Biol.1998, 132, 115–127. [CrossRef]
2. Soons, M.B.; Hefting, M.M.; Dorland, E.; Lamers, L.P .M.; Versteeg, C.; Bobbink, R. Nitrogen effects on plant species richness
in herbaceous communities are more widespread and stronger than those of phosphorus. Biol. Conserv. 2017, 212, 390–397.
[CrossRef]
3. Lun, F.; Liu, J.; Ciais, P .; Nesme, T.; Chang, J.; Wang, R.; Goll, D.; Sardans, J.; Peñuelas, J.; Obersteiner, M. Global and regional
phosphorus budgets in agricultural systems and their implications for phosphorus-use efﬁciency. Earth Syst. Sci. Data2018,
10, 1–18. [CrossRef]
4. Sardans, J.; Peñuelas, J. Potassium: A neglected nutrient in global change. Glob. Ecol. Biogeogr.2015, 24, 261–275. [CrossRef]
5. Bergh, J.; Nilsson, U.; Allen, H.L.; Johansson, U.; Fahlvik, N. Long-term responses of Scots pine and Norway spruce stands in
Sweden to repeated fertilization and thinning. For. Ecol. Manag.2014, 320, 118–128. [CrossRef]
6. Dentener, F.; Drevet, J.; Lamarque, J.F.; Bey, I.; Eickhout, B.; Fiore, A.M.; Hauglustaine, D.; Horowitz, L.W.; Krol, M.; Kulshrestha,
U.C.; et al. Nitrogen and sulfur deposition on regional and global scales: A multimodel evaluation. Glob. Biogeochem. Cycles
2006, 20. [CrossRef]
7. Velthof, G.; Barot, S.; Bloem, J.; Butterbach-Bahl, K.; de Vries, W.; Kros, J.; Lavelle, P .; Olesen, J.E.; Oenema, O. Nitrogen as a threat
to European soil quality. In The European Nitrogen Assessment; Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK, 2011; pp. 495–510.
[CrossRef]
8. Etzold, S.; Ferretti, M.; Reinds, G.J.; Solberg, S.; Gessler, A.; Waldner, P .; Schaub, M.; Simpson, D.; Benham, S.; Hansen, K.; et al.
Nitrogen deposition is the most important environmental driver of growth of pure, even-aged and managed European forests.
For. Ecol. Manag.2020, 458, 117762. [CrossRef]
9. Bobbink, R.; Hicks, K.; Galloway, J.; Spranger, T.; Alkemade, R.; Ashmore, M.; Bustamante, M.; Cinderby, S.; Davidson, E.;
Dentener, F.; et al. Global assessment of nitrogen deposition effects on terrestrial plant diversity: A synthesis. Ecol. Appl.2010,
20, 30–59. [CrossRef]
10. Pers-Kamczyc, E.; M ˛ aderek, E.; Kamczyc, J. Seed quantity or quality?—Reproductive responses of female of two dioecious woody
species to long term-fertilisation. Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 3187. [CrossRef]
11. Pers-Kamczyc, E.; Tyrała-Wierucka,˙Z.; Rabska, M.; Wro ´ nska-Pilarek, D.; Kamczyc, J. The higher availability of nutrients increases
the production but decreases the quality of pollen grains in Juniperus communisL. J. Plant Physiol.2020, 248, 153156. [CrossRef]
12. Pers-Kamczyc, E.; Iszkuło, G.; Rabska, M.; Wro ´ nska-Pilarek, D.; Kamczyc, J. More isn’t always better—The effect of environmental
nutritional richness on male reproduction of Taxus baccataL. Environ. Exp. Bot.2019, 162, 468–478. [CrossRef]
13. Pers-Kamczyc, E.; Suszka, J. Long-term maternal fertilizer addition increased seed size but decreased germination capacity and
offspring performance in Taxus baccataL. Forests 2022, 5, 670. [CrossRef]
14. Paupière, M.J.; Müller, F.; Li, H.; Rieu, I.; Tikunov, Y.M.; Visser, R.G.F.; Bovy, A.G. Untargeted metabolomic analysis of tomato
pollen development and heat stress response. Plant Reprod.2017, 30, 81–94. [CrossRef]
15. Paupière, M.J.; Tikunov, Y.M.; Firon, N.; de Vos, R.C.H.; Maliepaard, C.; Visser, R.G.F.; Bovy, A.G. The effect of isolation methods
of tomato pollen on the results of metabolic proﬁling. Metabolomics 2019, 15, 11. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 15 of 16
16. Mueller, G.A.; Thompson, P .M.; DeRose, E.F.; O’Connell, T.M.; London, R.E. A metabolomic, geographic, and seasonal analysis of
the contribution of pollen-derived adenosine to allergic sensation. Metabolomics 2016, 12, 139–148. [CrossRef]
17. Wei, S.; Yang, X.; Huo, G.; Ge, G.; Liu, H.; Luo, L.; Hu, J.; Huang, D.; Long, P . Distinct metabolome changes during seed
germination of lettuce (Lactuca sativaL.) in response to thermal stress as revealed by untargeted metabolomics analysis. Int. J.
Mol. Sci.2020, 21, 1481. [CrossRef]
18. Jiménez-Ramírez, A.; Grivet, D.; Robledo-Arnuncio, J.J. Measuring recent effective gene ﬂow among large populations in Pinus
sylvestris: Local pollen shedding does not preclude substantial long-distance pollen immigration. PLoS ONE2021, 16, e0255776.
[CrossRef]
19. Chybicki, I.J.; Oleksa, A. Seed and pollen gene dispersal in Taxus baccata, a dioecious conifer in the face of strong population
fragmentation. Ann. Bot.2018, 122, 409–421. [CrossRef]
20. Robledo-Arnuncio, J.J. Wind pollination over mesoscale distances: An investigation with Scots pine. New Phytol. 2011, 190,
222–233. [CrossRef]
21. Batos, B.; Miljkovic, D. Pollen viability in Quercus roburL. Arch. Biol. Sci.2017, 69, 111–117. [CrossRef]
22. Alonso, C.; Navarro-Fernández, C.M.; Arceo-Gómez, G.; Meindl, G.A.; Parra-Tabla, V .; Ashman, T.-L. Among-species differences
in pollen quality and quantity limitation: Implications for endemics in biodiverse hotspots. Ann. Bot. 2013, 112, 1461–1469.
[CrossRef]
23. Gruwez, R.; Leroux, O.; De Frenne, P .; Tack, W.; Viane, R.; Verheyen, K. Critical phases in the seed development of common
juniper (Juniperus communis). Plant Biol.2013, 15, 210–219. [CrossRef]
24. Pacini, E. Harmomegathic Characters of Pteridophyta Spores and Spermatophyta Pollen; Hesse, M., Ehrendorfer, F., Eds.; Springer:
Vienna, Austria, 1990; pp. 53–69.
25. Shivanna, K.R.; Rangaswamy, N.S. Pollen Biology: A Laboratory Manual; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 1992;
ISBN 978-3-540-55170-6.
26. Słomka, A.; Kawalec, P .; Kellner, K.; J˛ edrzejczyk-Koryci ´ nska, M.; Rosta ´ nski, A.; Kuta, E. Was reduced pollen viability inViola
tricolor L. the result of heavy metal pollution or rather the tests applied? Acta Biol. Crac. Bot.2010, 52, 123–127. [CrossRef]
27. Fragallah, S.A.D.A.; Wang, P .; Li, N.; Chen, Y.; Lin, S. Metabolomic analysis of pollen grains with different germination abilities
from two clones of Chinese Fir (Cunninghamia lanceolata(Lamb) Hook). Molecules 2018, 23, 3162. [CrossRef]
28. Welling, M.T.; Deseo, M.A.; Bacic, A.; Doblin, M.S. Untargeted metabolomic analyses reveal chemical complexity of dioecious
cannabis ﬂowers. Aust. J. Chem.2021, 74, 463–479. [CrossRef]
29. Thomas, P .A.; Polwart, A. Taxus baccata. J. Ecol.2003, 91, 489–524. [CrossRef]
30. Enescu, C.M.; Houston Durrant, T.; Caudullo, G.; de Rigo, D. Juniperus communis in Europe: Distribution, habitat, usage and
threats. In European Atlas of Forest Tree Species; San-Miguel-Ayanz, J., de Rigo, D., Caudullo, G., Houston Durrant, T., Mauri, A.,
Eds.; Publication Ofﬁce of European Union: Luxembourg, 2016; p. 104.
31. Fernando, D.D.; Lazzaro, M.D.; Owens, J.N. Growth and development of conifer pollen tubes. Sex. Plant Reprod.2005, 18, 149–162.
[CrossRef]
32. Piffanelli, P .; Ross, J.H.E.; Murphy, D.J. Biogenesis and function of the lipidic structures of pollen grains.Sex. Plant Reprod.1998,
11, 65–80. [CrossRef]
33. Huarancca Reyes, T.; Scartazza, A.; Lu, Y.; Yamaguchi, J.; Guglielminetti, L. Effect of carbon/nitrogen ratio on carbohydrate
metabolism and light energy dissipation mechanisms in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Physiol. Biochem.2016, 105, 195–202. [CrossRef]
34. Selinski, J.; Scheibe, R. Pollen tube growth: Where does the energy come from? Plant Signal. Behav.2014, 9, e977200. [CrossRef]
35. Thomas, P .A.; El-Barghathi, M.; Polwart, A. Biological Flora of the British Isles:Juniperus communisL. J. Ecol.2007, 95, 1404–1440.
[CrossRef]
36. Couée, I.; Sulmon, C.; Gouesbet, G.; El Amrani, A. Involvement of soluble sugars in reactive oxygen species balance and responses
to oxidative stress in plants. J. Exp. Bot.2006, 57, 449–459. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Khouider, S.; Borges, F.; LeBlanc, C.; Ungru, A.; Schnittger, A.; Martienssen, R.; Colot, V .; Bouyer, D. Male fertility inArabidopsis
requires active DNA demethylation of genes that control pollen tube function. Nat. Commun.2021, 12, 410. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Surso, M. Pollination and pollen germination in common juniper (Juniperus communis: Cupressaceae). Arct. Environ. Res.2018, 18,
162–174. [CrossRef]
39. Moing, A. Sugar alcohols as carbohydrate reserves in some higher plants. Dev. Crop Sci.2000, 26, 337–358. [CrossRef]
40. McConn, M.; Browse, J. The critical requirement for linolenic acid is pollen development, not photosynthesis, in an Arabidopsis
mutant. Plant Cell1996, 8, 403–416. [CrossRef]
41. Wang, J.; Kambhampati, S.; Allen, D.K.; Chen, L.Q. Comparative metabolic analysis reveals a metabolic switch in mature,
hydrated, and germinated pollen in Arabidopsis thaliana. Front. Plant Sci.2022, 13, 836665. [CrossRef]
42. Rabska, M.; Pers-Kamczyc, E.; ˙Zytkowiak, R.; Adamczyk, D.; Iszkuło, G. Sexual dimorphism in the chemical composition of male
and female in the dioecious tree, Juniperus communisL., growing under different nutritional conditions. Int. J. Mol. Sci.2020,
21, 8094. [CrossRef]
43. Mandal, M.; Sarkar, M.; Khan, A.; Biswas, M.; Masi, A.; Rakwal, R.; Agrawal, G.K.; Srivastava, A.; Sarkar, A. Reactive Oxygen
Species (ROS) and Reactive Nitrogen Species (RNS) in plants– maintenance of structural individuality and functional blend. Adv.
Redox Res.2022, 5, 100039. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2022, 23, 14105 16 of 16
44. Muthuramalingam, P .; Krishnan, S.R.; Pandian, S.; Mareeswaran, N.; Aruni, W.; Pandian, S.K.; Ramesh, M. Global analysis of
threonine metabolism genes unravel key players in rice to improve the abiotic stress tolerance. Sci. Rep.2018, 8, 9270. [CrossRef]
45. Bentayeb, Y.; Moumen, Y.; Boulahbal, S.; Chentouh, S.; Bouagui Algeria, E. The protective role of the date palm pollen (Phoenix
dactilyfera) on liver and haematological changes induced by the diethyl phthalate. World J. Environ. Biosci.2014, 7, 90–94.
46. Bilderback, D.E. Impatiens pollen germination and tube growth as a bioassay for toxic substances. Environ. Health Perspect.1981,
37, 95–103. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Yang, X.; Feng, L.; Zhao, L.; Liu, X.; Hassani, D.; Huang, D. Effect of glycine nitrogen on lettuce growth under soilless culture: A
metabolomics approach to identify the main changes occurred in plant primary and secondary metabolism. J. Sci. Food Agric.
2018, 98, 467–477. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Xia, J.; Wishart, D.S. Using metaboanalyst 3.0 for comprehensive metabolomics data analysis. Curr. Protoc. Bioinforma.2016, 55,
14.10.1–14.10.91. [CrossRef] [PubMed]