REVIEW
published: 24 May 2019
doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2019.00124
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 1 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124
Edited by:
Rodrigo Ledesma-Amaro,
Imperial College London,
United Kingdom
Reviewed by:
Dae-Hee Lee,
Korea Research Institute of
Bioscience and Biotechnology
(KRIBB), South Korea
Vinod Kumar,
Cranﬁeld University, United Kingdom
*Correspondence:
Carsten Jers
cjer@biosustain.dtu.dk
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Synthetic Biology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Bioengineering and
Biotechnology
Received: 30 September 2018
Accepted: 07 May 2019
Published: 24 May 2019
Citation:
Jers C, Kalantari A, Garg A and
Mijakovic I (2019) Production of
3-Hydroxypropanoic Acid From
Glycerol by Metabolically Engineered
Bacteria.
Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 7:124.
doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2019.00124
Production of 3-Hydroxypropanoic
Acid From Glycerol by Metabolically
Engineered Bacteria
Carsten Jers1*, Aida Kalantari2, Abhroop Garg1 and Ivan Mijakovic1,3
1 Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Tec hnical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark, 2 Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, NC, Unit ed States, 3 Systems and Synthetic Biology Division, Department
of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers Universit y of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden
3-hydroxypropanoic acid (3-HP) is a valuable platform chem ical with a high demand
in the global market. 3-HP can be produced from various renew able resources. It is
used as a precursor in industrial production of a number of ch emicals, such as acrylic
acid and its many derivatives. In its polymerized form, 3-HP can be used in bioplastic
production. Several microbes naturally possess the biosyn thetic pathways for production
of 3-HP , and a number of these pathways have been introduced i n some widely used cell
factories, such as Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Latest advances in the
ﬁeld of metabolic engineering and synthetic biology have le d to more efﬁcient methods
for bio-production of 3-HP . These include new approaches fo r introducing heterologous
pathways, precise control of gene expression, rational enz yme engineering, redirecting
the carbon ﬂux based on in silico predictions using genome scale metabolic models, as
well as optimizing fermentation conditions. Despite the fa ct that the production of 3-HP
has been extensively explored in established industrially relevant cell factories, the current
production processes have not yet reached the levels requir ed for industrial exploitation.
In this review, we explore the state of the art in 3-HP bio-pro duction, comparing the
yields and titers achieved in different microbial cell fact ories and we discuss possible
methodologies that could make the ﬁnal step toward industri ally relevant cell factories.
Keywords: 3-hydroxypropanoic acid, glycerol, biosynthesis, cell factory, synthetic biology, metabolic engineering
INTRODUCTION
The development of microbial cell factories is fueled by aspir ations to develop sustainable processes
based on renewable resources. The goal is mitigation of the n egative environmental consequences
of production of fuels, chemicals and other materials.
The development of microbial cell factories for production of the platform chemical
3-hydroxypropanoic acid (3-HP) has attracted much attention in the last decade. 3-HP is a
non-chiral (optically inactive), small three-carbon molec ule and a structural isomer of lactic acid.
Speciﬁcally, 3-HP is a precursor for the production of a number o f valuable chemicals including
acrylic acid and bioplastics ( Figure 1). Bio-based production of 3-HP also has the potential to “turn
waste into a resource” since several metabolic pathways exis t for converting glycerol, a by-product
of biodiesel production, into 3-HP.
Jers et al. 3-HP Production in Bacteria
Here, we will brieﬂy introduce the metabolic pathways that
can be used to produce 3-HP from glycerol. Based on work
accumulated over the last decade, we will present current
knowledge pertaining to diﬀerent production hosts, enzymes,
and strategies for optimization of production pathway and host
metabolism as well as process engineering for attaining high -
level production of 3-HP. Finally, we will discuss how recent
developments in synthetic biology and metabolic engineerin g
might form the basis for further improvements of production
strains and the eventual goal of industrially viable and sus tainable
3-HP production.
METABOLIC PATHWAYS FOR SYNTHESIS
OF 3-HP STARTING FROM GLYCEROL
Metabolic Pathways Found in Nature
A number of microorganisms have been reported to naturally
produce 3-HP using various pathways and diverse substrates
such as glycerol, glucose, CO 2, and uracil. Several reviews have
described these in detail (
Kumar et al., 2013a; de Fouchécour
et al., 2018 ), and in this review we will focus only on the pathways
for which glycerol is the substrate. Two pathways are known fo r
conversion of glycerol into 3-HP: the CoA-dependent pathway
and the CoA-independent pathway ( Figure 2).
The CoA-dependent pathway has been most extensively
studied in Lactobacillus reuteri and proceeds with conversion
of glycerol to 3-hydroxypropanal (3-HPA) catalyzed by
coenzyme B 12-dependent glycerol hydratase (PduCDE). 3-HPA
is subsequently converted to 3-HP via 3-hydroxypropanoyl-
CoA and 3-hydroxypropanoyl-phosphate, catalyzed by
the enzymes propionaldehyde dehydrogenase (PduP),
phosphotransacylase (PduL), and propionate kinase (PduW),
respectively (
Dishisha et al., 2014 ).
In the CoA-independent pathway, glycerol is converted to 3-
HP in 2 steps. As in the case of the CoA-dependent pathway,
glycerol is ﬁrst converted to 3-HPA, while in the second step,
3-HPA is converted directly to 3-HP in a reaction catalyzed
by aldehyde dehydrogenase (
Kumar et al., 2013a ). While the
CoA-independent pathway is by far the most employed for
production of 3-HP using engineered bacteria, it appears to hav e
little relevance in nature. This is possibly due to low activi ty of
aldehyde dehydrogenase in wild type bacteria (
Zhu et al., 2009 ).
PRODUCTION HOSTS
A number of microorganisms have been used for the
production of 3-HP , both natural isolates as well as engineer ed
microorganisms ( Table 1). For the selection of an appropriate
production host, there are several parameters to consider.
The microorganism should demonstrate tolerance to organic
acids, speciﬁcally 3-HP , as well as potentially toxic impuriti es in
crude glycerol. As one of the widely used glycerol dehydrata ses
is coenzyme B 12-dependent, the production host should
preferentially be capable of synthesizing coenzyme B 12. Addition
to the production medium instead of in situ synthesis would
signiﬁcantly increase the overall production cost.
Lactobacillus reuteri is capable of naturally producing 3-HP
from glycerol via the CoA-dependent pathway (
Luo et al., 2011 ).
In one study, three L. reuteri strains were evaluated, and all were
found to produce 3-HP ( Burgé et al., 2015 ). It also was shown
that 3-HPA is toxic at a concentration of 5 g/L while 2.5 g/L 3-
HP is not (as long as pH is maintained above 5). Notably, L.
reuteri is capable of synthesizing coenzyme B 12 (
Burgé et al.,
2015) and has been used for the bioconversion of biodiesel-
derived glycerol into 3-HP (14 g/L) and 1,3-propanediol (1,3-
PDO) (
Dishisha et al., 2015 ). To our knowledge, there have
been no attempts to engineer L. reuteri strains to improve
production. Among lactic acid bacteria, production of 3-HP is
not restricted to L. reuteri . Of 67 lactic acid bacteria isolates
tested, 22 isolates belonging to Lactobacillus diolivorans and
Lactobacillus collinoides were positive for 3-HP production from
glycerol (
Garai-Ibabe et al., 2008 ). Additionally, L. diolivorans is
capable of using biodiesel-derived glycerol for the productio n of
3-HPA (Lindlbauer et al., 2017 ).
Klebsiella pneumoniae is a pathogenic bacterium that has
been widely used for production of 3-HP. Along with E. coli ,
K. pneumoniae is one of the most frequently used hosts for
strain development by genetic engineering for improved 3-HP
production. In fact, the highest 3-HP titer reported, 83.8 g/L ,
was obtained in K. pneumoniae by the combining of optimized
expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase ( K. pneumoniae PuuC),
blocking of lactic acid synthesis ( ldh1, ldh2, and pta mutant), and
optimization of the fermentation conditions (
Li et al., 2016 ). An
important asset of K. pneumoniae is its capability of producing
coenzyme B12 (Luo et al., 2011 ).
E. coli is commonly used for metabolic engineering to produce
a wide variety of compounds. It has also been widely used
as a chassis for the production of 3-HP. The highest 3-HP
titer reported in E. coli so far is 71.9 g/L, using a strain in
which, besides introduction of glycerol dehydratase and ald ehyde
dehydrogenase, the central metabolism was modiﬁed to reduce
by-product formation (
Chu et al., 2015 ). It has been indicated
that careful choice of the strain could be of importance. A
comparison of nine E. coli strains in which a heterologous
pathway for 3-HP synthesis was introduced, demonstrated
diﬀerences in 3-HP production, as well as in enzyme level
and activity (
Sankaranarayanan et al., 2014 ). A drawback of
using E. coli is the fact that it is not naturally capable of
producing coenzyme B12. However, insertion of the Pseudomonas
denitriﬁcans genes for coenzyme B 12 synthesis (more than 25
genes in 6 operons) on three plasmids led to the production
of coenzyme B 12 under both anaerobic and aerobic conditions
(
Ko et al., 2014 ).
While K. pneumoniae and E. coli are by far the most
widely used production hosts, a number of other bacteria
have been engineered for 3-HP production as well. P.
denitriﬁcans synthesizes coenzyme B 12 in aerobic conditions
where NAD(P) + is eﬃciently regenerated (
Zhou et al., 2013 ).
Introduction of glycerol dehydratase and glycerol dehydrat ase
reactivase from K. pneumoniae allowed for the production
of 3.4 g/L 3-HP. By further introducing the K. pneumoniae
aldehyde dehydrogenase, the yield increased to 4.9 g/L
(
Zhou et al., 2013 ).
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 2 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124
Jers et al. 3-HP Production in Bacteria
FIGURE 1 |Potential industrial uses of 3-hydroxypropanoic acid. Glo bal market of derived compounds are indicated; >1,000 M$ (blue), 100–1,000 M$ (green), <100
M$ (yellow).
Another bacterium able to synthesize coenzyme B 12,
Shimwellia blattae , is a 1,3-PDO producer using a native
coenzyme B 12-dependent glycerol dehydratase. Introduction
of various genes including aldehyde dehydrogenase from
Pseudomonas putida KT2442 enabled the production of 0.26 g/L
Poly-3HP using crude glycerol from biodiesel production as t he
substrate (
Heinrich et al., 2013 ).
Corynebacterium glutamicum was engineered to produce 3-
HP from glucose and xylose. By a combination of eﬀorts, an
impressive titer of 62.6 g/L 3-HP was obtained in a fed-batch
fermentation (
Chen et al., 2017 ). The steps taken to achieve
this titer included enabling eﬃcient production of glycerol from
glucose, introduction of the K. pneumoniae pduCDEGH genes
encoding diol dehydratase and its reactivase and Cupriavidor
necator aldehyde dehydrogenase and modiﬁcation in sugar
uptake and glycolytic ﬂux. In Bacillus subtilis , introduction of
glycerol dehydratase along with its reactivases, and aldeh yde
dehydrogenase from K. pneumoniae, enabled the production of
3-HP from glycerol. Upon inactivation of glycerol kinase and
optimization of growth conditions, a 3-HP titer of 10 g/L was
obtained in a shake ﬂask culture (
Kalantari et al., 2017 ). A
drawback of both of these bacteria is their inability to synt hesize
coenzyme B 12, which thus has to be supplemented to the
production medium.
In an engineered cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus
CO2 was converted via glycerol to 3-HP , albeit at very low titer
(31.7 mg/L). Synechococcus elongatus is unable to synthesize
coenzyme B 12, but the problem was alleviated by producing 3-
HP under anaerobic conditions using the oxygen-sensitive B 12-
independent glycerol dehydratase from Clostridium butyricum
(Wang et al., 2015 ). The use of glycerol as an additional carbon
source in a strain engineered to assimilate glycerol has bee n
suggested for increasing productivity ( Kanno and Atsumi, 2017 ).
THE SUITE OF ENZYMES USED IN
HETEROLOGOUS 3-HP
SYNTHESIS PATHWAYS
As mentioned above, there are two principal pathways for
production of 3-HP from glycerol. In both CoA-dependent
and -independent pathways, the initial step is the conversion
of glycerol to 3-HPA. In the CoA-dependent pathway, 3-HPA
is converted via 3-hydroxypropanoyl-coenzyme A (3-HP-CoA)
and 3-hydroxypropanoyl-phosphate (3-HP-P) to 3-HP , catalyzed
by propionaldehyde dehydrogenase, phosphotransacylase, and
propionate kinase, respectively (
Dishisha et al., 2014 ). In the
CoA-independent pathway, 3-HPA is converted directly to 3-
HP by the action of aldehyde dehydrogenase (
Kumar et al.,
2013a). Both of the pathways have characteristics that are of
importance for the design of cell factory and process condition s,
for example, oxygen-sensitivity of enzymes and the need for c o-
factors such as coenzyme B 12, and NAD +. In the following, we
will describe the enzymes that make up these two pathways.
Where available, kinetic data for the enzymes is presented in
Table 2, to facilitate comparison.
Glycerol and Diol Dehydratase
Coenzyme B12-Dependent Dehydratases
Coenzyme B 12-dependent glycerol dehydratase (EC 4.2.1.30)
and diol dehydratase (EC 4.2.1.28) are isofunctional enzym es
that catalyse the dehydration of 1,2-diols to the correspond ing
aldehyde (e.g., glycerol to 3-HPA). Both glycerol dehydrata se and
diol dehydratase are composed of three subunits that form a
dimer of a heterotrimer ( α 2β 2γ 2;
Shibata et al., 1999; Yamanishi
et al., 2002 ). In mycobacteria, the α and β subunits are fused
in a single polypeptide ( Liu et al., 2010 ). Both of the enzymes
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 3 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124
Jers et al. 3-HP Production in Bacteria
FIGURE 2 |Synthesis of 3-hydropropanoic acid from glycerol via the
CoA-independent and -dependent pathways.
catalyze a radical process in which an adenosyl radical is for med
by homolytic cleavage of the Co-C bond in coenzyme B 12 (Daniel
et al., 1998 ). The adenosyl radical abstracts a hydrogen from the
substrate, glycerol, to generate a substrate radical. The s ubstrate
radical, upon rearrangement, re-abstracts a hydrogen to for m
the ﬁnal product and regenerate coenzyme B 12 (Daniel et al.,
1998). If a radical side reaction takes place, coenzyme B 12 is
not regenerated, and instead, a catalytically inactive cob alamin
species is formed, which binds tightly to the enzyme and there by
inactivates it ( Toraya, 2003). Radical side reaction can be induced
by both glycerol and oxygen, making the enzyme sensitive to
oxygen (
Wei et al., 2014 ). The inactive hydratase can be re-
activated by the action of glycerol/diol dehydratase react ivase
in the presence of ATP and intact coenzyme B 12 (Mori and
Toraya, 1999 ). Glycerol/diol dehydratase reactivase consists of
two subunits that form a heterotetramer ( α 2β 2; Liao et al., 2003 ).
The reactivase binds ATP and hydrolyzes it to ADP. The ADP-
bound reactivase forms a complex with the inactivated glycer ol
dehydratase. This leads to release of the damaged coenzyme B 12.
Subsequently, reactivase binds ATP and is released from the
TABLE 1 |Overview of bacterial species applied for production of 3-H P .
Bacterial species Natural producer B 12 synthesis
Lactobacillus reuteri Yes Yes
Klebsiella pneumonia Yes Yes
Escherichia coli No No
Pseudomonas denitriﬁcans No Yes
Shimwellia blattae Noa Yes
Corynebacterium glutamicum No No
Bacillus subtilis No No
Synechococcus elongates No No
aNaturally produces 3-HPA.
hydratase, which in turn binds coenzyme B 12 to regenerate the
active form of the enzyme ( Toraya, 2003).
From the above, it can be deduced that the expression of
ﬁve proteins is necessary for the eﬃcient catalysis of glycerol
to 3-HPA. In the context of engineering microorganisms for 3 -
HP production, the most widely used glycerol dehydratase is
that of K. pneumoniae (dhaB123, and gdrAB), which has been
used in E. coli (
Rathnasingh et al., 2009 ), K. pneumoniae (Wang
et al., 2013 ), B. subtilis (Kalantari et al., 2017 ), and S. elongatus
(Wang et al., 2015 ). The use of other dehydratases has also been
reported. In E. coli , the glycerol dehydratase from Lactobacillus
brevis encoded by dhaB123 and its reactivase dhaR12 were used
(Kwak et al., 2013 ). The diol dehydratase ( pduCDE) and activator
(pduGH) from K. penumoniae were used in C. glutamicum
(Chen et al., 2017 ).
Considering the problem of enzyme instability, it is somewha t
surprising that relatively few glycerol dehydratases have be en
tested. These enzymes have, by now, been discovered in many
bacteria and this should provide a resource for enzyme discov ery
endeavors. In fact, for three selected glycerol dehydratase s, the α
subunit was systematically swapped, which led to identiﬁcati on
of several combinations with improved stability and activit y
(
Qi et al., 2006 ). Interestingly, fusion of the α and β subunit
of K. pneumoniae glycerol dehydratase led to an increase
in the kcat (albeit with concomitant increase in KM; Wang
et al., 2009 ). As mentioned, mycobacteria contain a glycerol
dehydratase variant in which the α and β subunits are fused,
but to our knowledge they have not been characterized or used
for 3-HP production. Enzyme engineering could also prove
beneﬁcial for generation of enzyme variants with improved
properties such as increased stability and activity. As an exa mple,
by rational engineering, improved resistance to mechanism-
based inactivation was conferred to a glycerol dehydratase f rom
Klebsiella oxytoga (
Yamanishi et al., 2012 ).
Coenzyme B12-Independent Glycerol Dehydratase
This class of glycerol dehydratases is of particular interes t since
it negates the need for the rather costly coenzyme B 12. This
enzyme also performs a radical catalysis, but instead of coenz yme
B12, it uses S-adenosylmethionine as a co-factor ( Raynaud
et al., 2003 ). This glycerol dehydratase is a homodimer and it
is thus structurally simpler than its coenzyme B 12-dependent
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 4 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124
Jers et al. 3-HP Production in Bacteria
TABLE 2 |Summary of characterized enzymes of relevance in 3-HP produ ction.
Source gene / protein KM
(mM)
Vmax
(U/mg)
kcat
(s− 1)
kcat/KM x 103
(M− 1S− 1)
Other characteristics References
B12-dependent glycerol/diol dehydratase
K. pneumoniae dhaB123 n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
K. pneumoniae pduCDE n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.
L. reuteri pduCDE 0.60 130.1 n.a. n.a. pH opt 8.5
Qi et al., 2006
C. freundii gldABC 0.59 142.9 n.a. n.a. pH opt 8.5 Qi et al., 2006
L. brevis dhaB n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. pH opt 7.0 Kwak et al., 2013
B12-independent glycerol dehydratase
C. butyricum n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. B 12-independent
Propionaldehyde dehydrogenase
L. reuteri pduP 1.18 0.35 n.a. n.a. broad substrate speciﬁcity
Luo et al., 2011
n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. Inhibition by 3-HPA (from 7 mM). NAD +
preference
Sabet-Azad et al., 2013
Aldehyde dehydrogenase
E. coli K-12 aldH n.a. n.a. 28.5 58.6 NAD + preference
Jo et al., 2008
n.a. 38.16 n.a. 57.28 Chu et al., 2015
0.49 38.10 n.a. n.a. Ko et al., 2012
E. coli J M109 aldA 0.31 28.4 n.a. n.a. NAD + preference Zhu et al., 2009
C. necator gabD4 n.a. 55.12 n.a. 71.48 Chu et al., 2015
C. necator gabD4 E209Q/E269Q n.a. 78.07 n.a. 162.34 Chu et al., 2015
K. pneumoniae DSM 2026 puuC 0.48 22.25 19.81 41.44 pH opt 8.0 Raj et al., 2010
0.48 27.73 n.a. n.a. Ko et al., 2012
A. brasilense KGSADH 1.6 n.a. 15 9) NAD + preference Park et al., 2017
A. brasilense KGSADH 108-QR 0.17 n.a. 6 35 NAD + preference Park et al., 2017
Aldehyde oxidase
Pseudomonas sp. AIU 362 aloD 6.7 41.8 n.a. n.a. NAD +-independent
Li et al., 2014
counterpart that is composed of three subunits ( Raynaud et al.,
2003). While it would seem the obvious enzyme of choice, it is
important to note that it is extremely sensitive to oxygen and
its use requires production under strict anaerobic conditio ns
(
Raynaud et al., 2003 ).
Considering the fact that coenzyme B 12 is not produced in
most of the microorganisms that have been used as potential 3-
HP production hosts, the use of a coenzyme B 12-independent
dehydratase would be desirable. So far, its use has only been
reported in a few studies. The C. butyricum glycerol dehydratase
was used in the cyanobacterium S. elongatus for production
of 3-HP under anaerobic conditions. As expected, it was not
functional under aerobic conditions (
Wang et al., 2015 ). In case
of E. coli, the coenzyme B 12-independent dehydratase was used in
the context of 1,3-PDO production. Although the reported 1,3-
PDO production was relatively low, an accumulation of 3-HPA
was observed, thus demonstrating functionality of the glyc erol
dehydratase (
Dabrowski et al., 2012 ). Furthermore, it was used
for engineering E. coli to produce poly (3-Hydroxypropanoate)
(Andreeßen et al., 2010 ). The scarcity of reported use of
this enzyme could be due to diﬃculties in engineering 3-HP
producing strains using this dehydratase. Alternatively, a nd
perhaps more likely, is that reports are scarce because of the
requirement of strict anaerobic conditions for the enzyme t o
be functional, which is not compatible with growth of most
production microorganisms.
Enzymes for Converting 3-HPA to 3HP
Enzymes in the CoA-Dependent Pathway
In the CoA-dependent pathway, 3-HPA is converted via 3-
HP-CoA and 3-HP-P into 3-HP. This requires three enzymes:
propionaldehyde dehydrogenase, phosphotransacylase, and
propionate kinase, respectively (
Dishisha et al., 2014 ). The
propionaldehyde dehydrogenase requires the cofactor NAD +,
while one ATP is generated in the conversion of 3-HP-P to
3-HP. This pathway has been described in several organisms
including L. reuteri and K. pneumoniae (
Luo et al., 2012;
Dishisha et al., 2014 ). The propionaldehyde dehydrogenase PduP
from L. reuteri has been puriﬁed and characterized in vitro and
shown to exhibit activity toward a broad spectrum of aldehyde s,
including 3-HPA, using either NAD + (preferred) or NADP +
as a cofactor ( Luo et al., 2011 ). Lactobacillus reuteri PduP was
also reported to display substrate inhibition for 3-HPA (at 7 mM;
Sabet-Azad et al., 2013 ).
The CoA-dependent pathway has been used in several
engineered bacteria. The K. pneumoniae pduPLW genes were
introduced in an E. coli strain harboring the K. pneumoniae
glycerol dehydratase. Here they were shown to be functional
(although the obtained titer was lower than that obtained usi ng
an aldehyde dehydrogenase from Azospirillum brasilense;
Honjo
et al., 2015 ). In K. pneumoniae , overexpression of the ﬁrst gene
in the pathway, pduP, led to a 4-fold (0.72 g/L) increase in the
3-HP titer ( Luo et al., 2011 ). It could be speculated that the
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 5 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124
Jers et al. 3-HP Production in Bacteria
native K. pneumoniae CoA-dependent pathway enzymes were
responsible for the conversion of 3-HP-CoA to 3-HP , and that
over-expression of all three genes in the pathway would furthe r
increase the titer.
It remains to be seen whether the CoA-dependent pathway
could be an alternative to the more widely used aldehyde
dehydrogenases for the conversion of 3-HPA to 3-HP. Althoug h
both pathways use an NAD(P) +, ATP is generated in the CoA-
dependent pathway. However, this should be balanced against
the metabolic burden of over-expressing three enzymes inste ad
of one. Further, it is unclear if the substrate inhibition ex hibited
by L. reuteri PduP at a relatively low concentration of 3-HPA is
a general trait of propionaldehyde dehydrogenase, or whether a
more robust enzyme can be discovered or engineered.
Aldehyde Dehydrogenase
Aldehyde dehydrogenase (EC 1.2.1.3) has decidedly been the
enzyme of choice for conversion of 3-HPA to 3-HP in
engineered cells. It catalyses the conversion of an aldehyd e
to its corresponding carboxylic acid using NAD(P) + as a co-
factor. In the context of the 3-HP production pathway, it is of
utmost importance that enzyme activity is suﬃcient to ensure
that no accumulation of the toxic intermediate 3-HPA takes
place. Aldehyde dehydrogenases are present in most organisms ,
but generally their activity is not high enough to sustain a
high production of 3-HP (
Raj et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2009 ).
Consequently, many studies have focused on discovering sui table
aldehyde dehydrogenases. Earlier studies mainly employed t he
aldehyde dehydrogenase AldH from E. coli K-12 in both, E.
coli and K. pneumoniae (Raj et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2009 ). In
a study by Chu and co-workers, an indirect comparison (based
on 3-HP production in E. coli ) was made amongst 17 aldehyde
dehydrogenases from various organisms, benchmarked again st
E. coli AldH. One aldehyde dehydrogenase performing better
than AldH, GabD4 from C. necator , was identiﬁed (
Chu et al.,
2015). The enzyme was further improved by enzyme engineering,
substantially increasing its Vmax and kcat/KM, and used for
high-titer production of 3-HP in both E. coli (71.9 g/L) and C.
glutamicum (62.6 g/L) ( Chu et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2017 ).
The α -ketoglutaric semialdehyde dehydrogenase (KGSADH)
from A. brasilense has also been used in several studies. KGSADH
was evaluated against E. coli AldH and PuuC from K. pneumoniae
(Ko et al., 2012 ). This study indicated higher activity ( Vmax)
of KGSADH in extracts of the K. pneumoniae strain, while in
contrast it had the lowest Vmax and aﬃnity for 3-HPA when
enzymes puriﬁed from E. coli were evaluated ( Ko et al., 2012 ).
Whether this discrepancy is due to e.g., stability in vivo is unclear.
The structure of KGSADH has been solved and has provided a
basis for rational enzyme engineering. This has yielded enz yme
variants with improved activity toward 3-HPA (
Park et al., 2017;
Son et al., 2017; Seok et al., 2018 ).
PuuC from K. pneumoniae has also been used in several
production hosts, including K. pneumoniae and B. subtilis (Li
et al., 2016; Kalantari et al., 2017 ). Substrate speciﬁcity was
evaluated against 3-HPA and three other aldehydes indicati ng
broad substrate speciﬁcity (and lowest activity when 3-HPA w as
used; Raj et al., 2010 ). Comparative studies indicated that E.
coli AldH and C. necator GabD4 E209Q/E269Q were better
alternatives for converting 3-HPA to 3-HP ( Huang et al., 2012;
Chen et al., 2017 ). Nevertheless, PuuC was successfully used in
an engineered K. pneumoniae strain that produced 3-HP with a
titer of 83.8 g/L (highest reported) in a bioreactor ( Li et al., 2016 ).
Several other aldehyde dehydrogenases have been tested in
the context of 3-HP production. E. coli YneI was shown to
selectively target 3-HPA over other aldehydes ( Luo et al., 2013 ),
although it was not tested against succinic semialdehyde wh ich
was previously reported as its primary substrate ( Kurihara et al.,
2010). The aldehyde dehydrogenase DhaS from B. subtilis has also
been suggested as an aldehyde dehydrogenase that is speciﬁc f or
3-HPA (Su et al., 2015 ).
Due to the oxygen-sensitivity of glycerol dehydratase,
3-HP production is often performed under anaerobic or
microaerophilic conditions, where the regeneration of NAD +
is diminished. Thus, eﬃcient 3-HP production becomes a
compromise between assuring optimal glycerol dehydratase
activity (low oxygen level) and NAD +-dependent aldehyde
dehydrogenase activity (high oxygen level). An interestin g
strategy was suggested to overcome the limitation imposed by
NAD+, namely, the use of an aldehyde oxidase in place of
dehydrogenase. Li and co-workers characterized the NAD +-
independent aldehyde oxidase from Pseudomonas sp. AIU 362
and found it to exhibit a broad substrate speciﬁcity but relat ively
low aﬃnity for 3-HP. When expressed in K. pneumoniae , a
relatively low 3-HP titer was obtained (
Li et al., 2014 ). As can
be seen in Table 2, the aﬃnity of aldehyde oxidase to 3-HPA is
several-fold lower than the described aldehyde dehydrogen ases,
with a KM in the range where 3-HPA becomes toxic to the cell.
Considering the importance of maintaining a low concentrati on
of 3-HPA, better enzymes would likely be needed to successfull y
exploit aldehyde oxidase for 3-HP production. To the best of
our knowledge, no other attempts have been made at identifyin g
a more suitable aldehyde oxidase for the conversion of 3-HPA
to 3-HP.
As outlined in this section, many enzyme variants have been
used in the design of 3-HP-producing strains. While some of
the enzymes have been characterized biochemically, it is ob vious
from Table 2 that this is not a norm in the ﬁeld. Nevertheless, a
better understanding of the catalytic properties of these enz ymes
could provide a platform for more optimal selection of enzymes
for constructing 3-HP pathways.
STRAIN ENGINEERING
There are several parameters to consider when engineering
bacteria to produce 3-HP. As covered in sections Production
Hosts and The Suite of Enzymes Used in Heterologous 3-HP
Synthesis Pathways, a suitable host should be established a nd in
most cases some or all of the enzymes needed for converting
glycerol to 3-HP should be introduced. This provides a basis
for 3-HP production, but is not enough to ensure the desired
high titers. There are several hurdles that need to be overco me,
and these include, but are not limited to, proper balancing of
enzyme activities to prevent buildup of the toxic intermedia te
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 6 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124
Jers et al. 3-HP Production in Bacteria
3-HPA, eﬃcient channeling of substrate into product, co-
factor regeneration, prevention of by-product formation and
countering of stress. In the following, we will explore challe nges
and strategies that have been applied in the engineering of str ains
for 3-HP production.
Improving 3-HP Production by Optimizing
Expression of the Production Pathway
As illustrated above, a number of diﬀerent enzymes have been
used for the construction of synthetic operons to confer the
ability to produce 3-HP to various bacteria. In a number of the se
studies, it was shown that further optimization of the express ion
of the pathway genes could enhance 3-HP production.
A critical parameter is to ensure that the intermediate produc t
3-HPA is kept at a low concentration. 3-HPA (also known as
reuterin) is a broad range antimicrobial compound. Its minim al
inhibitory concentrations for various bacteria are in the r ange
of <1.9–50 mM, and it exerts its eﬀect via modiﬁcation of thiol
groups of proteins and small molecules (
Cleusix et al., 2007;
Schaefer et al., 2010 ). Considering the fact that 3-HPA is toxic
to bacteria even at minute concentrations, it is evident tha t
balancing enzyme activities to prevent 3-HPA accumulation i s
critical. To this end, diﬀerent approaches have been attempted
to ﬁne-tune the expression levels of glycerol dehydratase an d
aldehyde dehydrogenase. The order in which the genes encodi ng
aldehyde dehydrogenase and glycerol dehydratase are arran ged
was shown to impact 3-HP production. The rationale here is
that the gene adjacent to the promoter in an operon is normally
more expressed. Speciﬁcally, the arrangement favoring aldeh yde
dehydrogenase expression led to a higher 3-HP production due
to the diminished build-up of 3-HPA (
Li et al., 2013a ). Diﬀerent
promoters for driving the expression of aldehyde dehydrogena se
gene has also been successfully evaluated ( Li et al., 2016 ).
While these approaches are simple, they do not oﬀer a
high degree of tunability, and a number of more advanced
approaches have been applied for optimization of expression
levels. Optimization of expression level can be done by
applying various 5
′
untranslated regions (5
′
UTRs) in the genetic
constructs, which leads to diﬀerences in the translation rat e.
Using this approach, a better balance of the enzyme activities was
obtained by ﬁne-tuning expression of dhaB1 encoding a glycerol
dehydratase subunit. Testing only four diﬀerent UTRs led to
construction of a strain that enabled a 2.4-fold improvement o f
3-HP titer in shake ﬂask experiments (
Lim et al., 2016 ). Several
tools are available for the prediction of translation rate of 5′UTRs,
including the UTR Designer ( Seo et al., 2013 ), and the RBS
Calculator v2.0 ( Espah Borujeni et al., 2014 ). To the same end,
a study showed potential in tuning translation by modulation o f
the Shine-Dalgarno sequence for which an online tool, EMOPEC ,
is available ( Bonde et al., 2016 ). For a selection of 106 Shine-
Dalgarno sequences, the measured protein level was within 2-
fold of the predicted level in 91 % of cases (
Bonde et al., 2016 ).
While in silico prediction of expression level is a very attractive
venue, it should be noted that even for the good predictors, th e
number of false predictions appear to be signiﬁcant ( Bonde et al.,
2016). Nevertheless, these computational approaches should
allow for design and evaluation of smaller, more focused lib raries,
compared to random mutagenesis libraries.
In most studies, researchers have taken advantage of plasmid s
for the expression of relevant genes in the production host.
While these studies provide proof of principle, they might
not be optimal for industrial production due to the well-
known problem of plasmid instability in bioreactors (
Gao et al.,
2014). Consequently, the generation of genetically stable stra ins
where expression cassettes are integrated into the genome
will be a necessity. Additionally, the elimination of plasmids
might improve the production via a reduced metabolic burden
associated with plasmid maintenance and replication (
Silva et al.,
2012). To construct a plasmid-free strain, the E. coli aldH
was inserted in the genome of K. pneumoniae . While 3-HP
production was improved (over parent strain) the 3-HP titer
upon production in shake ﬂasks was low (
Wang and Tian, 2017 ).
In B. subtilis , a plasmid-free strain allowed the production of
3-HP in shake ﬂasks with a titer of 10 g/L ( Kalantari et al., 2017 ).
Considering that both multicopy vectors and strong
promoters have been used for the expression of relevant
genes, one foreseeable diﬃculty in shifting to a single (or a
few) genome-integrated expression cassette will be to ensur e
suﬃcient protein synthesis in the cell. A recent study describ ed
an approach based on translational coupling between the gene
of interest and an antibiotic resistance cassette, thus maki ng a
high rate of translation selectable via an increased resista nce
to an antibiotic (
Rennig et al., 2018 ). With limited screening,
the production of two selected proteins (a nanobody and an
aﬃbody) in E. coli was improved 2- and 10-fold, respectively
(
Rennig et al., 2018 ). The methodology was shown to also work
in Gram-positive bacteria B. subtilis and Lactococcus lactis where
production of a sialidase and a tyrosine ammonia lyase was
improved 2- and 8-fold, respectively (
Ferro et al., 2018 ).
Engineering Host Metabolism for
Improving 3-HP Production
Besides integrating an eﬃcient pathway for the conversion of
glycerol to 3-HP , it is often necessary to further modulate
the host metabolism, in order to direct the substrate into th e
production pathway more eﬃciently, eliminate unwanted by-
products and/or reduce stress.
One of the more common approaches is to ensure that glycerol
is converted more eﬃciently into 3-HP. To this end, targeting
the ﬁrst step in the glycerol utilization pathways is common.
In E. coli , two pathways for glycerol utilization exist. Glycerol
is converted to the glycolytic metabolite dihydroxyacetone
phosphate either via glycerol-3-phosphate catalyzed by glycerol
kinase under aerobic conditions or via dihydroxyacetone
catalyzed by glycerol dehydrogenase under anaerobic condi tions
(
Durnin et al., 2009 ; Figure 3). Inactivating the gene glpK (which
encodes glycerol kinase in E. coli ) increased the titer of 3-
HP 1.6-fold in an aerobic fed batch fermentation when co-fed
with glucose and glycerol. Under the conditions used (aerobic ),
further inactivating the gene encoding glycerol dehydrogen ase
had no eﬀect (
Kim et al., 2014 ). Similarly, the 3-HP titer increased
in B. subtilis co-fed on glycerol and glucose upon inactivation of
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 7 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124
Jers et al. 3-HP Production in Bacteria
FIGURE 3 |Overview of the glycerol metabolism in bacteria. Reactions consuming NADH/NAD + are indicated.
glpK (Kalantari et al., 2017 ). Inactivation of glpK is possible in
process setups where glycerol is not the sole carbon source. Wh en
cells grow only on glycerol, targeting glpK becomes less trivial as
the ﬂuxes toward biomass accumulation and 3-HP production
need to be balanced. In E. coli, the glpK was placed under control
of an inducible promoter and ﬁne-tuning of its expression led
to an increase in both 3-HP titer and yield on glycerol (
Jung
et al., 2014 ). In that study, the gene glpF encoding glycerol
facilitator was also overexpressed to increase the inﬂux of g lycerol
in the cell, which led to a modest increase in 3-HP production
(
Jung et al., 2014 ). Interestingly, the opposite approach was
evaluated by Su and co-workers. They overexpressed glycerol
dehydrogenase in K. pneumoniae to stimulate growth, and found
that this strain not only exhibited faster initial growth an d similar
ﬁnal biomass yield while using less glycerol, but also exhib ited
increased 3-HP production (
Su et al., 2014 ).
In natural 3-HP producers such as K. pneumoniae and L.
reuteri, 3-HPA can be oxidized to 3-HP and reduced to 1,3-
PDO ( Zhu et al., 2009; Dishisha et al., 2014 ). The conversion
of 3-HPA to 1,3-PDO is catalyzed by an oxidoreductase. In
K. pneumoniae , the most important oxidoreductase appears to
be the 1,3-propanediol reductase encoded by dhaT. However,
signiﬁcant amounts of 1,3-PDO are still produced in the dhaT
mutant, indicating that other oxidoreductases in the cell c an
also catalyse this reaction (
Ko et al., 2012 ). In a subsequent
attempt to eliminate 1,3-PDO formation, four oxidoreductas es
were inactivated, but the quadruple mutant still retained th e
ability to produce 1,3-PDO ( Ko et al., 2015 ). With respect
to cofactor balance, 3-HP synthesis requires NAD + while 1,3-
PDO formation requires NADH and thus regenerates NAD +.
Thus, the elimination of 1,3-PDO formation adversely aﬀects
the NAD +/NADH balance, and in fact, it was reported that
the dhaT mutation under 3-HP production conditions impeded
cell growth (
Ko et al., 2012 ). In E. coli , 3-HPA is also
converted to 1,3-PDO by the action of a broad-range aldehyde
oxidoreductase encoded by yqhD. While the deletion of yqhD
dramatically reduces 1,3-PDO formation, it is also here not f ully
abolished, likely due to the presence of alternate oxidoredu ctases
(
Tokuyama et al., 2014 ).
Other important by-products in 3-HP production are lactate
and acetate. The deletion of K. pneumoniae ldhA encoding lactate
dehydrogenase was reported to eliminate lactate formation
(
Kumar et al., 2013b ). Another study reported a reduction in
lactate formation upon inactivation of ldh1 and ldh2 in K.
pneumoniae (Li et al., 2016 ). Likewise, to reduce the acetate
formation, the synthesis gene pta was inactivated, leading
to a reduction but not elimination of acetate formation in
K. pneuomoniae (
Li et al., 2016 ). To further optimize 3-HP
producing cell factories, it is essential to assure that by-pr oduct
formation is reduced to a minimum. Besides the obvious loss
of carbon that could have otherwise been used for biomass
and product formation, it also leads to a more complex
fermentation broth thus potentially increasing costs associa ted
with downstream puriﬁcation.
The NAD +/NADH balance is of importance for the 3-HP
production due to the NAD +-dependence of the employed
aldehyde dehydrogenases. The synthesis of by-products 1,3- PDO
and lactate also generates NAD +. Elimination of respective
pathways thus further skews the NAD +/NADH balance
(Figure 3). Under aerobic conditions, NAD + is also regenerated
by the electron transport chain. However, due to the oxygen-
sensitivity of glycerol dehydratase, 3-HP production is oft en
performed under microaerophilic or anaerobic conditions whe re
NAD+ regeneration is reduced. To counter these eﬀects, various
enzymes can be used to modulate the NAD +/NADH balance.
In the context of 3-HP production, over-expression of the gene s
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 8 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124
Jers et al. 3-HP Production in Bacteria
encoding either NADH oxidase, NADH dehydrogenase, or
glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase in K. pneumoniae showed
potential in stimulating 3-HP production via regenerating th e
NAD+ pool in all cases (
Li et al., 2013b ).
From an economical point of view, it would be beneﬁcial
to use a production strain capable of synthesizing coenzyme
B12. However, even in K. pneumoniae which is capable
thereof, it has been reported that addition of coenzyme
B12 increases the glycerol dehydratase activity (
Ashok et al.,
2013). This could indicate that upregulation of coenzyme
B12 synthesis is another parameter for increasing the glycerol
dehydratase activity. Studies on Bacillus megaterium and more
recently on P. denitriﬁcans show good potential for increasing
coenzyme B 12 synthesis, e.g., by removing the riboswitch-
based feedback inhibition system ( Biedendieck et al., 2010;
Nguyen-Vo et al., 2018 ).
The application of genome scale metabolic models is a
common approach in the ﬁeld of metabolic engineering and
has been used successfully in multiple studies. Using a genom e-
scale metabolic model for K. pneumoniae , no single mutants
that would improve 3-HP production were predicted. Instead,
a double knockout of tpi (triose phosphate isomerase) and
zwf (glucose-6-phosphate-1-dehydrogenase) involved in centra l
metabolism was suggested. The introduction of these two
mutations led to a 4.4-fold increase in the 3-HP yield compare d
to the parent strain (
Tokuyama et al., 2014 ). Predictions were
made of beneﬁcial mutations in B. subtilis, but here only the more
obvious candidate, glycerol kinase, was suggested as a bene ﬁcial
mutation (Kalantari et al., 2017 ).
Another important aspect of optimizing the production strain
is to improve the robustness of the strain, speciﬁcally, allev iating
stress. Probably the most signiﬁcant stressor is that impose d
by the intermediate product 3-HPA and, to a lesser extent, the
product 3-HP. Warnecke et al. developed a method to screen
for regions and genes that could be involved in the tolerance
to 3-HP. Starting with a genomic library of E. coli clones, each
carrying a plasmid with a genomic DNA insert, they selected
for increased tolerance to 3-HP and subsequently quantiﬁed t he
enriched plasmid DNA by microarray analysis (
Warnecke et al.,
2010). Using this method, they concluded that 3-HP inhibition
is due to the limitations in the chorismate and threonine
pathways. Surprisingly, they found that over-expression of al most
any of the genes in the pathways dramatically alleviated the
stress imposed by 3-HP (
Warnecke et al., 2010 ). In a follow
up study, the authors identiﬁed a 21-amino acid peptide that,
when expressed, increased the 3-HP tolerance about 2.3-fold
(
Warnecke et al., 2012 ).
The potential of using omics data to identify the targets for
improving 3-HP tolerance has been demonstrated. Using 2D gel -
based proteomics, Liu and co-workers identiﬁed 46 up- and 23
down-regulated proteins upon challenging E. coli with 5 g/L of
3-HP. Over-expression of several of these proteins alleviate d the
stress imposed by 3-HP (
Liu et al., 2016 ).
In recent years, there have been key improvements in the
technology for generating targeted libraries of mutants, w hich
is exempliﬁed in a study by Liu and co-workers where a
method termed iCREATE for iterative genome editing was
used to generate 162,000 mutations in 115 genes (
Liu et al.,
2018). Using this approach, the production of 3-HP via the
Malonyl-CoA pathway was increased 60-fold ( Liu et al., 2018 ).
However, for its successful employment, appropriate screening
and/or selection techniques need to be in place. Small molecu le
biosensors based on transcription factors or riboswitches c an
couple metabolite concentration to a measurable output such a s
ﬂuorescence for selection or selectable output such as antib iotic
resistance (
Liu et al., 2017 ). It is, thus, of particular importance
that a 3-HP-inducible system was identiﬁed in P. putida
recently and demonstrated to be functional when expressed
in E. coli (
Hanko et al., 2017 ). This biosensor has already
found application for screening in the directed evolution of t he
aldehyde dehydrogenase KGSADH which improved the catalytic
eﬃciency of the enzyme 2.8-fold (
Seok et al., 2018 ).
Combining approaches such as iCREATE for generating
diversity, and biosensors for detection or selection of impr oved
variants should hold high promises for moving bacterial 3-HP
production strains to industrially relevant levels of produc tion.
PROCESS ENGINEERING FOR
OPTIMIZING 3-HP PRODUCTION
In a majority of the studies reviewed for this paper, the
ability of the recombinant strains to produce 3-HP was tested
in 1.5–5 L bioreactors operated in fed-batch mode ( Table 3;
Supplementary Table 1). A fed-batch operation typically entails
growing the cells until the end of the exponential phase. This
is followed by the addition of feed medium containing the
substrates, thus keeping the growth rate of the microorganis m
at a desired level (
Liu, 2017 ). A fed-batch mode of operation has
certain advantages over batch fermentation. For instance, a fed-
batch operation has the ability to prevent overﬂow metabolism,
that is, the phenomenon where fast-growing cells, in the presenc e
of oxygen, utilize fermentation instead of respiration to pro duce
energy (
Basan et al., 2015 ). Another advantage of a fed-batch
operation is its ability to maintain the substrate concentra tion
at a low level ( de Fouchécour et al., 2018 ). This is particularly
important when the substrate is glycerol. It was reported that
no growth of K. pneumoniae cells could be seen above 110 and
133 g/L glycerol (extrapolated values) in aerobic and anaero bic
conditions, respectively, with glycerol concentrations high er than
40 g/L showing signiﬁcant growth inhibition (
Cheng et al., 2005 ).
Consequently, high titers of 3-HP cannot be obtained from
glycerol in a batch fermentation. In L. reuteri , the conversion
of glycerol to 3-HPA was reported to be about 10 times faster
than the subsequent conversion of 3-HPA to 3-HP and 1,3-
PDO, resulting in the accumulation of the toxic intermediat e
3-HPA. To circumvent this problem, a fed-batch fermentation
process was established. It produced 3-HP and 1,3-PDO without
any accumulation of 3-HPA. This was achieved by identifying a
maximum value of speciﬁc glycerol consumption rate at which
only 1,3-PDO and 3-HP are produced, and no accumulation of
3-HPA takes place. By maintaining the glycerol amount in the
bioreactor such that its speciﬁc consumption rate stayed under
this maximum value, a 3-HP titer of 14 g/L with a productivity
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 9 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124
Jers et al. 3-HP Production in Bacteria
TABLE 3 |Summary of studies reporting the highest 3-HP titer, yield, and productivity in various production hosts.
Strain Carbon
source
Fermentation conditions Titer a Yielda Produc-tivitya Reference
K. pneumoniae
/Delta1ldh1/Delta1ldh2/Delta1pta_pTAC-puuC
Glycerol 5-L bioreactor, fed-batch fermentation, pH
7.0, 37 ◦C, 1.5 vvm air, 400 rpm
83.8 n.a. 1.16
Li et al., 2016
K. pneumoniae Kp4
/Delta1ldhA/Delta1dhaT_ lac-aldH
Glycerol 5-L bioreactor, fed-batch fermentation, pH
7.0, 37 ◦C, 2.2 L/min air, 450 rpm
61.9 0.58 1.62 b Jiang et al., 2018
E. coli W3110
/Delta1ackA-pta/Delta1yqhD_
T7-dhaB-gdrAB-gabD4
Glycerol 5-L bioreactor, fed-batch fermentation, pH
7.0, 35 ◦C, 1 vvm air, 500 rpm, vitamin B 12
added externally
71.9 n.a. 1.8 Chu et al., 2015
E. coli W /Delta1ackA-pta/Delta1yqhD_tac-
dhaB-gdrAB-KGSADH
Glycerol and
glucose
5-L bioreactor, fed-batch fermentation, pH
7.0, 37 ◦C, 1 vvm air, 500 rpm, coenzyme
B12 added externally
40.5 0.97 g/g 1.35
Lim et al., 2016
L. reuteri RPRB3007c Glycerol 3-L bioreactor, anaerobic fed-batch
fermentation, pH 7.0, 37 ◦C, 500 rpm
10.6 n.a. 1.08 Dishisha et al., 2014
B. subtilis 168 trp +
/Delta1glpK_pHyperspank-dhaB-
gdrAB-puuC
Glucose Shake ﬂask, 37 ◦C, 200 rpm, coenzyme B 12
added externally
10 0.79 g/g n.a. Kalantari et al., 2017
L. reuteri DSM 20016 and G.
oxydans DSM 50049 d
Glycerol 3-L bioreactor, Step 1: anaerobic fed-batch
fermentation, pH 5.5, 37 ◦C, 200 rpm. Step
2: aerobic batch fermentation, pH 5.5,
28◦C, 1 L/min air, 800 rpm.
23.6 0.98 n.a.
Dishisha et al., 2015
K. pneumoniae and G. oxydanse Glycerol 7-L bioreactor, fed-batch fermentation, Step
1: pH 7.0, 37 ◦C, 0.2 vvm air, 150 rpm. Step
2: pH 5.5, 28 ◦C, 0.5 vvm air, 600 rpm.
60.5 0.51 1.12 Zhao et al., 2015
aUnless otherwise mentioned, the units of titer, yield, and productivity ar e g/L, mol 3−HP/molGlycerol and g/L.h, respectively
bCalculated based on the published data
cMutated catabolite repression element (CRE) in the upstream region of the pdu oper on
dL. reuteri converted glycerol to 3-HP and 1,3-propanediol followed by G. oxydans converting 1,3-propanediol to 3-HP
eK. pneumoniae converted glycerol to 1,3-propanediol followed by G. oxy dans converting 1,3-propanediol to 3-HP
adhE, alcohol dehydrogenase; aldA, aldehyde dehydrogenase A (E. coli); al dH, γ -glutamyl-γ -aminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase (E. coli); aldHk, NAD +-dependent homolog
of E. coli aldH; CRE, catabolite repression element; dhaB, glycerol dehydra tase; dhaR, dhaB reactivating factor in L. brevis; dhaS, putative aldehyde de hydrogenase from
B. subtilis; dhaT, 1,3-propanediol oxidoreductase; DO, dissolved oxygen; frdA, succinate dehydrogenase; gabD4, aldehyde dehydrogenase (Cupriavidus n ecator); gdrA, gdrB,
glycerol dehydratase reactivase; glpF, glycerol uptake facilitator prote in; glpK, glycerol kinase; KGSADH, α -ketoglutaric semialdehyde dehydrogenase (A. brasilense); ldhA, lactate
dehydrogenase; n.a. , not available; pduP , propionaldehyde dehydrogenase ; puuC, γ -glutamyl-γ -aminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase (K. pneumoniae); yqhD, NADPH-dependen t
aldehyde reductase/alcohol dehydrogenase.
of 0.25 g/L.h was obtained (
Dishisha et al., 2014, 2015 ). This
underlines how the knowledge of cell metabolism can be used t o
solve production problems by means of process engineering.
The challenge concerning the requirement of anaerobic
conditions for coenzyme B 12 generation and aerobic conditions
for eﬃcient NAD + regeneration for production of 3-HP from
glycerol was tackled by electro-fermentation in a recently
published study (
Kim et al., 2017 ). Certain microorganisms
possess the ability to deliver electrons to solid electrodes when
grown under anaerobic conditions. These exoelectrogens,
as these microorganisms are called, can be used to control
the redox state in the cells independent of the electron
transport chain or fermentation. Electro-fermentation uti lizes
this property of exoelectrogens to drive the unbalanced
fermentations. Anodic electro-fermentation has been used
for bioconversion of glycerol to 3-HP using recombinant K.
pneumoniae over-expressing KGSADH from A. brasilense .
An electrical potential of + 0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl was applied
to the anode, with 2-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone used
for shuttling the electrons between the bacteria and the
anode. The transfer of electrons from the bacteria to the
anode during anaerobic fermentation led to a decrease in
NADH/NAD+ ratio in the cells, and hence to an enhanced
3-HP production as compared to the fermentative control
(
Kim et al., 2017 ). Although the 3-HP titer reached was low,
the study nevertheless demonstrated that it is possible to
improve NAD + regeneration under anaerobic conditions.
With further optimization, this novel strategy might pave
the way for providing new opportunities to enhance 3-
HP production from glycerol. It might similarly enhance
other bioconversions where there is a need to control the
intracellular redox state of a cell factory (
Kim et al., 2017;
de Fouchécour et al., 2018 ).
In a fermentation operation, the process parameters such
as aeration rate, medium composition, etc. play an important
role in determining the ﬁnal outcome. While there are
ample reports on strain development, generally less focus has
been put on the optimization of the production conditions.
Conversion of glycerol to 3-HP being an oxidative reaction,
the aeration rate does aﬀect the ﬁnal yield of the product (
de
Fouchécour et al., 2018 ). In one study, aerobic, micro-aerobic
and anaerobic conditions were tested in batch fermentation s
performed to convert glycerol to 3-HP using recombinant K.
pneumoniae. They reported that amongst the three conditions
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 10 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124
Jers et al. 3-HP Production in Bacteria
tested, the micro-aerobic condition yielded the highest 3- HP
titer (2.2 g/L; Zhu et al., 2009 ). In a more recent study,
the transcript levels of the genes encoding the enzymes of
the CoA-independent pathway of glycerol conversion to 3-
HP and the genes coding for the enzymes of the formate
hydrogen lyase pathway were analyzed to understand the
intracellular response of K. pneumoniae under aerobic, micro-
aerobic and anaerobic growth conditions (
Huang et al., 2016 ).
The transcription of the glycerol dehydratase operon was
downregulated in the presence of oxygen, while aldehyde
dehydrogenase-, hydrogenase- and formate dehydrogenase-
coding genes were found to be upregulated. The authors
suggested that in the presence of oxygen, the formate hydroge n
lyase pathway consumed the excess NADH generated due to
the over-expression of aldH (
Huang et al., 2016 ). In another
study aimed at enhancing the coproduction of 3-HP and
1,3-PDO in K. pneumoniae , the production of by-products
such as lactate, ethanol, succinate, and acetate was reduce d
by disrupting their synthesis (
Ko et al., 2017 ). However, the
disruption of pta-ackA gene of the acetate pathway led to
a reduction in cell growth, glycerol uptake, and 3-HP and
1,3-PDO production. The authors bypassed the disruption of
this gene for reducing acetate production by testing various
agitation speeds between 200 and 600 rpm. They reported an
increase in 3-HP yield from 0.18 to 0.38 mol 3−HP/molglycerol,
respectively, which could be attributed to an enhanced cell
growth rate because of better oxygen transfer at 600 rpm.
Although acetate production was not completely abolished, they
did manage to reduce it from 163 mM (at 400 rpm) to only
80 mM (at 600 rpm;
Ko et al., 2017 ). Recently, a production
of 61.9 g/L 3-HP with a yield of 0.58 mol 3−HP/molglycerol in
38 h in a 5 L bioreactor operated in fed-batch mode by using
an engineered K. pneumoniae strain was reported (
Jiang et al.,
2018). The aeration rate was reduced to half of the initial
rate once the cell biomass OD reached close to the maximum
value. Furthermore, using the same strategy, they were able to
scale-up the process in a 300 L bioreactor and reported a titer
of 54.5 g/L for 3-HP with a yield of 0.58 mol 3−HP/molglycerol
in 51 h.
The growth medium used for cultivating a microorganism
plays an important role in inﬂuencing the production process.
The current record holder for the highest 3-HP titer, addres sed
this issue by testing diﬀerent media for the production of 3-HP
in K. pneumoniae in shake ﬂasks (
Li et al., 2016 ). A gradient
concentration of each component of the media (except CaCl 2)
was individually analyzed. The ameliorated medium enabled an
increase of 80.5% in the production of 3-HP. They also tested t he
eﬀect of pH on 3-HP production and found pH 7.0 to be the most
appropriate for 3-HP production (
Li et al., 2016 ). To optimize the
growth medium for 3-HP production using L. reuteri, 30 diﬀerent
media with variable amounts of sugar beet and wheat processin g
coproducts (used as the carbon source), yeast extract, tween 80
and vitamin B 12 were tested. The authors reported an increase in
3-HP production yield by 70 %, accompanied with a decreased
3-HPA titer (
Couvreur et al., 2017 ).
Another way to solve the earlier-mentioned challenge of
conﬂicting requirements for coenzyme B 12 generation and
NAD+ regeneration, is to divide the conversion of glycerol to
3-HP into 2 steps. First, glycerol is converted into either 3- HPA
or a mixture of 3-HP and 1,3-PDO. The second step involves
the conversion of 3-HPA and 1,3-PDO to 3-HP. This two-step
strategy was employed in a study where wild-type L. reuteri
resting cells ﬁrst converted glycerol to 1,3-PDO and 3-HP in
equimolar amounts. In the subsequent step, the supernatant
was fed to the resting cells of Gluconobacter oxydans which
oxidized 1,3-PDO to 3-HP , yielding a 3-HP titer of 23.6 g/L
(
Dishisha et al., 2015 ). In a similar study, Zhao et al. employed
K. pneumoniae in the ﬁrst step to convert glycerol into 1,3-PDO.
In the second step, the resting cells of G. oxydans were introduced
in the same bioreactor after heat inactivating K. pneumoniae .
This led to the conversion of 1,3-PDO to 3-HP with a yield
of 0.52 mol/mol on glycerol and 0.94 mol/mol on 1,3-PDO,
and a 3-HP titer of 60.5 g/L (
Zhao et al., 2015 ). The advantage
of using two bioconversion steps is that each uncoupled step
can be optimized separately. As attractive as it may appear
because of high yields, the industrial implementation of thi s
two-step strategy may not be as cost-eﬀective and economical
as a single step fermentation because of higher associated co sts.
Nevertheless, this strategy could well be a ﬁrst step for achie ving
an integrated continuous process for the production of 3-HP ,
which in addition would be highly desirable because of its lo w
operating costs (
de Fouchécour et al., 2018 ).
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES
As outlined in this review considering the case of 3-HP
production in bacterial cell factories, there are many eleme nts
to the successful design of a suitable production strain,
ranging from the choice of organism, pathway, and enzymes
to engineering of the cell for improved ﬂux through the
production pathway and the ability to tolerate the stress
imposed by intermediate, by-, and ﬁnal products ( Figure 4).
Most of the studies described in this review have targeted
some of these elements. The highest titer recorded so far is
83.8 g/L which was achieved in K. pneumoniae by optimizing
the expression of aldehyde dehydrogenase in the production
pathway and increasing ﬂux through the production pathway
by blocking synthesis of the by-products lactic acid and
acetic acid (
Li et al., 2016 ). This impressive feat was based
on rational design and accomplished by combining some
of the successful approaches outlined above in very few
engineering steps.
For bacterial 3-HP production to reach a level of
economic viability, further improvements in titer, and
productivity will be necessary. By now, many diﬀerent
enzyme variants have been used for constructing 3-HP
production pathways but in many cases the enzymes
have not been characterized biochemically. A better
understanding of the properties of the enzymes with
respect to catalytic properties, pH range, and stability could
prove instrumental in identifying the optimal enzymes and
would also help to identify enzyme qualities to improve by
enzyme engineering.
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 11 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124
Jers et al. 3-HP Production in Bacteria
FIGURE 4 |Representation of targets in the bacterial cell for enginee ring a 3-hydroxypropanoic acid producing strain. Reaction s and proteins in green represents
targets that are introduced or over-expressed to confer/imp rove 3-HP production. Unwanted reactions and the correspon ding enzymes are shown in red. Inactivation
of these targets have been shown to improve 3-HP production a nd/or reduce/eliminate unwanted by-product formation.
The impressive body of research on strain engineering
has identiﬁed numerous challenges and solutions such as
balancing enzyme activities, preventing by-product formati on
and alleviating stresses. With this accumulating knowledg e
base pertaining to 3-HP cell factory design, it seems likely
that it will be possible to further tweak production by
combining all of the successful approaches described herein.
To facilitate this work, powerful engineering techniques ar e
continually emerging that allow the design of large combina torial
libraries of targeted mutations. Notably, the recent devel opment
of a 3-HP biosensor can be used in combination with
adaptive laboratory evolution for identifying as-of-yet un known
mechanisms for further ﬁne-tuning of the production strains .
While it seems reasonable that further improvements in titer
will be achieved in the coming years, there should be an
increased focus to also develop industrially relevant proce ss
designs and subsequent upscaling in order to provide proof
of concept.
In conclusion, the massive developments in synthetic biology
and metabolic engineering could be expected to soon deliver th e
long-sought goal of converting the abundant by-product glyc erol
into the much desired value-added chemical 3-HP.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
CJ, AG, and AK performed literature search and drafted the
manuscript. All authors revised the manuscript and approved the
ﬁnal version.
FUNDING
This work was supported by grants from the Novo
Nordisk Foundation (Grant no. NNF16OC0021474 and
NNF10CC1016517) to IM.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Kirsten Leistner for proofreading and
revising the manuscript.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.338 9/fbioe.
2019.00124/full#supplementary-material
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 12 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124
Jers et al. 3-HP Production in Bacteria
REFERENCES
Andreeßen, B., Lange, A. B., Robenek, H., and Steinbüchel, A. (2 010). Conversion
of glycerol to poly(3-hydroxypropionate) in recombinant Escherichia coli. Appl.
Environ. Microbiol. 76, 622–626. doi: 10.1128/AEM.02097-09
Ashok, S., Sankaranarayanan, M., Ko, Y., Jae, K. E., Ainala, S. K ., Kumar,
V., et al. (2013). Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycero l by
recombinant Klebsiella pneumoniae /Delta1dhaT/Delta1yqhD which can produce vitamin
B12 naturally. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 110, 511–524. doi: 10.1002/bit.24726
Basan, M., Hui, S., Okano, H., Zhang, Z., Shen, Y., Williamson, J. R ., et al.
(2015). Overﬂow metabolism in Escherichia coli results from eﬃcient proteome
allocation. Nature. 528, 99–104. doi: 10.1038/nature15765
Biedendieck, R., Malten, M., Barg, H., Bunk, B., Martens, J. H., D eery,
E., et al. (2010). Metabolic engineering of cobalamin (vitamin B12 )
production in Bacillus megaterium . Microb. Biotechnol. 3, 24–37.
doi: 10.1111/j.1751-7915.2009.00125.x
Bonde, M. T., Pedersen, M., Klausen, M. S., Jensen, S. I., Wulﬀ, T., Harrison, S.,
et al. (2016). Predictable tuning of protein expression in bacteria. Nat. Methods.
13, 233–236. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3727
Burgé G., Saulou-Bérion, C., Moussa, M., Pollet, B., Flourat, A., A llais, F.,
et al. (2015). Diversity of Lactobacillus reuteri strains in converting glycerol
into 3-Hydroxypropionic acid. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 177, 923–939.
doi: 10.1007/s12010-015-1787-8
Chen, Z., Huang, J., Wu, Y., Wu, W., Zhang, Y., and Liu, D. (2017 ).
Metabolic engineering of Corynebacterium glutamicum for the production of
3-hydroxypropionic acid from glucose and xylose. Metab. Eng. 39, 151–158.
doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2016.11.009
Cheng, K. K., Liu, H. J., and Liu, D. H. (2005). Multiple growth inhib ition of
Klebsiella pneumoniae in 1,3-propanediol fermentation. Biotechnol. Lett. 27,
19–22 doi: 10.1007/s10529-004-6308-8
Chu, H. S., Kim, Y. S., Lee, C. M., Lee, J. H., Jung, W. S., Ahn, J. H., et al. (2015).
Metabolic engineering of 3-hydroxypropionic acid biosynthesis i n Escherichia
coli. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 112, 356–364. doi: 10.1002/bit.25444
Cleusix, V., Lacroix, C., Vollenweider, S., Duboux, M., and Le Bla y, G. (2007).
Inhibitory activity spectrum of reuterin produced by Lactobacillus reuteri
against intestinal bacteria. BMC Microbiol. 7:101. doi: 10.1186/1471-2180-7-101
Couvreur, J., Teixeira, A., Allais, F., Spinnler, H. E., Saulou-Bério n, C., and
Clément, T. (2017). Wheat and sugar beet coproducts for the bioprod uction
of 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid by Lactobacillus reuteri DSM17938. Fermentation
3:32. doi: 10.3390/fermentation3030032
Dabrowski, S., Pietrewicz-Kubicz, D., Zabłotna, E., and Dług ołecka, A. (2012).
1,3-propanediol production by Escherichia coli expressing genes of dha
operon from Clostridium butyricum 2CR371.5. Acta Biochim. Pol. 59, 357–361
doi: 10.18388/abp.2012_2121
Daniel, R., Bobik, T. A., and Gottschalk, G. (1998). Biochemist ry
of coenzyme B12-dependent glycerol and diol dehydratases and
organization of the encoding genes. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 22, 553–566
doi: 10.1111/j.1574-6976.1998.tb00387.x
de Fouchécour, F., Sánchez-Castañeda, A. K., Saulou-Bérion, C., and Spinnler, H.
E. (2018). Process engineering for microbial production of 3-hydro xypropionic
acid. Biotechnol. Adv. 36, 1207–1222 doi: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2018.03.020
Dishisha, T., Pereyra, L. P., Pyo, S. H., Britton, R. A., and Hatti -Kaul, R.
(2014). Flux analysis of the Lactobacillus reuteri propanediol-utilization
pathway for production of 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde, 3-hydroxypropion ic
acid and 1,3-propanediol from glycerol. Microb. Cell Fact. 13:76.
doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-13-76
Dishisha, T., Pyo, S. H., and Hatti-Kaul, R. (2015). Bio-based 3-hydroxypropionic-
and acrylic acid production from biodiesel glycerol via integrated mi crobial and
chemical catalysis. Microb. Cell Fact. 14:200. doi: 10.1186/s12934-015-0388-0
Durnin, G., Clomburg, J., Yeates, Z., Alvarez, P. J., Zygourakis, K ., Campbell,
P., et al. (2009). Understanding and harnessing the microaerobic
metabolism of glycerol in Escherichia coli . Biotechnol. Bioeng. 103, 148–161.
doi: 10.1002/bit.22246
Espah Borujeni, A., Channarasappa, A. S., and Salis, H. M. (2014). Tra nslation
rate is controlled by coupled trade-oﬀs between site accessibility, selective
RNA unfolding and sliding at upstream standby sites. Nucleic Acids Res. 42,
2646–2659. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1139
Ferro, R., Rennig, M., Hernández-Rollán, C., Daley, D. O., and Nørho lm,
M. H. H. (2018). A synbio approach for selection of highly expressed
gene variants in Gram-positive bacteria. Microb. Cell Fact. 17:37.
doi: 10.1186/s12934-018-0886-y
Gao, Y., Liu, C., Ding, Y., Sun, C., Zhang, R., Xian, M., et al. (2 014). Development
of genetically stable Escherichia coli strains for poly(3-hydroxypropionate)
production. PLoS ONE. 9:e97845. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097845
Garai-Ibabe, G., Ibarburu, I., Berregi, I., Claisse, O., Lonvaud -Funel, A.,
Irastorza, A., et al. (2008). Glycerol metabolism and bitterness produ cing
lactic acid bacteria in cidermaking. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 121, 253–261.
doi: 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2007.11.004
Hanko, E. K. R., Minton, N. P., and Malys, N. (2017). Characteris ation of
a 3-hydroxypropionic acid-inducible system from Pseudomonas putida for
orthogonal gene expression control in Escherichia coli and Cupriavidus necator.
Sci. Rep. 7:1724. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-01850-w
Heinrich, D., Andreeßen, B., Madkour, M. H., Al-Ghamdi, M. A., Shab baj, I.
I., and Steinbüchel, A. (2013). From waste to plastic: synthesis of poly(3-
hydroxypropionate) in Shimwellia blattae . Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 79,
3582–3589. doi: 10.1128/AEM.00161-13
Honjo, H., Tsuruno, K., Tatsuke, T., Sato, M., and Hanai, T. (201 5). Dual synthetic
pathway for 3-hydroxypropionic acid production in engineered Escherichia
coli. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 120, 199–204. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2014.12.023
Huang, Y., Li, Z., Shimizu, K., and Ye, Q. (2012). Simultaneous prod uction
of 3-hydroxypropionic acid and 1,3-propanediol from glycerol by a
recombinant strain of Klebsiella pneumoniae. Bioresour. Technol. 103, 351–359.
doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2011.10.022
Huang, Y., Li, Z., and Ye, Q. (2016). Transcriptional regulation of genes
involved in 3-hydroxypropionic acid production in response to aeratio n of
recombinant Klebsiella pneumoniae. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 178, 1129–1140
doi: 10.1007/s12010-015-1933-3
Jiang, J., Huang, B., Wu, H., Li, Z., and Ye, Q. (2018). Eﬃcient 3 -hydroxypropionic
acid production from glycerol by metabolically engineered Klebsiella
pneumoniae. Bioresour. Bioprocess. 5:34. doi: 10.1186/s40643-018-0218-4
Jo, J. E., Mohan Raj, S., Rathnasingh, C., Selvakumar, E., Jung , W. C.,
and Park, S. (2008). Cloning, expression, and characterization of an
aldehyde dehydrogenase from Escherichia coli K-12 that utilizes 3-
Hydroxypropionaldehyde as a substrate. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 81,
51–60. doi: 10.1007/s00253-008-1608-x
Jung, W. S., Kang, J. H., Chu, H. S., Choi, I. S., and Cho, K. M. (20 14).
Elevated production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid by metabolic enginee ring
of the glycerol metabolism in Escherichia coli . Metab. Eng. 23, 116–122.
doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2014.03.001
Kalantari, A., Chen, T., Ji, B., Stancik, I. A., Ravikumar, V., F ranjevic,
D., et al. (2017). Conversion of glycerol to 3-Hydroxypropanoic acid
by genetically engineered Bacillus subtilis . Front. Microbiol. 8:638.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00638
Kanno, M., and Atsumi, S. (2017). Engineering an obligate photoa utotrophic
cyanobacterium to utilize glycerol for growth and chemical producti on. ACS
Synth. Biol. 6, 69–75. doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.6b00239
Kim, C., Kim, M. Y., Michie, I., Jeon, B. H., Premier, G. C., Park, S., et al.
(2017). Anodic electro-fermentation of 3-hydroxypropionic acid fro m glycerol
by recombinant Klebsiella pneumoniae L17 in a bioelectrochemical system.
Biotechnol. Biofuels. 10:199. doi: 10.1186/s13068-017-0886-x
Kim, K., Kim, S. K., Park, Y. C., and Seo, J. H. (2014). Enhanced produ ction
of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol by modulation of glycerol
metabolism in recombinant Escherichia coli. Bioresour. Technol. 156, 170–175.
doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2014.01.009
Ko, Y., Ashok, S., Ainala, S. K., Sankaranarayanan, M., Chun, A. Y., Jung, G.
Y., et al. (2014). Coenzyme B12 can be produced by engineered Escherichia
coli under both anaerobic and aerobic conditions. Biotechnol. J. 9, 1526–1535.
doi: 10.1002/biot.201400221
Ko, Y., Ashok, S., Seol, E., Ainala, S. K., and Park, S. (2015). De letion of putative
oxidoreductases from Klebsiella pneumoniae J2B could reduce 1,3-propanediol
during the production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol. Biotechnol
Bioproc E. 20, 834–843. doi: 10.1007/s12257-015-0166-1
Ko, Y., Ashok, S., Zhou, S., Kumar, V., and Park, S. (2012). Aldeh yde
dehydrogenase activity is important to the production of 3-hydroxy propionic
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 13 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124
Jers et al. 3-HP Production in Bacteria
acid from glycerol by recombinant Klebsiella pneumoniae. Process Biochem. 47,
1135–1143 doi: 10.1016/j.procbio.2012.04.007
Ko, Y., Seol, E., Sundara Sekar, B., Kwon, S., Lee, J., and Park, S . (2017).
Metabolic engineering of Klebsiella pneumoniae J2B for co-production
of 3-hydroxypropionic acid and 1,3-propanediol from glycerol: Reducti on
of acetate and other by-products. Bioresour. Technol. 244, 1096–1103.
doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2017.08.099
Kumar, V., Ashok, S., and Park, S. (2013a). Recent advances in b iological
production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid. Biotechnol. Adv. 31, 945–961.
doi: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2013.02.008
Kumar, V., Sankaranarayanan, M., Durgapal, M., Zhou, S., Ko, Y., A shok,
S., et al. (2013b). Simultaneous production of 3-hydroxypropionic
acid and 1,3-propanediol from glycerol using resting cells of the
lactate dehydrogenase-deﬁcient recombinant Klebsiella pneumoniae
overexpressing an aldehyde dehydrogenase. Bioresour. Technol. 135, 555–563.
doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2012.11.018
Kurihara, S., Kato, K., Asada, K., Kumagai, H., and Suzuki, H. (201 0). A putrescine-
inducible pathway comprising PuuE-YneI in which γ -aminobutyrate is
degraded into succinate in Escherichia coli K-12. J. Bacteriol. 192, 4582–4591.
doi: 10.1128/JB.00308-10
Kwak, S., Park, Y. C., and Seo, J. H. (2013). Biosynthesis of 3-h ydroxypropionic
acid from glycerol in recombinant Escherichia coli expressing Lactobacillus
brevis dhaB and dhaR gene clusters and E. coli K-12 aldH. Bioresour Technol .
135, 432–439. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2012.11.063
Li, Y., Ge, X., and Tian, P. (2013a). Gene arrangements in expressio n vector
aﬀect 3-hydroxypropionic acid production in Klebsiella pneumoniae. Indian J.
Microbiol. 53, 418–424. doi: 10.1007/s12088-013-0390-3
Li, Y., Liu, L., and Tian, P. (2014). NAD +-independent aldehyde oxidase
catalyzes cofactor balanced 3-hydroxypropionic acid production in Klebsiella
pneumoniae. Biotechnol. Lett. 36, 2215–2221. doi: 10.1007/s10529-014-1590-6
Li, Y., Su, M., Ge, X., and Tian, P. (2013b). Enhanced aldehyde d ehydrogenase
activity by regenerating NAD + in Klebsiella pneumoniae and implications
for the glycerol dissimilation pathways. Biotechnol Lett . 35, 1609–1615.
doi: 10.1007/s10529-013-1243-1
Li, Y., Wang, X., Ge, X., and Tian, P. (2016). High production of 3-
hydroxypropionic acid in Klebsiella pneumoniae by systematic optimization of
glycerol metabolism. Sci. Rep. 6:26932. doi: 10.1038/srep26932
Liao, D. I., Reiss, L., Turner, I., and Dotson, G. (2003). Struc ture of glycerol
dehydratase reactivase: a new type of molecular chaperone. Structure. 11,
109–119 doi: 10.1016/S0969-2126(02)00935-8
Lim, H. G., Noh, M. H., Jeong, J. H., Park, S., and Jung, G. Y. (2016).
Optimum rebalancing of the 3-Hydroxypropionic acid production
pathway from glycerol in Escherichia coli . ACS Synth. Biol. 5, 1247–1255
doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.5b00303
Lindlbauer, K. A., Marx, H., and Sauer, M. (2017). 3-Hydroxypropion aldehyde
production from crude glycerol by Lactobacillus diolivorans with enhanced
glycerol uptake. Biotechnol. Biofuels. 10:295. doi: 10.1186/s13068-017-0982-y
Liu, M., Han, X., Xian, M., Ding, Y., Liu, H., and Zhao, G. (2016). Development of
a 3-hydroxypropionate resistant Escherichia coli strain. Bioengineered. 7, 21–27.
doi: 10.1080/21655979.2015.1122143
Liu, R., Liang, L., Choudhury, A., Bassalo, M. C., Garst, A. D., Tarasava, K., et al.
(2018). Iterative genome editing of Escherichia coli for 3-hydroxypropionic acid
production. Metab. Eng. 47, 303–313. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2018.04.007
Liu, S. (2017). “Cell cultivation” in Bioprocess Engineering, 2nd Edn, ed S. Liu,
(Amsterdam: Elsevier), 699–782.
Liu, Y., Gallo, A. A., Bajpai, R. K., Chistoserdov, A., Nelson, A. T ., Segura, L. N.,
et al. (2010). The diversity and molecular modelling analysis of B 12-dependent
and B 12-independent glycerol dehydratases. Int. J. Bioinform. Res. Appl. 6,
484–507 doi: 10.1504/IJBRA.2010.037988
Liu, Y., Liu, Y., and Wang, M. (2017). Design, optimization and application of
small molecule biosensor in metabolic engineering. Front. Microbiol. 8:2012.
doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2017.02012
Luo, L. H., Kim, C. H., Heo, S. Y., Oh, B. R., Hong, W. K., Kim, S., et al.
(2012). Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid through propionaldehy de
dehydrogenase PduP mediated biosynthetic pathway in Klebsiella pneumoniae.
Bioresour. Technol. 103, 1–6. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2011.09.099
Luo, L. H., Seo, J. W., Baek, J. O., Oh, B. R., Heo, S. Y., Hong, W. K. , et al. (2011).
Identiﬁcation and characterization of the propanediol utilizati on protein PduP
of Lactobacillus reuteri for 3-hydroxypropionic acid production from glycerol.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 89, 697–703. doi: 10.1007/s00253-010-2887-6
Luo, L. H., Seo, J. W., Heo, S. Y., Oh, B. R., Kim, D. H., and
Kim, C. H. (2013). Identiﬁcation and characterization of Klebsiella
pneumoniae aldehyde dehydrogenases increasing production of 3-
hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol. Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 36, 1319–1326.
doi: 10.1007/s00449-012-0880-4
Mori, K., and Toraya, T. (1999). Mechanism of reactivation of co enzyme B 12-
dependent diol dehydratase by a molecular chaperone-like reactivati ng factor.
Biochemistry. 38, 13170–13178 doi: 10.1021/bi9911738
Nguyen-Vo, T. P., Ainala, S. K., Kim, J. R., and Park, S. (2018). A nalysis,
characterization of coenzyme B 12 biosynthetic gene clusters and improvement
of B12 biosynthesis in Pseudomonas denitriﬁcans ATCC 13867. FEMS Microbiol
Lett. 1:365. doi: 10.1093/femsle/fny211
Park, Y. S., Choi, U. J., Nam, N. H., Choi, S. J., Nasir, A., Lee, S.
G., et al. (2017). Engineering an aldehyde dehydrogenase toward i ts
substrates, 3-hydroxypropanal and NAD +, for enhancing the production of
3-hydroxypropionic acid. Sci. Rep. 7:17155. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-15400-x
Qi, X., Sun, L., Luo, Z., Wu, J., Meng, X., Tang, Y., et al. (2006). Rational
design of glycerol dehydratase: Swapping the genes encoding the s ubunits
of glycerol dehydratase to improve enzymatic properties. Chinese Sci. Bull .
51:2977. doi: 10.1007/s11434-006-2219-5
Raj, S. M., Rathnasingh, C., Jo, J. E., and Park, S. (2008). Prod uction of 3-
hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol by a novel recombinant Escherichia coli
BL21 strain. Process Biochem. 43, 1440–1446 doi: 10.1016/j.procbio.2008.04.027
Raj, S. M., Rathnasingh, C., Jung, W. C., Selvakumar, E., and Pa rk, S.
(2010). A Novel NAD +-dependent aldehyde dehydrogenase encoded by
the puuC Gene of Klebsiella pneumoniae DSM 2026 that Utilizes 3-
Hydroxypropionaldehyde as a Substrate. Biotechnol. Bioproc. E . 15, 131–138
doi: 10.1007/s12257-010-0030-2
Rathnasingh, C., Raj, S. M., Jo, J. E., and Park, S. (2009). Dev elopment and
evaluation of eﬃcient recombinant Escherichia coli strains for the production
of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 104, 729–739.
doi: 10.1002/bit.22429.
Raynaud, C., Sarçabal, P., Meynial-Salles, I., Croux, C., and Sou caille, P.
(2003). Molecular characterization of the 1,3-propanediol (1,3-P D) operon
of Clostridium butyricum . Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 100, 5010–5015
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0734105100
Rennig, M., Martinez, V., Mirzadeh, K., Dunas, F., Röjsäter, B ., Daley, D. O.,
et al. (2018). TARSyn: Tunable antibiotic resistance devices e nabling bacterial
synthetic evolution and protein production. ACS Synth. Biol. 7, 432–442.
doi: 10.1021/acssynbio.7b00200
Sabet-Azad, R., Linares-Pastén, J. A., Torkelson, L., Sardari, R . R., and Hatti-Kaul,
R. (2013). Coenzyme A-acylating propionaldehyde dehydrogenase (P duP)
from Lactobacillus reuteri : kinetic characterization and molecular modeling.
Enzyme Microb. Technol. 53, 235–242. doi: 10.1016/j.enzmictec.2013.
05.007
Sankaranarayanan, M., Ashok, S., and Park, S. (2014). Productio n of 3-
hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol by acid tolerant Escherichia coli . J. Ind.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 41, 1039–1050. doi: 10.1007/s10295-014-1451-2
Schaefer, L., Auchtung, T. A., Hermans, K. E., Whitehead, D., Bo rhan,
B., and Britton, R. A. (2010). The antimicrobial compound reuterin ( 3-
hydroxypropionaldehyde) induces oxidative stress via interactio n with thiol
groups. Microbiology 156, 1589–1599. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.035642-0
Seo, S. W., Yang, J. S., Kim, I., Yang, J., Min, B. E., Kim, S., et a l. (2013). Predictive
design of mRNA translation initiation region to control prokaryotic translation
eﬃciency. Metab. Eng. 15, 67–74. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2012.10.006
Seok, J. Y., Yang, J., Choi, S. J., Lim, H. G., Choi, U. J., Kim, K. J. , et al. (2018).
Directed evolution of the 3-hydroxypropionic acid production pathwa y by
engineering aldehyde dehydrogenase using a synthetic selectio n device. Metab.
Eng. 47, 113–120. doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2018.03.009
Shibata, N., Masuda, J., Tobimatsu, T., Toraya, T., Suto, K., M orimoto, Y., et al.
(1999). A new mode of B 12 binding and the direct participation of a potassium
ion in enzyme catalysis: X-ray structure of diol dehydratase. Structure 7,
997–1008 doi: 10.1016/S0969-2126(99)80126-9
Silva, F., Queiroz, J. A., and Domingues, F. C. (2012). Evaluatin g metabolic
stress and plasmid stability in plasmid DNA production by Escherichia coli .
Biotechnol. Adv. 30, 691–708. doi: 10.1016/j.biotechadv.2011.12.005
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 14 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124
Jers et al. 3-HP Production in Bacteria
Son, H. F., Park, S., Yoo, T. H., Jung, G. Y., and Kim, K. J. (2017). S tructural insights
into the production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid by aldehyde dehydrog enase
from Azospirillum brasilense. Sci. Rep. 7:46005. doi: 10.1038/srep46005
Su, M., Li, Y., Ge, X., and Tian, P. (2015). 3-Hydroxypropionaldehyd e-speciﬁc
aldehyde dehydrogenase from Bacillus subtilis catalyzes 3-hydroxypropionic
acid production in Klebsiella pneumoniae . Biotechnol. Lett. 37, 717–724.
doi: 10.1007/s10529-014-1730-z
Su, M. Y., Li, Y., Ge, X. Z., and Tian, P. F. (2014). Insights int o 3-
hydroxypropionic acid biosynthesis revealed by overexpressing nati ve glycerol
dehydrogenase in Klebsiella pneumoniae . Biotechnol Biotechnol Equip . 28,
762–768 doi: 10.1080/13102818.2014.944419
Tokuyama, K., Ohno, S., Yoshikawa, K., Hirasawa, T., Tanaka, S. , Furusawa, C.,
et al. (2014). Increased 3-hydroxypropionic acid production from glyc erol, by
modiﬁcation of central metabolism in Escherichia coli. Microb. Cell Fact. 13:64.
doi: 10.1186/1475-2859-13-64
Toraya, T. (2003). Radical catalysis in coenzyme B 12-dependent isomerization
(eliminating) reactions. Chem. Rev. 103, 2095–2127 doi: 10.1021/cr020428b
Wang, K., and Tian, P. (2017). Engineering Plasmid-Free Klebsiella Pneumoniae
for Production of 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid. Curr. Microbiol. 74, 55–58.
doi: 10.1007/s00284-016-1153-2
Wang, X., Sa, N., Wang, F. H., and Tian, P. F. (2013). Engineered c onstitutive
pathway in Klebsiella pneumoniae for 3-hydroxypropionic acid production and
implications for decoupling glycerol dissimilation pathways. Curr. Microbiol.
66, 293–299. doi: 10.1007/s00284-012-0271-8
Wang, X. D., Zhang, X. E., Guo, Y. C., Zhang, Z. P., Cao, Z. A., and Zhou, Y. F.
(2009). Characterization of glycerol dehydratase expressed by fus ing its α - and
β -subunits. Biotechnol. Lett. 31, 711–717. doi: 10.1007/s10529-009-9911-x
Wang, Y., Tao, F., Ni, J., Lia, C., and Xu, P. (2015). Production of C3 platform
chemicals from CO 2 by genetically engineered cyanobacteria. Green Chem. 17,
3100–3110 doi: 10.1039/C5GC00129C
Warnecke, T. E., Lynch, M. D., Karimpour-Fard, A., Lipscomb, M. L., H andke,
P., Mills, T., et al. (2010). Rapid dissection of a complex phenotype th rough
genomic-scale mapping of ﬁtness altering genes. Metab. Eng. 12, 241–250.
doi: 10.1016/j.ymben.2009.12.002
Warnecke, T. E., Lynch, M. D., Lipscomb, M. L., and Gill, R. T. (2012 ).
Identiﬁcation of a 21 amino acid peptide conferring 3-hydroxypropion ic
acid stress-tolerance to Escherichia coli . Biotechnol. Bioeng. 109, 1347–1352.
doi: 10.1002/bit.24398
Wei, X., Meng, X., Chen, Y., Wei, Y., Du, L., and Huang, R. (2014).
Cloning, expression, and characterization of coenzyme-B 12-dependent diol
dehydratase from Lactobacillus diolivorans . Biotechnol. Lett. 36, 159–165
doi: 10.1007/s10529-013-1346-8
Yamanishi, M., Kinoshita, K., Fukuoka, M., Saito, T., Tanoku chi, A., Ikeda,
Y., et al. (2012). Redesign of coenzyme B 12 dependent diol dehydratase to
be resistant to the mechanism-based inactivation by glycerol and act on
longer chain 1,2-diols. FEBS J. 279, 793–804. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2012.
08470.x
Yamanishi, M., Yunoki, M., Tobimatsu, T., Sato, H., Matsui, J., Dokiya,
A., et al. (2002). The crystal structure of coenzyme B 12-dependent
glycerol dehydratase in complex with cobalamin and propane-1,2-
diol. Eur. J. Biochem. 269, 4484–4494 doi: 10.1046/j.1432-1033.2002.
03151.x
Zhao, L., Lin, J., Wang, H., Xie, J., and Wei, D. (2015). Developmen t of a two-
step process for production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol us ing
Klebsiella pneumoniae and Gluconobacter oxydans . Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng. 38,
2487–2495 doi: 10.1007/s00449-015-1486-4
Zhou, S., Catherine, C., Rathnasingh, C., Somasundar, A., and Park,
S. (2013). Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol by
recombinant Pseudomonas denitriﬁcans . Biotechnol. Bioeng. 110, 3177–3187.
doi: 10.1002/bit.24980
Zhu, J. G., Ji, X. J., Huang, H., Du, J., Li, S., and Ding, Y. Y. (200 9). Production
of 3-hydroxypropionic acid by recombinant Klebsiella pneumoniae based
on aeration and ORP controlled strategy. Korean J. Chem. Eng. 26:1679.
doi: 10.1007/s11814-009-0240-5
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Jers, Kalantari, Garg and Mijakovic. This is an o pen-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribu tion License (CC BY).
The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is perm itted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited a nd that the original
publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with acc epted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which doe s not comply with these
terms.
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology | www.front iersin.org 15 May 2019 | Volume 7 | Article 124