Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-019-3328-x
METHODOLOGY ARTICLE OpenAccess
Improvingtheorganizationand
interactivityofmetabolicpathfindingwith
precomputedpathways
SarahM.Kim 1,MatthewI.Peña 2,MarkMoll 1* ,GeorgeN.Bennett 2 andLydiaE.Kavraki 1
Abstract
Background: Therapid growth ofavailableknowledgeonmetabolicprocessesacrossthousandsofspecies
continuestoexpandthepossibilitiesofproducingchemicalsbycombiningpathwaysfoundindifferentspecies.
Severalcomputationalsearchalgorithmshavebeendevelopedforautomatingtheidentificationofpossible
heterologouspathways;however,thesesearchesmayreturnthousandsofpathwayresults.Althoughthelarge
numberofresultsareinpartduetothelargenumberofpossiblecompoundsandreactions,asubsetofcorereaction
modulesisrepeatedlyobservedinpathwayresultsacrossmultiplesearches,suggestingthatsomesubpathsbetween
commoncompoundsweremoreconsistentlyexploredthanothers.
Toreducetheresourcesspentonsearchingthesamemetabolicspace,anewmeta-algorithmformetabolic
pathfinding,HubPathwaysearchwithAtomTracking(HPAT),wasdevelopedtotakeadvantageofaprecomputed
networkofsubpathmodules.Toinvestigatetheefficacyofthismethod,wecreatedatabledescribinganetworkof
commonhubmetabolitesandhowtheyarebiochemicallyconnectedandonlyoffloadedsearchestoandfromthis
hubnetworkontoaninteractivewebservercapableofvisualizingtheresultingpathways.
Results: Atestsetofnineteenknownpathwaystakenfromliteratureandmetabolicdatabaseswereusedtoevaluate
ifHPATwascapableofidentifyingknownpathways.HPATfoundtheexactpathwayforelevenofthenineteentest
casesusingadiversesetofprecomputedsubpaths,whereasacomparablepathfindingsearchalgorithmthatdoes
notuseprecomputedsubpathsfoundonlysevenofthenineteentestcases.ThecapabilityofHPATtofindnovel
pathwayswasdemonstratedbyitsabilitytoidentifynovel3-hydroxypropanoate(3-HP)synthesispathways.Asfor
pathwayvisualization,thenewinteractivepathwayfiltersenableareductionofthenumberofdisplayedpathways
fromhundredsdowntolessthantenpathwaysinseveraltestcases,illustratingtheirutilityinreducingtheamountof
presentedinformationwhileretainingpathwaysofinterest.
Conclusions: Thisworkpresentsthefirststepinincorporatingaprecomputedsubpathnetworkintometabolic
pathfindinganddemonstrateshowthisleadstoaconcise,interactivevisualizationofpathwayresults.Themodular
natureofmetabolicpathwaysisexploitedtofacilitateefficientdiscoveryofalternatepathways.
Keywords: Metabolicpathfinding,Precomputation,Atommapping,Graphsearch
Background
Identifying novel metabolic pathways for synthesizing
valuable products is an important first step in the field
of metabolic engineering, where organisms are geneti-
cally manipulated to serve as cellular factories for pro-
ducing valuable chemicals. Recent advances in the field
*Correspondence:mmoll@rice.edu
1DepartmentofComputerScience,RiceUniversity,Houston,Texas,USA
Fulllistofauthorinformationisavailableattheendofthearticle
of metabolic engineering have proven successful in opti-
mizing the production of biofuels [1, 2], pharmaceuticals
[3–6],andchemicalprecursors[ 7].
Identifying the metabolic pathways used to synthe-
size these products has traditionally required an expert
to search through metabolic databases and literature
for promising enzymatic reactions. However, the rapid
expansion of available metabolic information stored
acrossmanyonlinedatabaseshasmadeitincreasinglydif-
ficult to manually survey all possibilities and resources.
©TheAuthor(s).2020 OpenAccess ThisarticleisdistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttribution4.0
InternationalLicense( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/),whichpermitsunrestricteduse,distribution,and
reproductioninanymedium,providedyougiveappropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor(s)andthesource,providealinktothe
CreativeCommonslicense,andindicateifchangesweremade. TheCreativeCommonsPublicDomainDedicationwaiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)appliestothedatamadeavailableinthisarticle,unlessotherwisestated.
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page2of22
To address the need for faster and broader search, several
computational approaches have been developed to iden-
tify promising pathways, resulting in the identification of
novelpathwayslikethesynthesisof1,4-butanediol(BDO)
[8], a high-demand commercial chemical precursor that
hadamarketofonebilliontonsannuallyin2013[ 7].
One of the universal challenges of automated pathfind-
ingmethodsisthetrade-offbetweenfindingasetofpath-
waysthatpresentsdiversealternativesforsynthesizingthe
targetproduct,whilealsonotoverwhelmingtheuserwith
too many options. Introducing strict constraints during
the search can limit the diversity of pathways found, but
too few constraints will result in a large number of repet-
itive or biologically infeasible pathways. How the results
arepresentedandvisualizedalsoplaysasignificantrolein
this trade-off, as a means of visualization can enable the
usertoeasilysiftthroughalargenumberofresults.
This paper introduces a meta-algorithm designed for
metabolic pathfinding, which could be generally applied
to other graph-based search approaches giving rise to a
large number of unique pathways. We demonstrate that
our meta-algorithm and interactive visualization can be
coupled allowing for post-search filtering that provides
the user with information about a manageable number of
pathways instead of listing all generated pathways, which
requiressignificantmanualinspection.
Themeta-algorithmproposedinthispaperisbuiltupon
graph-based metabolic pathfinding algorithms, such as
[9–12].Graph-basedmethodsfindpathwaysbasedonthe
connectivity of compounds in a metabolic network and
also lend themselves well to scaling to large metabolic
networks and finding pathways that incorporate enzymes
from multiple organisms. However, the flexibility of the
graph-based search approach also results in finding thou-
sands of biologically infeasible pathways. This paper con-
tributesanewalgorithmformetabolicpathfinding,which
besides its good performance, facilitates interpretation of
theresults.
Existing graph-based search approaches have utilized a
combination of heuristics and cutoffs to limit the num-
b e ro fi n f e a s i b l ep a t h w a y s[13]. One of the most widely
used heuristics is the conservation of chemical struc-
ture from the start to the target compound. Pathway
Hunter Tool [14], MetabolicTinker [15], and GEM-Path
[16] incorporate chemical similarity measures as heuris-
tics to guide the metabolic search. Other methods track
individual atoms, or groups of connected atoms in the
case of AGPathFinder [17], from the start to target com-
pound and aim to conserve a minimum number of
atoms throughout the pathway [9, 12, 18]o rm a x i m i z e
the number of atoms conserved [10, 19]. Information
on enzymatic reactions, like thermodynamic favorability
(/Delta1G) [15, 17, 20] and enzyme efficiency and promiscuity
[20, 21], is also used to guide the search and rank
pathways. It is important to note that many of these
pathfindingmethodsuseacombinationofseveralheuris-
tics. For example, in addition to factoring in chemical
similarity and thermodynamic favorability, XTMS [22]
incorporatesmetabolicexchangeinformation,compound
toxicity scores, and estimated maximum pathway yield
in ranking pathways. However, even when using these
heuristics, pathfinding searches can return thousands of
results, which are either listed sequentially in full or lim-
ited by a cutoff of the top x pathways. Though users
can adjust the search by changing input parameters (i.e.,
changing the minimum number of atoms to conserved),
userinteractionwiththeresultsthemselvesislimited.
Across existing pathfinding methods, pathway results
are most commonly presented in a ranked list [9, 19],
whichrequiresuserstoevaluateeachpathwayresultindi-
vidually. Instead of a list, Metabolic Tinker [15]p r e s e n t s
an overview of pathways by providing a static output
graphthatrepresentsacombinationofallpathwayresults.
Pathway results that share all the same compound inter-
mediates are grouped together and considered the same
pathway. However, this organization does not help group
similar pathways together if the pathways do not go
through the same compound intermediates. Also, the
graphproducedbyMetabolicTinkerisstaticanddoesnot
come with any tools for users to alter or explore the out-
put graph after the search has been completed. For more
generalexplorationofthemetabolicspacearoundatarget
compound,bothBioSynther[ 23]andA TLAS[24]provide
views that display all compounds that are a given number
of reaction steps away from a given compound. How-
ever, this visualization becomes exponentially crowded
with increasing step size, considering there are no ways
for the user to filter pathways. Other tools incorporate
userinteractionwithexplorationofpathways.TheMRSD
tool designed by Xia et al. [21] and BioSynther [23]p r o -
vide views where the user can specify a compound, then
interactively select intermediate compounds step by step,
manuallyconstructingapathway.Thisworkswellforfind-
ingsmallvariantsofapathwayofinterestoriftheuserhas
a specific pathway in mind. However, in the case where
the user is more interested in exploring all possible path-
ways for synthesizing a target compound, the interactive
step-by-stepapproachtoexploringpossiblepathwayscan
be time consuming and may not provide a good overview
of all the possibilities, especially if there are many diverse
routestoexplore.
One aspect that is not addressed by previous search
methodsistheidentificationofcommon segmentsacross
different search results. Many pathways of interest in
metabolic engineering involve synthesis of a more com-
plex target compound (e.g., artemisinin) from relatively
simple compounds like glucose. In several of these
synthesis pathways, simple compounds must first be
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page3of22
converted into common intermediate precursor com-
pounds before being synthesized into the final target
compound. The modularity of metabolic networks has
been observed by previous work [25–28], and common
reaction modules across known pathways have even been
identified by [29]. However, these reaction modules are
based on existing natural pathways and do not neces-
sarily generalize to the heterologous pathways found by
metabolic pathfinding algorithms. We have observed that
thesubpathsbetweencommonprecursorcompoundsare
often shared across several different heterologous path-
ways, acting as modules that repeatedly appear across
pathways.Giventhatthesecommonsubpathmodulescan
be identified without extensive expert knowledge, pre-
computingthesemodulestolookupduringthesearchcan
keepmetabolicpathfindingalgorithmsfrom havingtore-
explore the same metabolic space in future searches and
aidwithcondensingthevisualizationoftheresults.
Contributions
This paper introduces and demonstrates an initial
approach to take advantage of short series of connecting
reactions among common compounds across metabolic
pathways by incorporating precomputed subpaths into
graph-based metabolic pathfinding search algorithms. To
our knowledge, no previous approaches have incorpo-
rated the use of precomputed pathways. In addition to
their use as look-up modules in pathway searches, pre-
computed pathways can help to organize and quickly
visualize pathway results, enabling a more interactive
userexperience.Thoughinteractivegraphvisualizationof
known pathways has been explored [30–32] and included
in recent pathway tools like PyPathway [33], this visual-
ization has not yet been applied to metabolic pathfinding
results. This paper also introduces the use of post-search
slidingfilterswhichenabletheusertoevaluatethevalidity
of result pathways based on path length, carbons con-
served, and ATP used. The introduction of post-search
filtersprovideamoreinteractiveexperienceforusersthat
has not been provided by previous metabolic pathfinding
methods,enablinguserstoselectpathwaysbasedontheir
own interests and encouraging broader exploration of the
searchresultswithoutoverwhelmingtheuser.
Results
The Hub Pathway Search with Atom Tracking (HPAT)
was developed as a first step to utilizing precomputed
subpaths in the metabolic pathfinding search (see Fig.1
for a visual overview of the HPAT meta-algorithm). First,
all subpaths between a set of highly connected hub com-
poundsareprecomputedandstoredinalook-uptable.
Then, given a start compound and a target com-
pound, HPAT finds pathways converting the start to the
target compound in three search steps: (1) a no-hub
pathway search, where all hub compounds are excluded
from the searched metabolic network, (2) a one hub
pathway search, where all but one hub compound are
excluded, and (3) the hub pathway search, which utilizes
the precomputed subpaths.
In this study, the linear atom-tracking search algorithm
LPAT [9] was used to precompute subpaths between hub
compounds, find pathways containing one or less hub
compounds (Fig.1a-b), and find the segments of the hub
pathways connecting the start compound to the first hub
compound and the last hub compound to the target com-
pound (Fig.1c). Only the hub compounds that have the
most similar chemical structures to the start and target
compounds are included in the search as the first and
last hub compounds respectively (See the “First and Last
HubsSelection”subsectionin“ Methods”sectionformore
details).
Throughout each step of the hub pathway search, car-
bonatomsaretrackedfromthestartcompoundtothetar-
get compound to insure that carbon atoms from the start
compound are being incorporated into the target com-
pound. Conserving carbon atoms throughout the path-
way prevents the search from finding infeasible pathways
thatgothroughcurrencymetabolitesthatonlycontribute
energyorelectronbalancetothereaction.
A hub pathway search tool will ideally find biochemi-
callyfeasiblepathwaysthatdonotalreadyoccurnaturally
inexistingorganisms.ThustheperformanceoftheHPAT
meta-algorithm was evaluated based on its ability (1) to
find a diverse set of known biochemically feasible path-
ways documented in the literature, and (2) to find novel
pathways that do not occur in existing organisms and
have the potential to be used for metabolic engineering
applications.
This section then describes how pathways found by
HPAT are visualized on the Hub Pathways Webserver,
and how users can utilize interactive filtering options to
selectivelyreducethenumberofresultsdisplayed.
RecoveryofKnownPathwaysbyHPAT
The quality of pathways found by HPAT were evalu-
ated by comparing the HPAT results to nineteen known
pathways taken from the literature and KEGG database
[34, 35]. The final products of the pathways were chosen
because of their importance as precursors to the syn-
thesis of industrial or medicinal compounds. The start
and target compounds of the test set pathways varied
in size and complexity. The smallest compounds (pyru-
vate, 3-hydroxypropanoate, and 1,3-propanediol) only
contained three carbon atoms, whereas the largest com-
pound (stachyose) contained twenty four carbon atoms
and several ring structures (See Additional file1). The
test set pathways also varied in path length, ranging from
four to fifteen enzymatic reactions. Five variants of the
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page4of22
Fig.1 Overviewofhubsearchprocess.Pathwayswithnohubs( a)andonehub( b)arefoundusinganexistinglinearatom-trackinggraph-based
pathwaysearch(LPAT[ 9])whileexcludinghubcompoundsfromthemetabolicnetwork.Theprocessforfindingpathwayswithatleasttwohubs
(c)consistsof(1)thestartcompoundto“first”hubcompoundssearch,(2)the“first”hubstothe“last”hubssearchusingtheprecomputednetwork,
and(3)the“last”hubstothetargetcompoundsearch.The“first”hubsand“last”hubsareidentifiedbyusingachemicalsimilarityheuristic
(SIMCOMP[50])tofindthehubcompoundsthathavethemostsimilarchemicalstructurestothestartcompoundandtargetcompound
respectively.Thefirstandlasthubcompoundsareidentifiedbeforethehubtohubsearchisperformed.Forallpathwaysidentifiedbythehub
pathwaysearch,atleasttwocarbonatomsareconservedfromthestartcompoundtothetargetcompoundtoavoidfindingpathwaysthatdonot
utilizethestartcompoundtosynthesizethetargetcompound
lysine synthesis pathway and seven variants of the 3-
hydroxypropanoate (3-HP) synthesis pathway were also
includedintheknownpathwaysettotestifHPAT’scould
findadiverserangeofresults.
To evaluate the HPAT meta-algorithm’s ability to find
the known pathways, the F1 score [36] was calculated for
each result pathway based on its reactions. Reactions in
the result pathway that are also present in the known
pathway are counted as true positives (TP), whereas reac-
tions in the result pathway that are not present in the
known pathway are counted as false positives (FP). Reac-
tions that are in the known pathway but not the result
pathway are counted as false negatives (FN). The F 1
score is calculated as F1 =2 ×(P×R)/(P+R), where P =
TP/(TP+FP) is the precision and R = TP/(TP+FN) is the
recall.
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page5of22
The highest F1 scores of all pathways found by HPAT
compared to each known pathway is reported in Table1.
This differs from previous studies, where only the top
handful of pathways, determined by ranking heuristics
like path length and thermodynamics, are compared to
the known pathway. However, unlike previous studies, it
is assumed that the user of the HPAT search can utilize
interactive post-search filtering tools to narrow down the
results to a manageable set of pathways, such that the
ranking of the results does not have a significant impact
on which pathways the user sees. For sake of reference,
the F1 scores were also calculated for the closest pathway
(1) among the top twenty pathway results and (2) among
all the results obtained from a LPAT search using com-
parable input parameters (see Additional file5 for values
ofLPATinputparameters).TheF 1 scoreswerecalculated
for the top twenty LPAT results to evaluate if a user could
quickly find the canonical pathway in the top few LPAT
resultswithoututilizingtheinteractivefilteringtools.
The HPAT meta-algorithm was able to find the exact
canonical pathway for eleven of the nineteen test cases,
including all five variants of the lysine synthesis path-
way. Meanwhile, the LPAT algorithm was able to find the
exact canonical pathway for only seven of the nineteen
test cases and found only one of the five canonical lysine
synthesis pathways. The reason HPAT could outperform
LPAT in these cases is that the maximum search depth
usedforfindingtheprecomputedhubpaths(100,000)was
larger than the depth used for the HPAT hub search and
LPAT search (10,000, see Additional files3,4and5). This
enables more diverse subpaths to be precomputed and
then later looked-up during the HPAT search.
Evaluating just the top twenty LPAT results (instead
of all LPAT results) yielded lower F1 scores for four
of the pathway test cases (dopamine, 3-HP III, 3-
HP VII, and 1,3-propanediol). Though the known 1,3-
propanediol synthesis pathway was found by LPAT, it
was not contained in the top twenty LPAT results. This
Table1 F1 scoresoftheclosestpathwayfoundbytheHPATmeta-algorithm(usesprecomputedsubpaths)andLPATalgorithm(does
notuseprecomputedsubpaths)comparedtoknownpathways,whereanF 1 scoreofoneindicatesthattheHPATsearchfoundthe
exactknownpathway
F1 Score,LPAT F 1 Score,LPAT
Knownpathway F 1 Score,HPAT (Top20Paths) (AllPaths)
Pyruvate→ LysineI 1.00 0.70 0.70
Pyruvate→ LysineII 1.00 0.70 0.70
Pyruvate→ LysineIII 1.00 1.00 1.00
Pyruvate→ LysineIV 1.00 0.78 0.78
Pyruvate→ LysineV 1.00 0 0
Glutamate→ Proline 1.00 1.00 1.00
UDP-Galactose→ Stachyose 1.00 1.00 1.00
alpha-D-glucose→ Phenylpyruvate 0.71 + 0.71 0.71
alpha-D-glucose→ Dopamine 0.59 † 0.42 0.76
*Pyruvate→ 3-HP,I 1.00 1.00 1.00
*Pyruvate→ 3-HP,II 0.50 † 0.33 0.33
*Pyruvate→ 3-HP,III 0.60 † 0.38 0.78
*Pyruvate→ 3-HP,IV 0.42 † 0.71 0.71
*Pyruvate→ 3-HP,V 0.36 † 0.40 0.40
*Pyruvate→ 3-HP,VI 0.36 # 0.36 0.36
*Pyruvate→ 3-HP,VII 0.53 # 0.36 0.50
Glucose→ Glucaricacid 1.00 1.00 1.00
alpha-D-glucose→ 1,3-propanediol 1.00 0.67 1.00
Tryptophan→ Melatonin 1.00 1.00 1.00
TheclosertheF 1 scoreistoone,themoresimilarthefoundpathway’sreactionsaretothatoftheknownpathway.ThefirstcolumnofF 1 scoresforLPATiscalculatedbased
ontheclosestpathwaywithinthetoptwentypathwaysfoundbyLPAT,whilethesecondcolumnofF 1 scoresforLPATiscalculatedbasedontheclosestpathwayforallLPAT
pathwayresults
*Pathwayisexperimentallyvalidated;doesnotexistnaturallyinorganisms
#Requiresanengineered,non-natural2,3-alanineaminomutase
+Knownpathwayconserveslessthantwocarbons
†Hubincanonicalpathwayclosesttostart/targetnotamongclosesthubs
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page6of22
example illustrates how HPAT with interactive filtering
can often enable users to find known pathways as accu-
rately as LPAT without having to look through as much
information.
For eight of the nineteen test cases, the HPAT meta-
algorithmdidnotfindtheknownpathway.Therearethree
main reasons for this: (1) the known pathway requires
an engineered, non-natural enzyme, (2) the known path-
way does not conserve at least two carbons, and (2) the
f i r s to rl a s th u bc o m p o u n d ( s )i nt h ek n o w np a t h w a yw e r e
not identified as the closest hubs to the start or tar-
get compound by the chemical similarity heuristic (See
Table1).
For the first case, the reaction catalyzed by the engi-
neered enzyme in these known pathways was not present
intheKEGGdatabase,soitwasnotpossiblefortheHPAT
search to find these pathways. For the second case, the
selected input parameters for both the HPAT and LPAT
searches impose the restriction that all result pathways
must conserve a minimum of two carbons atoms from
the start to the target compound. Though conserving
one carbon atom from start to target compound pre-
vents the search from finding pathways through currency
metabolites that are not used to build up the target com-
pound, conserving a single carbon atom does not prevent
the search from finding nonsensical pathways that break
down the start compound to a single carbon compound
(i.e., CO2), only to build back up to the target compound.
The two carbon atom limit was chosen to reduce the
number of these particular nonsensical pathways. How-
ever, if the known pathway only conserves one carbon
atom from start to target compounds, the pathway will
not be found by either HPAT or LPAT due to this two
carbonatomlimitsetting.Inthesecases,theHPATmeta-
algorithm performed about the same or slightly better
than the LPAT algorithm in finding pathways similar to
the known pathway.
For the third case, whenever the start or target com-
poundarenothubcompounds,theHPATsearchwillonly
explore pathways that go through the first and/or last hub
compounds identified by a chemical similarity heuristic
(see “Methods” section for details), so if the first or last
hub compound of the known pathway is not one of the
most similar compounds, the HPAT search will not find
the pathway. In these cases, the HPAT meta-algorithm
tended to perform worse than LPAT in finding pathways
similartotheknownpathway.
IdentificationofnovelpathwaysbyHPAT
Biochemical repositories, such as KEGG, are curated
to maintain completeness and accuracy of standard
metabolicreactions,butreactionsforenzymeswitheither
engineered or off-target function are often not included.
This is an inherent constraint on the discovery of novel
pathways. Despite this limitation, novel approaches and
usefulpathwayscanbeuncoveredusingexploratorytools
such as the one described in this paper that can fil-
ter results to favor carbon conservation from start to
target compound or utilize enzymes drawn from dis-
parate species to form heterologous pathways. Here, we
look more closely at 3-hydroxypropionic acid (3-HP), the
biosynthesis of which is characterized by multiple stan-
dardandnonstandardpathways.
3-HP, a compound of interest for numerous metabolic
engineering projects, has had at least seven biosyn-
thesis pathways starting from glucose that have been
patented and evaluated to determine if they are "biolog-
ically attractive," meaning the pathways are thermody-
namically favorable, maintain redox balance, and require
minimal ATP utilization [37–42]. Pyruvate is a sensible
starting point for pathfinding the synthesis of many com-
pounds, including 3-HP, because it is the natural product
of glycolysis, a central pathway of organisms consum-
ing glucose as a carbon source. 3-HP is a good test
of the hub search because of the variety of nonstan-
dard biosynthesis pathways that include hub compound
intermediates.
In Table 1,w ec a ns e et h a to ft h es e v e np r e v i o u s l y
defined pathways only one is recovered in its entirety
independentoftheselectedhubs:PathwayI,whichpasses
through lactate. Two additional pathways are recovered
f o rs p e c i f i ch u bs e t s :P a t h w a y sI I Ia n dI V ,w h i c hb o t h
include the carboxylation of pyruvate to oxaloacetate but
differ in the conversion ofβ-alanine to 3-oxopropanoate.
Of the remaining four pathways, only partial coverage is
obtained either from overlap with Pathways I, III, and
IV or because individual reaction steps are present in
the cumulative pathfinding results but not in a reaction
sequence matching the illustrated pathways. Pathways VI
and VII cannot be completed because the conversion
of α-alanine to β-alanine requires an engineered, non-
natural 2,3-alanine aminomutase, which is absent from
KEGG[ 38].
Of the remaining pathfinding results, the majority are
alternative, feasible paths that have been documented
in KEGG between the illustrated intermediates. These
alternative pathways are valuable because they represent
points where potentially more carbons can be fed into
a pathway of interest. An example of this is seen for
intermediates of the TCA cycle, succinate, fumarate, and
malate, which can be fed into the oxaloacetate and aspar-
t a t en o d e so fp a t h w a y sI I Ia n dI V( F i g .2b). Similarly, we
can elaborate on pathway II by adding a parallel pathway
of pyruvate to acetate to malonate to 3-oxopropanoate
(also referred to as malonate semialdehyde). Between
thesetwoparallelpathways,acetyl-CoAandmalonyl-CoA
can each be converted to acetate and malonate, respec-
tively(Fig. 2c).
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page7of22
Fig.2 HPATcanrecoverthreeofsevenpathwayspatentedforuseintheproductionof3-hydroxypropionicacid(3-HP)startingfrompyruvate.The
sevenpathwaysarenumberedaccordingtoJiangetal.[ 41].Intermediatesthatareunderlinedrepresenthubcompoundsfromthe50in-degree(I)
hubtable(seeTable 2fordetails).Arrowsrepresentreactionslinkingintermediateswherethecolorofthearrowindicatesiftheyarefoundbythe
HPATsearchwhereatleastonecarbonisconserved.SolidgreenarrowsrepresentreactionsthatwerefoundbytheHPATsearch,solidorange
arrowsrepresentreactionsthatwerenotfoundinthesearch,dashedarrowsarerequiremultiplereactions,andanXmarksthosereactionsthatare
absentfromKEGGandcannotbefoundbythesearch,greyarrowsrepresentalternativereactionsfoundbythesearchbutnotassociatedwiththe
sevenpathways,andthegreenhighlightrepresentsentirepathwaysbetweenpyruvateand3-HPthatarerecovered. aReactionsidentifiedinthe
HPATsearchconnectingTCAcycleintermediates,succinate,malate,andfumarate,toPathwaysIIIandIV( b)andviableacetateandmalonateto
PathwayII( c)
Thenewvisualizationsystemmakesiteasiertoidentify
connections between common metabolic pathways and
biosyntheticpathwaysofinterest,asdescribedinthenext
section.
Visualizationofpathwayresults
The Hub Pathways Webserver ( http://hpat.kavrakilab.
org) was developed to execute user pathway searches
using LPAT and HPAT. Once a search query has been
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page8of22
completed, the user can view the pathway results in the
webserver’spathwayvisualizationinterface.
The visualization interface consists of a main panel to
display the pathway search results and a fixed left panel
for displaying information on the compounds and reac-
tions contained in the pathway results, as well as filtering
options that can be applied to the results. Pathway results
arevisualizedasasinglecombinedgraph,wherethenodes
represent compounds and the edges represent enzymatic
reactions. The starting compound node is highlighted in
greenandthetargetcompoundnodeishighlightedinred.
Eachcompoundnodecanbeclickedtodisplaythecom-
monnameandchemicalstructureofthecompoundatthe
topoftheleftpanel.Inadditiontothevisualizationgraph,
themainpaneldisplaysthetotalnumberofpathwaysthat
are currently being visualized by the graph in the top left-
hand corner. Note that for HPAT pathways, a pathway
result containing precomputed hub path(s) is counted as
one pathway when calculating the displayed total number
of pathways, instead of counting all possible variations of
the hub path(s) as separate pathways.
Combining all results into a single graph eliminates the
redundancyofcommonpathsegmentsthatappearacross
multiple pathway results, which provides a more con-
densed summary of result pathways compared to a list
of individual pathways (see Fig.3 as an example of how
ninety six pathway results can be displayed in a single
graph).
Hubpathwayvisualization
For HPAT results, the details of hub-to-hub pathways are
abstracted such that there is a single dashed arrow to
indicate that one or more subpaths exist between two
hubcompounds. Hidingthedetailsofthesecommonhub
pathwayssimplifiestheoverallpathwayview,allowingthe
user to get a clearer idea of which hub compounds are
used as intermediates by the found pathways. Though all
compounds and reactions between hub compounds are
initially hidden from view, the user may click any dashed
arrow between a pair of hubs to switch to a more detailed
view of all the possible subpath connections between the
hub pair (See Fig.4).
Filteringofpathways
Since pathway searches may return tens of thousands of
results, user are provided the option on the left panel
Fig.3 VisualizationofLPATpathwayresultsfromglutamate(C00025,greennode)toproline(C00148,rednode).Compoundsinthecanonical
prolinesynthesispathwayarehighlightedinblue.Thearrowsoftheedgesconnectingthecompoundnodesindicatethedirectionalityofthe
reactions,wheredouble-sidedarrowsindicatethereactionisreversible.Thetotalnumberofpathways(96paths)inthegraphisindicatedinthe
upperleftcorneroftheinterfacedisplay
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page9of22
Fig.4 Visualizationofpathwayresultsforahubsearchfromglutamate(C00025)toproline(C00148). aTheinitialvisualizationabstractsthe
subpathsbetweenseveralhubpairsasadottedarrow,includingthesubpathsfrom2-oxoglutarate(C00026)tosuccinate(C00042),highlightedby
theredbox. bClickingonthedottededgebetweenC00026andC00042inview( a)displaysallthesubpathsbetweenthehubpairasasingle
graph,wherenodesrepresentcompoundsandedgesrepresentenzymaticreactions
o ft h ev i s u a l i z a t i o ni n t e r f a c et of i l t e rr e s u l t sb yc o m -
pounds, path length, carbons conserved, and ATP usage
(See Fig. 5). Users can also interact directly with the
visualization graph by right clicking compounds to filter
pathways containing the right-clicked compound. These
filteroptionsallowtheusertoquicklyremoveorhighlight
pathways,narrowingdownthenumberofresultstheuser
must view at once.
Compounds
Using the compounds filter, the user can specify com-
pounds that they would like to exclude from or include
in all displayed pathway results (Fig.5). Users can also
right click compound nodes in the visualization graph
and choose to exclude or only include all pathways that
contain that compound. To locate compounds in the
visualization graph by their common names, the user can
use the compound selection bar to highlight the com-
poundsinthegraph(Fig. 6).
Novel pathways that were found by the search can be
identified by excluding result pathways that contain spec-
ified compounds or by only including result pathways
that go through specific compounds (See Fig.7 for an
examplewith3-HPsearchresults).Thisprovidestheuser
an option to quickly remove pathways with features that
arenotinterestingtothemwithouthavingtolookateach
pathway individually. The user can also switch between
different compound filters without having to re-run the
search.
Interactivesliders
Inadditiontothecompoundfilter,theuseralsohasaccess
to three interactive sliders to filter pathways by (1) max-
imum path length, defined as the number of reactions
included in the pathway, (2) minimum number of car-
bon atoms conserved between the start compound and
the target compound, and (3) the maximum net num-
ber of ATP consumed throughout the pathway (Fig.5).
Path length and atom tracking have been used by several
pathfinding approaches as a heuristic to find biologically
feasible pathways. The default maximum path length is
set to the minimum path length found in the results to
prevent cases where an overwhelming number of path-
ways is initially displayed to the user. The default min-
imum carbons conserved is initially set to two carbons,
since this filters out inefficient pathways that may break
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page10of22
Fig.5 Filteringoptionsforpathwayresults.Ascreenshotoffilter
optionsthatcanbefoundintheleftcolumnofthewebserver’s
pathwayvisualizationinterface.Userscan(1)excludepathways
containingspecificcompoundsandreactionsbyspecifyingtheir
KEGGids,(2)onlyincludepathwayscontainingspecificcompounds
andreactionsbyspecifyingtheirKEGGids,(3)excludepathwayswith
apathlengthlongerthanagivennumberofreactions,(4)exclude
pathwaysthatconservelessthanagivennumberofcarbonatoms,
and(5)excludepathwaysthatproduceless/consumemorethana
givennumberofATPs
down the starting compound to single carbon compound
intermediates (e.g., carbon dioxide) before building back
up to the target compound.
PathwaysthatrequirelessATP(energy)tendtobemore
efficient and preferred in metabolic engineering, so the
ability to filter pathways by ATP can narrow down the
results based on energy efficiency. Unlike the previous
two sliders, the ATP usage slider includes both positive
and negative integers. Selecting a positive valuei,f i l t e r s
out pathways that produce less than a net amount ofi
ATP molecules. Selecting a negative value−i,f i l t e r so u t
pathways that consume more than a net amount ofi ATP
molecules. The default value for the ATP usage slider
is−1, meaning that all pathways that consume more than
a net amount of one ATP molecule will be filtered from
theresults.
Usingthethreesliderscansignificantlyreducethenum-
ber of pathways displayed to the user. In some cases, the
known pathways are captured at the extremes of the fil-
ters.Forexample,theknownstachyosesynthesispathway
can be recovered by sliding the path length filter to the
minimum path length of three. However, aggressively fil-
tering can exclude known pathways, such as the case for
known lysine pathways (Fig.8). This example illustrates
that filters may need to be adjusted by the user to identify
all interesting pathways. Using interactive filtering, users
can view a manageable subset of pathways that match
theircriteriaforidentifyingfeasiblepathways.
Hubtablesizeandselection
The results reported so far were produced using the hub
table constructed using fifty hub compound selected by
out-degree, listed as the 50 (O) hub table in Table2.T o
e n s u r et h eh u bt a b l es i z ea n ds e l e c t i o no fh u b su s e df o r
this study were reasonable and to observe how changes
to the selected hub compounds affected pathway results,
hub tables of varying sizes (20, 50, and 80 hubs) and
varying hub selection criteria were comparatively eval-
uated (See Table2). Three of the hub selection criteria
tested were based on the compound’s connectivity in the
metabolic network. Compounds could be selected by (1)
largest in-degree, or how many reactions produced the
given compound as a product, (2) largest out-degree, or
how many reactions used the given compound as a reac-
tant, or (3) largest sum of in-degree and out-degree. Two
random hub selections of fifty compounds and the hub
compoundsselectedbyArakietal.[ 43]werealsoincluded
for the sake of comparison with the hub selections based
onconnectivity.
The overlap of the different hub compound selections
usedtoconstructthesehubtablesareillustratedinFigs. 9
and 10. All hub tables had some overlap in hub com-
poundswiththeothertables.Thirtyeighthubcompounds
are shared between the top 50 out-degree (O) hub table
and 139 (A) hub table. The top 50 in-degree (I) hub
table and the 50 (O) hub table share twenty one hub
compounds. All hub compounds in the top 50 combined
in-degree and out-degree (IO) hub table are contained
within eitherthe I table orO tableand contains about the
samenumberofhubcompoundsfrombothtables.
Thetwohubtablesconstructedfromrandomlyselected
hub compounds shared no overlap with each other. The
50 (R1) table has one hub (C00235) that is in the 50 (O)
and80(O)tablesandanotherhub(C00002)thatisshared
with the 139 (A) table. The 50 (R2) table has one hub
(C00270) that is in the 50 (O), 80 (O), and 139 (A) tables.
Otherwise, there were no other overlaps with the R1 and
R2tables.
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page11of22
Fig.6 Highlightingornithineinallpathwaysearchresultsfromglutamatetoproline.Forthepathwaysearchfromglutamate(C00025)toproline
(C00148),iftheusersearchesfor“ornithine”inthe“Find”selectionbar,theywillbepresentedalistofcompoundsthatmatchtheirinput.Theycan
thenselectL-ornithine(C00077)fromthe“Find”compoundselectionlist,anditwillbehighlightedwithaboldedsalmon-coloredoutlineinthe
graph.Userscansearchforanycompoundinthegraphbyenteringeitherthecompound’scommonnameorKEGGid
After running hub searches using the 20, 50, and 80
(O) tables to find the canonical pathway test cases, the
F1 scores of all the searches are relatively similar with the
exception of three test cases: two (D-glucarate and 1,3-
propanediol) where the search using the 80 (O) table fails
tofindthecanonicalpathwaywhilethesearchesusingthe
20 and 50 (O) tables successfully identify the canonical
pathway and one (3-HP, III) where search using the 80(O)
table finds the known pathway and the searches using the
20 and 50 tables do not (See Table3). Though it seems
counter-intuitivethatthelarger80hubtablefailstofinda
few canonical pathways that are identified by the smaller
20 and 50 hub tables, having a larger number of hub
compounds increases the chances of the precomputed
hub network being used during the online search, which
can fail to find the known pathway due to not includ-
ing the first or last hub compound of the known pathway
as a hub closest to the start / target compound (see
“Reasons for missing some canonical pathways”s u b s e c -
tionin“ Discussion”sectionformoredetails).
The search time typically ranged from seconds to a
few minutes across all hub tables. Both the median
and average total search time was lowest for the 80
(O) hub table and highest for 20 (O) hub table (see
Additional file 8). When looking at only the hub-to-
hub search time, the time increases with the hub table
size (see Additional file9). However, increasing the hub
t a b l es i z ea l s oi n c r e a s e st h el i k e l i h o o do ft h es t a r tc o m -
pound being a hub compound, which reduces the search
time in two ways: (1) the start to hub search is not
required, since the start compound is already in the
hub table and (2) starting with a hub compound sig-
nificantly reduces the search time for the hub to target
compound, since there are fewer variations of carbons
conserved. Because of this, the search time, on average, is
less for the largest hub table than the mid-sized and small
hub tables.
The 20, 50, and 80 (O) hub tables were also compared
based on their coverage of reactions present in KEGG
pathway modules, a curated list of pathways featured by
KEGGascentraltometabolismacrossorganisms.Areac-
tion in a KEGG pathway module is considered “covered”
byahubtableifthereactionispresentinatleastonepre-
computed subpath stored in the hub table. An increasing
numberofreactionsacrossKEGGmodulesarecoveredas
the size of the hub table increases; however, the increase
between the 20 and 50 hub table is larger than between
t h e5 0a n d8 0h u bt a b l e( s e eT a b l e4 f o rm o r ed e t a i l s ) .
These trends remained the same when examining the
reaction coverage of the forty eight KEGG pathway mod-
ules that specifically correspond to the reaction modules
foundacrossmanyknownpathwaysidentifiedby[ 29](see
Additional file7). This suggest that though increasing the
size of the hub table does increase the number of KEGG
module reactions contained in the hub table’s precom-
putedsubpaths,therearediminishingreturnsforincreas-
ing the number of hub compounds. In the end, the hub
table constructed with 50 hubs was chosen for this study,
sincethe50hubtablebothcoveredamoresizablenumber
of reactions in the KEGG modules than the 20 hub table
while also enabling the hub search to find more canonical
pathways than the 80 hub table.
Similar to the different hub table sizes, the three hub
selections (O, I, and IO) described in Table2 were com-
pared based on finding the canonical pathway test cases.
The size of the hub tables were all fixed at 50 hub com-
pounds. The search using the 50 (O) hub table was able
to find the canonical pathways for eleven out of nine-
teen test cases, whereas the search using the 50 (I) and
the50(IO)tablesfoundeightandtencanonicalpathways
respectively(Table 3).Thedifferencesbetweenthesethree
hub selections were due to the start and/or target com-
pound being included in the hub compounds list for one
hub selection but not included for the others. As a result,
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page12of22
Fig.7 Filteringpathwayresultsfrompyruvateto3-HPusingcompoundselections.Inthewebservervisualization,userscanspecifywhich
compoundstheywouldliketoincludeorexcludeinpathwayresultsbytypingtheKEGGcompoundID(s)intothe“Filter”textboxorbyright
clickingthecompoundnode(s)inthegraph.Forexample,for atheLPATpathwaysearchresultsbetweenpyruvate(C00022)and3-HP(C01013), b
pathwayscontainingeither3-oxopropanoate(C00222)orpropanoyl-CoA(C00100)canbeexcludedfromthesearch,reducingthenumberof
pathwaysdisplayedfromninety-sixtotwelve. cForthesamepathwaysearch,theusercanrequireallpathwaystocontainboth3-oxopropanoate
(C00222)andpropanoyl-CoA(C00100),whichreducesthenumberofpathwaysdisplayedfromninety-sixtothree
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page13of22
Fig.8 Filteringpathwayresultsfrompyruvatetolysine.ThenumberofuniquepathwaysfoundbyHPATfrompyruvatetolysinefordifferent
combinationsofmaximumpathlengthandminimumnumberofconservedcarbonscutoffs(amaximumnetATPconsumedofoneisalsoapplied
forallcombinations).Thenumberofpathwaysincludesallpossiblecombinationsofprecomputedsubpathsbetweenhubpairs,andthenumberof
knownpathwaysthatcanbefoundusingeachfilteringcombinationisreportedinparentheses.Allfiveknownpyruvatesynthesispathwaysusedas
testcasesinthispaperaredisplayedwhenthemaxpathlength=11andminimumcarbonsconserved=2.Thevisualizationoftheresultsfortwo
differentfilteringcombinations(length=9,carbonsconserved=2,andlength=11,carbonsconserved=2)areshownontheright
any failure to identify the closest hub compounds to the
start or target compound (which is the first step in the
hubsearch,seeFig. 1candthe“ First and Last Hubs Selec-
tion”s u b s e c t i o ni n“Methods” section for more details)
would unequally impact the F1 scores. For example, both
thestartandtargetcompoundinthelysinepathwayswere
hub compounds for the 50 (O) and 50 (IO) hub tables,
but not the 50 (I) table. The hub search meta-algorithm
did not identify the correct closest hub for the search
using the 50 (I) table, resulting in the search not finding
the canonical pathways. Meanwhile, since the start and
target compound were hubs for the 50 (O) and 50 (IO)
tables, the canonical pathways were able to be found in
thesecases.
Allthreeofthehubselectionshadcomparablecoverage
of the KEGG module reactions and had higher coverage
than that of the hub tables constructed using randomly
selected hub compounds when looking at all 310 KEGG
pathway modules (see Table4). However, when looking
at only the KEGG pathway modules that correspond to
reaction modules identified by [29], the out-degree hub
selection covered more KEGG module reactions than the
in-degree and the total degree selections (see Additional
file 7). Search times for the hub tables varied for each test
case and in almost all cases range from a few seconds
to a few minutes. None of the three curated hub selec-
tions resulted in a significantly lower total search time
compared to the others across all the pathway test cases
(Additionalfile 8).Forthisstudy,the50(O)hubtablewas
used since this table enabled the search to find the most
canonicalpathways.
The 139 (A) hub table constructed based on the hub
compounds in Araki et al. [43] had the highest cover-
age of KEGG modules. Though the 139 (A) table showed
significantly wider coverage of the KEGG pathway mod-
ules corresponding to reaction modules (85.42% of these
Table2 Descriptionofhubtablesthatwereevaluated
HubTable Description
20(O) Selectedtwentyhubcompoundsinvolvedas
reactantsinthemostnumberofreactions(highest
out-degree).Subsetofthe50(O)hubtable.
50(O) Selectedfiftyhubcompoundsinvolvedasreactants
inthemostnumberofreactions(highest
out-degree).Subsetofthe80(O)hubtable.
80(O) Selectedeightyhubcompoundsinvolvedas
reactantsinthemostnumberofreactions(highest
out-degree).
139(A) 139hubsusedintheArakietal.[ 43]study.
50(IO) Selectedfiftyhubcompoundsinvolvedinthemost
numberofreactions(eitherasreactantsorproducts,
highestdegree).
50(I) Selectedfiftyhubcompoundsinvolvedasproducts
inthemostnumberofreactions(highestin-degree).
50(R1)and(R2) Twoindependentsetsoffiftyrandomlyselectedhub
compounds.
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page14of22
Fig.9 Overlapofhubcompoundsbetweenthe20(O),50(O),80(O),and139( a)hubtables.Thoughthereareafewcompoundscontainedinthe
out-degreehubtablewhicharenotincludedinthe139( a)hubtable,thereisasignificantoverlapbetweentheout-degreetablesandthehub
tableconstructedfromthelistofhubcompoundstakenfromArakietal.[ 43].Thereare68,38,and14compoundssharedbetweenthe139( a)hub
tableandthe80(O),50(O),and20(O)hubtablesrespectively
Fig.10 Overlapofhubcompoundsbetweenthe50(O),50(IO),and50(I)hubtables.Thethreehubtablessharetwentyonehubcompounds.The
hubcompoundsintheIOhubtableareallencompassedbyeithertheOorItables.TheOhubtablehassixteenuniquehubcompoundsand
thirteenhubcompoundssharedwiththeIOtable,butnottheItable.TheIhubtablehasthirteenuniquehubcompoundsandsixteenhub
compoundssharedwiththeIOtablebutnottheOtable
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page15of22
Table3 F1 scoresofhubtablesofdifferentsizesandhubselectionsfortheknownpathwaytestset,whereanF 1 scoreofone
indicatesthattheHPATsearchfoundtheexactknownpathway
NumberofHubs
20(O) 50(O) 80(O) 139(A) 50(IO) 50(I) 50(R1) 50(R2)
Pyruvate→ LysineI 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.67 0.70 0.70
Pyruvate→ LysineII 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.67 0.70 0.70
Pyruvate→ LysineIII 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.61 1.00 1.00
Pyruvate→ LysineIV 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.61 0.78 0.78
Pyruvate→ LysineV 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.10 0.30 0.30
Glutamate→ Proline 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
UDP-Galactose→ Stachyose 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
alpha-D-glucose→ Phenylpyruvate 0.71 0.71 0.71 0.62 0.74 0.71 0.71 0.71
alpha-D-glucose→ Dopamine 0.76 0.59 0.59 0.60 0.65 0.76 0.76 0.76
Pyruvate→ 3-HP,I 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
Pyruvate→ 3-HP,II 0.38 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.50 0.60 0.33 0.33
Pyruvate→ 3-HP,III 0.55 0.60 1.00 1.00 0.60 1.00 0.78 0.78
Pyruvate→ 3-HP,IV 0.38 0.42 0.50 0.50 0.43 1.00 0.71 0.71
Pyruvate→ 3-HP,V 0.40 0.36 0.36 0.36 0.36 0.36 0.40 0.40
Pyruvate→ 3-HP,VI 0.36 0.36 0.18 0.18 0.36 0.67 0.36 0.36
Pyruvate→ 3-HP,VII 0.36 0.53 0.77 0.77 0.53 0.77 0.50 0.50
Glucose→ Glucaricacid 1.00 1.00 0.38 0.44 0.21 1.00 1.00 1.00
alpha-D-glucose→ 1,3-propanediol 1.00 1.00 0.57 0.89 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
Tryptophan→ Melatonin 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
TheclosertheF 1 scoreistoone,themoresimilarthefoundpathway’sreactionsaretothatofthecanonicalpathway.Thedifferentsuffixesincolumnnamesindicateho w
hubswereselected:IO,sumofin-andout-degree;A,fromArakietal.2015;O,out-degree;I,in-degree;R n,randomly
KEGG modules were at least partially covered by the 139
(A) table while all the other hub tables only partially cov-
ered 42–44%), in most cases the coverage of the 139 (A)
tablewasnotsignificantlydifferentfromthe80(O)table.
T h en u m b e ro fp a t h w a y sf o u n df o re a c hp a t h w a yt e s t
casebythehubsearchusingthedifferenthubtablesarein
Additional file10. The number of pathways are recorded
f o rn oh u b/s i n g l eh u bs e a r c h( F i g .1a and b), and the
start to hub, hub to hub, and hub to target components
of the hub search (Fig.1c). Both the smaller hub tables
(i.e., 20 (O)) and the hub tables constructed using ran-
domly selected hubs tend to have a larger number of no
hub/singlehubpathwaysandasmallernumberofhubto
hub pathways than the larger hub tables (i.e., 80 (O) and
139 (A)), illustrating that the hub to hub search is more
actively used when the hub tables contain a large number
ofhighly-connectedhubs.
Discussion
This paper outlines the first steps to taking advantage
of repeated, common subpaths in the metabolic net-
work and utilizing these subpath modules to improve the
organization of pathway results identified by metabolic
pathfinding approaches. HPAT was shown to find more
known pathways than LPAT by using a diverse collec-
tion of precomputed subpaths. The capability of HPAT
Table4 Thepercentageofthe310KEGGpathwaymodulesthathadalloftheirreactions,atleasthalfoftheirreaction,andnoneof
theirreactionscontainedbyhubtablesconstructedwithvaryingnumbersandselectionsofhubcompounds
Differenthubtables
20(O) 50(O) 80(O) 139(A) 50(IO) 50(I) 50(R1) 50(R2)
All 19.35 26.77 32.58 34.52 24.84 28.71 13.23 20.00
Atleasthalf 42.90 54.19 61.61 63.55 53.23 56.13 35.16 45.48
None 37.42 26.13 23.55 18.06 31.29 30.00 42.58 35.16
TheKEGGpathwaymodulesrepresentswell-documentedandimportantmetabolicpathwaysthatideallyshouldbecoveredbytheprecomputedsubpathsst oredinhub
tables.Thedifferentsuffixesincolumnnamesindicatehowhubswereselected:IO,sumofin-andout-degree;A,fromArakietal.2015;O,out-degree; I,in-degree;R n,randomly
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page16of22
to find novel pathways was illustrated through the
alternative 3-HP pathways identified by the search. The
p a p e ra l s oi n t r o d u c e san e ww a yt ov i s u a l i z ep a t h w a y
results as a single interactive graph, where subpaths
betweenhubcompoundscanbeexpandedorhiddenfrom
view to simply visualization. Filtering tools enable users
to quickly sift through pathway results without having to
click individually through a list of pathways or rely on
a pre-determined ranking heuristic to present the best
results.
Reasonsformissingsomecanonicalpathways
ThoughtheHPATmeta-algorithmrecoveredmanyofthe
k n o w np a t h w a y si nt h et e s ts e t ,af e wk n o w np a t h w a y s
were not found due to a failure of the HPAT meta-
algorithm to identify the correct first or last hub in the
pathway. The identification of closest hubs is based on
the assumption that the hub compounds with the highest
chemical similarity score to the start and target com-
poundswouldbethemostlikelyhubcompoundsincluded
inthepathwayresult(Seesubsection“ First andLastHubs
Selection”subsectionin“ Methods”section).
As seen in the results, the structure of the first or last
hub compound may not necessarily resemble the start
or the target compound respectively due to (1) an addi-
tion of a coenzyme or large structural addition along the
way (i.e. coenzyme-A) or (2) the hub compound present
in the known pathway is many reactions away from both
the start and the target compound. In these cases, the
heuristic is unable to identify the correct closest hub
compound.
One alternative method is to directly identify the hub
compounds that are the least reactions away from the
start and the target, using a breadth first search. Though
it would take more time to compute, this approach
would be able to find closest hubs with chemical struc-
tures that differ significantly from the start and target
compounds.
Another promising option is to use the chemical sim-
ilarity measure to identify a recommended set of closest
hub pathways, then provide the user the option to add or
remove hub compounds to the recommended set before
performingthehubsearch.Thisallowstheusertoprovide
expertguidanceonwhichclosesthubsshouldbeexplored
inthesearch,whilealsopresentingtheuserwithasmaller
subset of recommended hub compounds so that the user
doesnotneedtoexamineallpossiblehubcompounds.
Conservationofcarbonatoms
All the metabolic pathfinding experiments described in
this paper had the constraint of conserving at least two
carbon atoms from the start compound to the target
compound. When using the term ‘conservation’ we are
specificallyreferringtoretainingasubsetofcarbonatoms
present in the starting compound through each biochem-
ical transformation in the pathway through to the final
target compound. Conserving some minimum number of
carbon atoms throughout the pathway is done to ensure
that the start compound is being utilized in produc-
tion of the target compound, and this heuristic has been
used by several existing metabolic pathfinding methods
[9,10,12,17,19,44,45].However,ifthenumberofatoms
conservedthroughoutthepathwayisrelativelysmallcom-
pared to the number of atoms in the start compound or
target compound, the carbon conservation heuristic may
not be as effective at preventing the search from finding
infeasible pathways, since the search is still able to find
pathways that break down the start compound to a much
smaller compound (i.e., CO2) then build that compound
backuptoproducethetargetcompound.
Thereareafewwaystopreventthesearchfrominclud-
ing unnecessary build up / break down steps in the path-
way results. First, the user of the hub pathway search has
the choice to maximize the number of carbons conserved
throughoutthepathway,sothatallpathwaysfoundbythe
hubpathwaysearchconservethelargestpossiblenumbers
of carbon atoms from start to target compound. Another
option that can be easily made available is for the user
to specify what percentage of carbon atoms that exist in
the start compound or target compound should be con-
servedthroughoutthepathway.Thisway,alargernumber
of carbon atoms are conserved when the start and target
compounds are large, preventing the search from find-
ing pathways with unnecessary break down / build up
steps, while also accounting for scenarios where the start
compound or target compound is small, and conserving
only one or two carbon atoms will not cause the search
algorithmtofindlengthyinfeasiblepathways.
Hubcompoundselection
The selection of hub compounds used in the hub table
can have a significant impact on how frequently the hub
tableisutilizedinthesearch.Whenhubcompoundswere
selected randomly, the hub table was often not used in
finding the canonical pathways since no feasible path-
ways passed through the precomputed paths. Meanwhile,
when the hub compounds were selected by their degree
of connectivity with other compounds, the hub table was
used for finding more than half the canonical pathways.
I n c r e a s i n gt h en u m b e ro fh u b sa l s oi n c r e a s e st h eu s eo f
thehubtableinsearches,whichinsomecases,hadaneg-
ative effect on the F1 score when the chemical similarity
heuristicdidnotidentifythecorrectfirstorlasthubcom-
pound. As a result, increasing the hub table size did not
result in better F1 scores for finding canonical pathways
even though larger hub tables had more coverage of the
KEGG modules and KEGG reactions than smaller hub
tables.
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page17of22
Improvementstovisualization
Metabolic pathfinding has many potential applications,
from suggesting new pathways for metabolic engineer-
ing to help with understanding the metabolic space in
multi-species communities. It is essential for these tools
to be flexible and interactive, so users can quickly find
the information that they are seeking. To this end, bet-
ter organization and visualization of predicted pathways
will enable further development and utilization of the
available,rapidlygrowingmetabolicinformation.
The sliding filters in the web server visualization allow
formoreflexibleuserinteractionwiththepathwaysearch
results; however, there are several improvements that
couldbemadeforaneasieruserexperience.Forexample,
the layout of the pathways can be intimidating to users,
especially for large pathway graphs which often resemble
ahairballofnodesandedges.Onesolutiontovisualizinga
complex, disorganized network of predicated pathways is
to utilize an existing scaffold for organization. This could
be accomplished by overlaying the predicted pathways
on curated representations of global metabolic networks,
such as those from KEGG, which have been designed
to minimize overlapping paths and to facilitate pathway
navigation. Alternatively, introducing more hierarchical
elements described in [31] could further condense the
graph while still giving the user a feel of the connectivity
andscopeofthenetwork.
More interactive filters based on other common search
heuristicscanbeaddedtothewebservertoallowtheuser
tonarrowthesearch.Forexample,anorganism-basedfil-
ter could allow users to view pathways that only contain
enzymatic reactions from specific organisms of interest.
A filter based on thermodynamic (/Delta1G) cutoffs could also
be included for users to remove pathways that contain
enzymaticreactionswithunfavorablethermodynamics.
StandardizationandIntegration
The Hub Pathways Webserver is currently a stand-alone
tool, to gather feedback from the community. Such feed-
back and the availability of the code will drive further
in-depth development. Ultimately, the development of
an open-source suite of metabolic pathway visualization
tools will help insure the sustainability and continued
usage of these visualization tools over the years. In the
future, it would be ideal for the Hub Pathways Webserver
to be modulized such that the webserver’s functional-
ities can be seamlessly integrated with and supported
by existing, well established open-source network visu-
alization softwares like Escher [46]a n dC y t o s c a p e[47].
Utilizing common standardized formats for compounds
and reactions (i.e., SBML, MDL mol, and MDL rxn files)
as inputs to the webserver could also bolster the web-
server’s utility to the community. Realizing these changes
is an ongoing process, and feedback and collaboration
fromthecommunityisencouragedtoachieveamoreinte-
gratedandstandardizedenvironmentforvisualizingnovel
pathways.
Futuredirections
Thecurrenthubsearchmethodonlyexploreslinearpath-
ways, which tracks the conversion of a single compound
throughout the pathway. However, most metabolic path-
ways are more accurately represented as branching paths
and require multiple intermediate compounds at each
enzymatic reaction step. The easiest way to introduce
branched pathways into the hub search is to identify
potential merge points between subpaths connecting a
pair of hubs, similar to how the BPAT-M algorithm [48]
findsbranchedpathwaysbymerginglinearpathwayswith
thesamestartandtargetcompound.Identifyingpotential
branchpathwaysthathelptofeedby-productcompounds
back into the main pathway can result in a significant
improvementsinproduction.Thisisillustratedinarecent
study by South et al. [49], where crops were modified to
have an alternate metabolic pathway that more efficiently
recycledunproductivesideintermediatesofphotosynthe-
sisandsubsequentlyshoweda40%increaseinbiomassin
the field.
In this paper, the metabolic pathfinding problem is
framed as a graph-search problem similar to LPAT and
BPAT [9]. However, there are other well-studied methods
for identifying metabolic pathways, including constraint-
based optimization methods. In order to better compare
the performance of the hub search method with existing
optimizationapproaches,thenextstepistoframethehub
pathway search approach presented in this paper as an
optimization problem. This step could also facilitate the
incorporationofmoreadvancedpropertiessuchastaking
into account steady state mass balance constraints.
Beyonditsapplicationsinmetabolicpathfinding,theset
of hub compounds identified in this study could be used
as a tool to compare and describe the structure and prop-
erties of metabolic networks from different organisms or
communities. For this paper, all compounds and reac-
tionsintheKEGGdatabasewereincludedinthesearched
metabolic network. However, there are cases where only
a subset of the available reactions (i.e., only reactions
from a specific species or community of organisms) are
of interest to the user. The complexity and properties
of the metabolic network composed of this subset may
significantly differ from the entire known metabolome
and other subsets of the metabolic network. Examining
how the selection of hub compounds differ for a range
of organisms, and which hub compounds are ubiquitous
across all species, could lead to more insights about the
roles these compounds play in metabolism. Also, assum-
ing that the precomputed paths between hub compounds
are a good representation of common metabolic modules
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page18of22
across species, identifying which organism(s) contain the
most of these precomputed subpaths could be a way to
identify potential chassis organisms for metabolic engi-
neering. This study’s initial exploration on how to select
hub compounds and construct precomputed hub tables
containing common metabolic modules serves as a good
startingpointforexaminingdifferentorganismsandcom-
munitiesinthefuture.
Conclusion
The HPAT meta-algorithm takes advantage of the modu-
larity of metabolic pathways by precomputing short sub-
paths (containing no more than ten reactions) that con-
serve carbon atoms between common hub compounds,
and organizing these subpaths as a hub table for quick
lookup during the graph-based search. The HPAT meta-
algorithm was able to find a variety of known pathways
and demonstrated its capability to find novel pathways.
The interactive visualization of result pathways by the
Hub Pathways Webserver enables users to filter pathways
using intuitive heuristics, giving them more control over
which pathways they see. Users also gain the flexibility to
view a wide range of pathways without having to decide
on cutoff parameters before the search.
Methods
Thehubpathwaysearchmeta-algorithmwithatomtrack-
ing (HPAT) uses a graph-based atom tracking search
approach for finding metabolic pathways. HPAT consists
of an offline component, where paths between hub com-
pounds are precomputed and stored in a hub table, and
an online component, where the hub table is utilized for
pathway search. Subpaths between hub compounds are
assumed to appear frequently in pathway search results,
since hub compounds are the substrates or products of
a large number of enzymatic reactions. By precomputing
and storing these subpaths, pathways between any pair
of hub compounds can be easily explored and added to
a pathway search. These precomputed subpathways are
indexed by both the hub pair and the uniquely conserved
carbonatomtuplesforfasterlook-up.
Offlinecomponent:precomputationofhubpathways
To construct the hub table, hub compounds must first
be selected from the pool of known metabolites. Hub
compounds are defined as key metabolites found across
multiplepathways,suchthatwewouldexpectmanypath-
ways to contain subpaths between two or more hub
compounds. If the metabolic network is represented as a
bipartite graph of compound nodes and reaction nodes,
hub compounds can be identified as compound nodes
connected with many reaction nodes. Three hub selec-
tions based on the in-degree, out-degree, and combined
degreeofcompoundswereusedtoconstructtheO,I,and
IO hub tables described in the “Results”s e c t i o n .T h e s e
hub selections were determined by ranking each KEGG
compound by the number of reactions that contained the
compoundasareactantand/orproduct(seeFig. 11),then
selecting the compounds that were involved in the largest
numberofreactions.
Before hub compounds were selected, a set of KEGG
compounds that would not make good hub compounds
were removed from consideration based on a list of pre-
determined rules (see Additional file2). These removed
compounds include currency metabolites and side com-
pounds that are used to provide energy or to balance the
reaction but do not contribute any carbon atoms to the
targetcompound.
Hubtableconstruction
The hub table is constructed by running a linear pathway
searchbetweeneachpossiblepairofhubsusingtheLinear
Pathfinding with Atom Tracking algorithm (LPAT) from
Heath et al. [9]. All precomputed subpaths were required
to conserve at leasttwocarbon atoms (oratleastone car-
bon atom, if the start or end hub compound contain only
o n ec a r b o n ) .T ol i m i tt h es i z eo ft h eh u bt a b l e ,a l lp a t h s
storedinthehubtablearetenorlessreactionslong,anda
conditionalmaximumofonehundredsubpathsarestored
perhubpair.Themaximumofonehundredsubpathsmay
be exceeded only if all subpaths stored in the hub table
conserve a unique set of carbon atoms, to ensure that all
possiblevariationsofconservedcarbonsetsarepresentin
the hub table.
In addition to the start and target compound, LPAT
also takes several adjustable input parameters, including
the minimum number of carbon atoms to conserve, the
number of shortest pathways to return (K), the maximum
searchdepth,andwhetherornottoconsiderallreactions
asreversible.Thevaluesusedfortheseparameterscanbe
found in Additional file3. Although LPAT is used in this
study,theHPATmeta-algorithmcanbegeneralizedtouse
any linear pathfinding method with atom tracking to find
precomputedpathways.
Allprecomputedsubpathsbetweenhubcompoundsare
stored in the hub table. The subpaths are indexed first
by hub pair and then by the tuples of conserved carbons
f r o mt h es t a r th u bt ot h ee n dh u b( F i g .12), which were
trackedbytheLPATalgorithm.Indexingsubpathsbyhub
pair enables the HPAT meta-algorithm to quickly access
all possible subpaths given a start hub and an end hub.
The subpaths are further organized by tuples of carbon
atoms conserved so the HPAT meta-algorithm can look
upsubpathsthatconservetherequirednumberofcarbon
atomsduringtheonlinesearchstep.Indexingsubpathsby
tuples of carbons conserved can condense a list of a hun-
dredsubpathstotwoorthreegroupsofsubpaths.Forthis
study, the precomputation and organization of subpaths
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page19of22
Fig.11 ThenumberofreactionseachcompoundinKEGGparticipatesinas aareactant(out-degree,usedforOtables), baproduct(in-degree,
usedforItables),or casareactantoraproduct(totaldegree,usedforIOtables).Asillustratedinallthreeofthegraphs,thereareafewcompounds
thatareinvolvedinalargenumberofreactions,whereasthemajorityofcompoundstakepartinonlyahandfulofreactions
for all hub tables were performed on a Rice cluster, with
eac hh ubta bletakingaf ewhourst oc om put e.
Onlinecomponent:pathwaysearch
The online component of the hub search draws on both
thelinearpathwaysearchandtheprecomputedhubtable.
The hub search separately explores three types of path-
ways: (1) pathways containing no hub compounds, (2)
pathways containing one hub compound, and (3) path-
ways containing at least two hub compounds (See Fig.1
in“Results”section).Thesepathwaysarefoundseparately
because for finding pathways containing one or no hub
compounds,theprecomputednetworkisnotusedforthe
search,whileforfindingpathwayscontainingtwoormore
hubs,theprecomputednetworkisused.
A linear pathway search which excludes all hubs in
the network is first run to find pathways with no hubs.
Second, linear pathway searches which exclude all hubs
except a single hub compound are run to find pathways
with only one hub. The single hub searches are limited
to only then hubs that are closest to the start compound
or to the target compound based on chemical similarity.
Similar to the hub table construction step, the hub path-
way search takes several input parameters to adjust the
breadth of the search, including the maximum number
of hubs in a hub pathway and the maximum number of
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page20of22
Fig.12 Theorganizationofthehubtableforapairofhubs.Hub1isthecompoundtothebottomleftandhub2isthecompoundtothebottom
right.Eachhubcompoundhasnumberedcarbonatomscorrespondingtothemappingsdisplayedinthehubtable.Individualrowsinthetable
representauniquetupleofcarbonsconservedbetweenhub1andhub2,wherethecarbonnumbersofhub1inthefirstcolumncorrespondwith
thecarbonnumbersofhub2inthesecondcolumn.Thethirdcolumncontainsallthesubpathsbetweenhub1andhub2thataregroupedunder
thistupleofconservedcarbons
reactions in a hub to hub path. The values used for the
inputparametersaredescribedintheAdditionalfile 4.
Firstandlasthubsselection
Start and end hub compounds were identified using the
KEGG SIMCOMP similarity measure [50]. SIMCOMP
is a graph-based method for scoring the structural sim-
ilarity between compounds. The compound structure
is represented by a graph with atoms represented as
nodes and bonds represented as edges. SIMCOMP iden-
tifies the maximal cliques between compound graphs by
comparing either the atom nodes or the bond edges,
then calculating the similarity score as the number of
nodes or edges matched between the compound graphs
divided by the total number of nodes or edges present
in the smaller compound. SIMCOMP also incorporates
biochemical features (i.e., chirality) into the final simi-
larity score. We assume that hub compounds that are
structurally similar to the start compound or the tar-
get compound are more likely to be part of a feasible
pathway connecting the two compounds. SIMCOMP was
used to rank the similarity of all hub compounds to the
start compound of the search, as well as the target com-
pound. In this study, the three hub compounds with the
top SIMCOMP similarity scores to the start compound
wereselectedasthefirsthubs,andlikewise,thethreehub
compounds with the top SIMCOMP similarity scores to
the target compounds were selected as the last hubs in
the search. By limiting the search to the top three scor-
ing start hubs and last hubs, we can reduce the scope of
the search to completely explore all possible paths going
through the selected first hubs and last hubs instead of
having to exhaustively search through all combinations of
hubs.However,thenumberofclosesthubcompoundscan
beraisedtoobtainmorediverseresultpathways.
Supplementaryinformation
Supplementaryinformation accompaniesthispaperat
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-019-3328-x.
Additionalfile1: Thetestsetofnineuniquepairsofstartandtarget
compounds.The“num.carbons”columnsreportthenumberofcarbon
atomsinthestartandtargetcompounds.The“knownpaths”column
referstothenumberofcanonicalpathwaysfoundinKEGGorinother
literature.The“pathlength”columnreferstothenumberofreactionsin
thecanonicalpathway(s).
Additionalfile2: Alistofalltheexclusionrulesusedtocuratethehub
compoundlist.Theleftcolumnprovidestheruledescription,whilethe
rightcolumnprovidesalistofcompounds(withKEGGids)thatwere
removedduetothecorrespondingrule.
Additionalfile3: Hubtableconstructionparameters.Valuesoftheinput
parametersusedforprecomputingsubpathsforallthehubtablesinthis
paper.
Additionalfile4: Hubpathwaysearchparameters.Valuesoftheinput
parametersusedforthehubsearch.Thesevaluescanbeadjustedto
increasethenumberanddiversityofpathwaysfound.
Additionalfile5: LPATsearchparameters.Valuesoftheinputparameters
usedfortheLPATsearchasacomparisontoHPAT.Thesevalueswere
chosentobecomparabletotheparametersusedintheHPATsearch.
Additionalfile6: Anillustrationofwhichstepsofhubsearch(asshownin
Figure1)wouldfindthecanonicalpathwayforeachofthepathwaytest
casesusingthedifferenthubtables.Forcombinationsmarkedwithan“A,”
thecanonicalpathwayisfoundbytheno-hubsearch.Forcombinations
markedwitha“B,”thesinglehubsearchisrequiredtofindthecanonical
pathway,andforcombinationsmarkedwitha“C,”thecanonicalpathway
wouldbefoundbythehub-to-hubsearch.Combinationsthatarealso
markedwitha*indicatethatthehubsearchfailedtofindthecanonical
pathwayinthiscase.Hubtablesconstructedwithmorehubsmustmore
frequentlyusethehubtohubsearchtofindcanonicalpathways,whilethe
hubtablesconstructedwitharandomselectionofhubsdonotusethe
hubtohubsearchtofindthecanonicalpathways.Thedifferentsuffixesin
columnnamesindicatehowhubswereselected:IO,sumofin-and
out-degree;A,fromArakietal.2015;O,out-degree;I,in-degree;R n,
randomly.
Additionalfile7: ThepercentageofthefortyeightKEGGpathway
modulescorrespondingtothereactionmodulesidentifiedby[ 29]thathad
alloftheirreactions,atleasthalfoftheirreaction,andnoneoftheir
reactionscontainedbyhubtablesconstructedwithvaryingnumbersand
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page21of22
selectionsofhubcompounds.Thedifferentsuffixesincolumnnames
indicatehowhubswereselected:IO,sumofin-andout-degree;A,from
Arakietal.2015;O,out-degree;I,in-degree;R n,randomly.
Additionalfile8: Totaltimeofsearchesusinghubtablesofdifferentsizes
andhubselectionsfortheknownpathwaytestset,runonanIntelCore
i7-4790with16GBRAM.Thedifferentsuffixesincolumnnamesindicate
howhubswereselected:IO,sumofin-andout-degree;A,fromArakietal.
2015;O,out-degree;I,in-degree;R n,randomly.
Additionalfile9: Timesforthehub-to-hubpartofthehubsearch,using
hubtablesofdifferentsizesandhubselectionsfortheknownpathwaytest
set.Thedifferentsuffixesincolumnnamesindicatehowhubswere
selected:IO,sumofin-andout-degree;A,fromArakietal.2015;O,
out-degree;I,in-degree;R n,randomly.
Additionalfile10: Numberofpathwaysfoundforthe(1)nohub/single
hubpartofthesearchand(2)thehub-to-hubpartofthesearch,usinghub
tablesofdifferentsizesandhubselectionsfor19pathwaytestset.Forthe
hub-to-hubpathways,uniquecombinationsofhubpairsthatconserve
differentsetsofcarbonsarecountedasindividualpathways;however,the
differentcombinationsofsubpathsbetweenhubpairsarenotcountedas
separatepathways.Forexample,givenhubcompoundsH1,H2,andH3,(1)
H1→H2andH1 →H3arecountedasseparatepathways,(2)H1 →H2
conservingtwocarbonatomsandH1 →H2conservingadifferentsetof
twocarbonatomsarecountedasseparatepathways,but(3)anysubpath
variationsbetweenH1andH2(i.e.,H1 →N1→H2andH1 →N2→H2,
whereN1andN2arenon-hubcompounds)arenotcountedasseparate
pathways,giventhattheyconservethesamecarbonatomsfromH1toH2.
Thedifferentsuffixesincolumnnamesindicatehowhubswereselected:
IO,sumofin-andout-degree;A,fromArakietal.2015;O,out-degree;I,
in-degree.
Abbreviations
3-HP:3-hydroxypropanoate;ATP:Adenosinetriphosphate;HPAT:Hub
pathwaysearchwithatomtracking;KEGG:Kyotoencyclopediaofgenesand
genomes;LPAT:Linearpathwaysearchwithatomtracking
Acknowledgements
WewouldliketoacknowledgePrudhviBoyapalliforthedevelopmentofthe
corefeaturesanddesignoftheHubPathwaysWebserver.Wewouldalsoliketo
acknowledgeAllisonHeathforthedevelopmentoftheLPATalgorithm,which
wasusedasthepathwaysearchalgorithmforconstructingthehubtables.
Authors’contributions
SKandMPco-wrotethe“ Background”section.SKwrotethe“ Methods”,
“Discussion”,and“ Conclusion”sections.The“ Identificationofnovelpathways
byHPAT”andFigs. 2,9,and 10werewrittenandcreatedbyMP,whiletherest
ofthe“ Results”sectionwaswrittenbySK.Additionalfile 2wascreatedbyMP
andGB.MMhelpedwiththeformattingofallthetables.MM,GB,andLK
directedtheresearch,andadvisedandprovidedexpertfeedbackonthe
writingofthepaper.Allauthorshavereadandapprovedthemanuscript.
Funding
ThisworkwassupportedinpartbyNSFDBI-1262491andtheNSFGraduate
FellowshipawardedtoSarahKIM.MatthewPeñawaspartiallysupportedby
NSFEAGER:DESYN-C3CBET-1843556andDOEBESDE-SC0014462.The
fundingbodydidnotplayanyroleinthedesignofthestudy,orcollection,
analysis,orinterpretationofdata,orinwritingthemanuscript.
Availabilityofdataandmaterials
Thedatasetsusedand/oranalysedduringthecurrentstudyareavailablefrom
thecorrespondingauthoronreasonablerequest.
Ethicsapprovalandconsenttoparticipate
Notapplicable.
Consentforpublication
Notapplicable.
Competinginterests
Theauthorsdeclarethattheyhavenocompetinginterests.
Authordetails
1DepartmentofComputerScience,RiceUniversity,Houston,Texas,USA.
2DepartmentofBioSciences,RiceUniversity,Houston,Texas,USA.
Received:14March2019 Accepted:18December2019
References
1. LeeSK, ChouH, HamTS, LeeTS, KeaslingJD.Metabolicengineeringof
microorganismsforbiofuelsproduction:frombugstosyntheticbiology
tofuels.CurrOpinBiotechnol.2008;19(6):556–63.
2. MajidianP, TabatabaeiM, ZeinolabediniM, NaghshbandiMP, ChistiY.
Metabolicengineeringofmicroorganismsforbiofuelproduction.Renew
SustEnergyRev.2018;82:3863–85.
3. PaddonCJ, WestfallP, PiteraDJ, BenjaminK, FisherK, McPheeD,etal.
High-levelsemi-syntheticproductionofthepotentantimalarial
artemisinin.Nature.2013;496:528–32.
4. GalanieS, ThodeyK, TrenchardIJ, InterranteMF, SmolkeCD.Complete
biosynthesisofopioidsinyeast.Science.2015;349:1095–1100.
5. NarcrossL, FossatiE, BourgeoisL, DueberJE, MartinVJ.Microbial
factoriesfortheproductionofbenzylisoquinolinealkaloids.Trends
Biotechnol.2016;34(3):228–41.
6. IbdahM, MartensS, GangDR.Biosyntheticpathwayandmetabolic
engineeringofplantdihydrochalcones.JAgricFoodChem.2017;66(10):
2273–80.
7. JenkinsS.Commercial-scaleproductionofbio-basedBDOannounced.
ChemEng.2013.Availablefrom: http://www.chemengonline.com/
commercial-scale-production-of-bio-based-bdo-announced/ .Accessed
9Aug2019.
8. YimH, HaselbeckR, NiuW, Pujol-BaxleyC, BurgardA, BoldtJ,etal.
MetabolicengineeringofEscherichiacolifordirectproductionof
1,4-butanediol.NatChemBiol.2011;7:445–52.
9. HeathAP, BennettGN, KavrakiLE.Findingmetabolicpathwaysusing
atomtracking.Bioinformatics.2010;26:1548–55.
10. PitkänenE, JouhtenP, RousuJ.Inferringbranchingpathwaysin
genome-scalemetabolicnetworks.BMCSystBiol.2009;3:103.
11. FaustK, CroesD, vanHeldenJ.MetabolicPathfindingUsingRPAIR
Annotation.JMolBiol.2009;388:390–414.
12. AritaM.Insilicoatomictracingbysubstrate-productrelationshipsin
Escherichiacoliintermediarymetabolism.GenomeRes.2003;13:2455–66.
13. KimSM, PeñaMI, MollM, BennettGN, KavrakiLE.Areviewof
parametersandheuristicsforguidingmetabolicpathfinding.J
Cheminformatics.2017;9(1):51.
14. RahmanSA, AdvaniP, SchunkR, SchraderR, SchomburgD.Metabolic
pathwayanalysiswebservice(PathwayHunterToolatCUBIC).
Bioinformatics.2005;21:1189–93.
15. McClymontK, SoyerOS.Metabolictinker:Anonlinetoolforguidingthe
designofsyntheticmetabolicpathways.NucleicAcidsRes.2013;41:e113.
16. CampodonicoMA, AndrewsBA, AsenjoJA, PalssonBO, FeistAM.
GenerationofanatlasforcommoditychemicalproductioninEscherichia
coliandanovelpathwaypredictionalgorithm,GEM-Path.MetabEng.
2014;25:140–58.
17. HuangY, ZhongC, LinHX, WangJ.AMethodforFindingMetabolic
PathwaysUsingAtomicGroupTracking.PLoSONE.2017;12:e0168725.
18. BlumT, KohlbacherO.MetaRoute:Fastsearchforrelevantmetabolic
routesforinteractivenetworknavigationandvisualization.
Bioinformatics.2008;24:2108–9.
19. LatendresseM, KrummenackerM, KarpPD.Optimalmetabolicroute
searchbasedonatommappings.Bioinformatics.2014;30:2043–50.
20. ChoA, YunH, ParkJH, LeeSY, ParkS.Predictionofnovelsynthetic
pathwaysfortheproductionofdesiredchemicals.BMCSystBiol.2010;4:
35.
21. XiaD, ZhengH, LiuZ, LiG, LiJ, HongJ,etal.MRSD:Awebserverfor
MetabolicRouteSearchandDesign.Bioinformatics.2011;27:1581–2.
22. CarbonellP, ParuttoP, HerissonJ, PanditSB, FaulonJL.XTMS:Pathway
designinaneXTendedmetabolicspace.NucleicAcidsRes.2014;42:
W389–94.
23. TuW, ZhangH, LiuJ, HuQN.BioSynther:Acustomizedbiosynthetic
potentialexplorer.Bioinformatics.2015;32:472–3.
24. HadadiN, HafnerJ, ShajkofciA, ZisakiA, HatzimanikatisV.ATLASof
Biochemistry:ARepositoryofAllPossibleBiochemicalReactionsfor
Kimetal. BMCBioinformatics           (2020) 21:13 Page22of22
SyntheticBiologyandMetabolicEngineeringStudies.ACSSynthBiol.
2016;5:1155–66.
25. PapinJA, ReedJL, PalssonBO.Hierarchicalthinkinginnetworkbiology:
theunbiasedmodularizationofbiochemicalnetworks.TrendsBiochem
Sci.2004;29(12):641–7.
26. RavaszE, SomeraAL, MongruDA, OltvaiZN, BarabásiAL.Hierarchical
organizationofmodularityinmetabolicnetworks.Science.5586;297:
1551–5.
27. SchusterS, PfeifferT, MoldenhauerF, KochI, DandekarT.Exploringthe
pathwaystructureofmetabolism:decompositionintosubnetworksand
applicationtoMycoplasmapneumoniae.Bioinformatics.2002;18(2):
351–61.
28. YamadaT, KanehisaM, GotoS.Extractionofphylogeneticnetwork
modulesfromthemetabolicnetwork.BMCBioinformatics.2006;7(1):130.
29. MutoA, KoteraM, TokimatsuT, NakagawaZ, GotoS, KanehisaM.
Modulararchitectureofmetabolicpathwaysrevealedbyconserved
sequencesofreactions.JChemInformaModel.2013;53(3):613–22.
30. LuoW, PantG, BhavnasiYK, BlanchardJrSG, BrouwerC.PathviewWeb:
userfriendlypathwayvisualizationanddataintegration.Nucleicacids
research.2017;45(W1):W501–8.
31. PaduanoF, EtemadpourR, ForbesAG.BranchingSets:Interactively
visualizingcategoriesonnode-linkdiagrams.In:Proceedingsofthe9th
InternationalSymposiumonVisualInformationCommunicationand
Interaction.ACM;2016. p.9–16. https://doi.org/10.1145/2968220.
2968229.
32. SariM, BahceciI, DogrusozU, SumerSO, AksoyBA,BaburÖ,etal.
SBGNViz:atoolforvisualizationandcomplexitymanagementofSBGN
processdescriptionmaps.PloSONE.2015;10(6):e0128985.
33. XuY, LuoXC.PyPathway:PythonPackageforBiologicalNetworkAnalysis
andVisualization.JComputBiol.2018;25(5):499–504.
34. KanehisaM, FurumichiM, TanabeM, SatoY, MorishimaK.KEGG:new
perspectivesongenomes,pathways,diseasesanddrugs.NucleicAcids
Res.2017;45:D353–61.
35. KanehisaM, GotoS.KEGG:kyotoencyclopediaofgenesandgenomes.
NucleicAcidsRes.2000;28:27–30.
36. PowersDM.Evaluation:fromprecision,recallandF-measuretoROC,
informedness,markednessandcorrelation.JMachLearnTechnol.
2011;2(1):37–63.
37. GokarnRR, SelifonovaOV, JessenHJ, GortSJ, SelmerT, BuckelW,
inventors, CargillIncassignee.3-Hydroxypropionicacidandother
organiccompounds.USPatent7,393,676;2008. https://patents.google.
com/patent/US7393676/en.
38. LiaoHH, GokarnRR, GortSJ, JessenHJ, SelifonovaO,inventors, Cargill
Incassignee,Alanine2.3-Aminomutase.USPatent7,309,597;2007.
https://patents.google.com/patent/US7309597B2/en.
39. LiaoHH, GokarnRR, GortSJ, JessenHJ, SelifonovaO,inventors, Cargill
Incassignee.Productionof3-hydropropionicacidusing
beta-alanine/pyruvateaminotransferase.USPatentApp.10/581,570;
2007.https://patents.google.com/patent/US20070107080A1/en.
40. MarxA, WendischVF, RittmannD, BuchholzS,inventors, Wisconsin
AlumniResearchFoundationassignee.Microbiologicalproductionof
3-hydroxypropionicacid.USPatent6,852,517B1;2009. https://patents.
google.com/patent/US6852517B1/en.
41. JiangX, MengX, XianM.Biosyntheticpathwaysfor3-hydroxypropionic
acidproduction.ApplMicrobiolBiotechnol.2009;82(6):995–1003.
42. HenryCS, BroadbeltLJ, HatzimanikatisV.Discoveryandanalysisofnovel
metabolicpathwaysforthebiosynthesisofindustrialchemicals:
3-hydroxypropanoate.BiotechnolBioeng.2010;106(3):462–73.
43. ArakiM, CoxRS, MakiguchiH, OgawaT, TaniguchiT, MiyaokuK,etal.
M-path:Acompassfornavigatingpotentialmetabolicpathways.
Bioinformatics.2015;31:905–11.
44. BoyerF, ViariA.Abinitioreconstructionofmetabolicpathways.
Bioinformatics.2003;19:ii26–34.
45. PeyJ, PlanesFJ, BeasleyJE.Refiningcarbonfluxpathsusingatomictrace
data.Bioinformatics.2013btt653. https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/
btt653.
46. RoweE, PalssonBO, KingZA.Escher-FBA:awebapplicationfor
interactivefluxbalanceanalysis.BMCSystBiol.2018;12(1):84.
47. ShannonP, MarkielA, OzierO, BaligaNS, WangJT, RamageD,etal.
Cytoscape:asoftwareenvironmentforintegratedmodelsof
biomolecularinteractionnetworks.GenomeRes.2003;13(11):2498–504.
48. HeathAP, BennettGN, KavrakiLE.AnAlgorithmforEfficientIdentification
ofBranchedMetabolicPathways.JComputBiol.2011;18:1575–97.
49. SouthPF, CavanaghAP, LiuHW, OrtDR.Syntheticglycolatemetabolism
pathwaysstimulatecropgrowthandproductivityinthefield.Science.
2019;363(6422):eaat9077.
50. HattoriM, TanakaN, KanehisaM, GotoS.SIMCOMP/SUBCOMP:chemical
structuresearchserversfornetworkanalyses.NucleicAcidsRes.
2010;38(suppl_2):W652–6.
Publisher’sNote
SpringerNatureremainsneutralwithregardtojurisdictionalclaimsin
publishedmapsandinstitutionalaffiliations.