Analysis of metabolic network disruption in engineered microbial hosts due
to enzyme promiscuity
Vladimir Porokhina, Sara A. Amina, Trevor B. Nicksb, Venkatesh Endalur Gopinarayananb,
Nikhil U. Nairb,**, Soha Hassouna,b,*
a Department of Computer Science, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA
b Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Metabolic disruption
Enzyme promiscuity
Metabolic models
Metabolic engineering
Synthetic biology
Bio design automation
ABSTRACT
Increasing understanding of metabolic and regulatory networks underlying microbial physiology has enabled
creation of progressively more complex synthetic biological systems for biochemical, biomedical, agricultural, and
environmental applications. However, despite best efforts, confounding phenotypes still emerge from unforeseen
interplay between biological parts, and the design of robust and modular biological systems remains elusive. Such
interactions are difﬁcult to predict when designing synthetic systems and may manifest during experimental
testing as inefﬁciencies that need to be overcome. Transforming organisms such asEscherichia coliinto microbial
factories is achieved via several engineering strategies, used individually or in combination, with the goal of
maximizing the production of chosen target compounds. One technique relies on suppressing or overexpressing
selected genes; another involves introducing heterologous enzymes into a microbial host. These modiﬁcations
steer mass ﬂux towards the set of desired metabolites but may create unexpected interactions. In this work, we
develop a computational method, termed M
etabolic Disruption Workﬂow (MDFlow), for discovering interactions
and network disruptions arising from enzyme promiscuity– the ability of enzymes to act on a wide range of
molecules that are structurally similar to their native substrates. We applyMDFlow to two experimentally veriﬁed
cases where strains with essential genes knocked out are rescued by interactions resulting from overexpression of
one or more other genes. We demonstrate how enzyme promiscuity may aid cells in adapting to disruptions of
essential metabolic functions. We then applyMDFlow to predict and evaluate a number of putative promiscuous
reactions that can interfere with two heterologous pathways designed for 3-hydroxypropionic acid (3-HP) pro-
duction. UsingMDFlow, we can identify putative enzyme promiscuity and the subsequent formation of unintended
and undesirable byproducts that are not only disruptive to the host metabolism but also to the intended end-
objective of high biosynthetic productivity and yield. As we demonstrate, MDFlow provides an innovative
workﬂow to systematically identify incompatibilities between the native metabolism of the host and its engi-
neered modiﬁcations due to enzyme promiscuity.
1. Introduction
Integrating heterologous synthesis pathways within microbial hosts
has been instrumental in the biomanufacturing of industrial products
such as biofuels, polymers, pharmaceuticals, therapeutics,ﬂavors and
chemical commodities (Lee et al., 2008; Madison and Huisman, 1999;
Nakamura and Whited, 2003; Trantas et al., 2015; George et al., 2015).
One strategy to improve yield is to use well-established metabolic
engineering techniques such as gene deletion, promoter engineering,
media optimization, etc. (Lee et al., 2009). Another strategy is to directly
engineer enzymatic properties such as activity, selectivity,
inhibition-resistance, and solubility (Yoshikuni et al., 2008). Using one or
more of these strategies has proven effective in the development of
strains with desired target yields, productivity, and titers.
Often, such metabolic engineering strategies yield unexpected
enzyme-compound interactions. Some interactions can be beneﬁcial for
* Corresponding author. Department of Computer Science, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA.
** Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: vladimir.porokhin@tufts.edu (V. Porokhin), sara.amin@tufts.edu, saraaamin@gmail.com (S.A. Amin), trevor.nicks@tufts.edu (T.B. Nicks),
venkatesh.endalur_gopinarayanan@tufts.edu (V.E. Gopinarayanan),nikhil.nair@tufts.edu (N.U. Nair),soha.hassoun@tufts.edu (S. Hassoun).
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Metabolic Engineering Communications
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/mec
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mec.2021.e00170
Received 8 September 2020; Received in revised form 22 January 2021; Accepted 1 March 2021
2214-0301/© 2021 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of International Metabolic Engineering Society. This is an open access article under the CC BY-
NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Metabolic Engineering Communications 12 (2021) e00170
the survival of the host. For instance, Patrick et al. documented 41 rescue
instances where the lethality of an essential protein deletion was sup-
pressed by overexpression of one noncognateE. coli gene, attributing
some of them to catalytic promiscuity and substrate ambiguity (Patrick
et al., 2007). In other cases, beneﬁcial interactions can come at a cost.
The overexpression or knockout of enzymes can result in interactions that
are disruptive for growth and maintenance by siphoning off key meta-
bolic intermediates like pyruvate, acetyl-CoA, and NADH. For example,
while seeking to suppress lethality of inactivating the
pyridoxal-5-phosphate (PLP) cofactor synthesis pathway, Kim et al.
experimentally identiﬁed a four-step serendipitous pathway inE. colithat
restored the strain’s ability to grow on glucose at the expense of
consuming essential intermediates in the native serine biosynthetic
pathway (Kim et al., 2010), producing toxic byproducts (Kim and Copley,
2012).
The presence of high concentrations of heterologous enzymes and
metabolites within microbial cells causes unexpected promiscuous in-
teractions with host enzymes and metabolites. For example, the short-
chain dehydrogenase YMR226C used to produce 3-hydroxypropionic
acid (3-HP) in yeast is associated with 15 known substrates (Fujisawa
et al., 2003 ; Jessen et al., 2015 ). In E. coli strains featuring the
malonyl-CoA pathway for 3-HP synthesis, signiﬁcant quantities of lactate
and acetate are produced, even after lactate dehydrogenase (ldh) andpta
were knocked out (Rathnasingh et al., 2012). Another instance of pro-
miscuous activity can be observed for pathways intended for butanol
production: the promiscuity of the bifunctional butyryl-CoA dehydro-
genase (AdhE2) enzyme with substrate acetyl-CoA often results in
concomitant synthesis of ethanol with butanol (Inui et al., 2008; Atsumi
et al., 2008a; Nielsen et al., 2009). In yet another example, Liao and
colleagues leveraged promiscuity of ketoacid decarboxylase (KVD) and
alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) enzymes to synthesize a spectrum of al-
cohols from branched-chain amino acid metabolic intermediates (Atsumi
et al., 2008b). Yet, a caveat of this promiscuous activity is that no single
alcohol can be made alone. That is, pyruvate itself is a ketoacid, which
can be converted to ethanol by the same promiscuous activity of KVD and
ADH. Thus, isobutanol synthesis is also coupled to ethanol synthesis due
to enzyme promiscuity (Trinh et al., 2011).
While ubiquitous (D’Ari and Casadesús, 1998; Nobeli et al., 2009;
Khersonsky et al., 2006; Tawﬁk and D. S, 2010) and often observed, ef-
fects of enzyme promiscuity on the host metabolic network are often
ignored during design and only identiﬁed during experimental studies.
Predicting such interactions early in the design cycle could yield
improved design outcomes and reduce experimental efforts. The pre-
diction of enzymatic products due to substrate promiscuity has mainly
relied on hand-curated rules that capture well-known enzymatic trans-
formations. For example, a list of 50 reaction rules, each associated with
one or more reaction, was previously deﬁned to explore novel synthesis
pathways (
Cho et al., 2010; Campodonico et al., 2014). Another set of
rules was applied repetitively to generate novel synthesis (Li et al., 2004)
or degradation pathways (Finley et al., 2009). Further use of such rules
allowed the compilation of over 130,000 hypothetical enzymatic re-
actions that connect two or more KEGG metabolites (Hadadi et al., 2016),
and the compilation of predicted metabolic products into databases such
as MINEs (Jeffryes et al., 2015). MyCompoundID (Li et al., 2013) utilizes
a similar paradigm and generates products by the repeated application of
addition or subtraction of common functional groups. BioTransformer
(Djoumbou-Feunang et al., 2019) predicts derivatives by utilizingﬁve
separate prediction modules in concert with machine learning and a
rule-based knowledge base. PROXIMAL (Yousofshahi et al., 2015) uti-
lizes enzyme-speciﬁc reactant–product transformation patterns from the
KEGG database (Moriya et al., 2010) as a lookup table to predict products
for query molecules. The PROXIMAL algorithm was utilized to create
organism-speciﬁcE
xtended M etabolic M odels (EMMs) that extend
reference metabolic models catalogued in databases to include putative
Fig. 1. An overview of the four-step process used byMDFlow to identify and evaluate byproducts formed due to enzymes promiscuity for Scenarios 1 and 2. The
original host metabolic model is progressively augmented with engineered modiﬁcations and predicted interactions. The updated models are evaluated using FBA
and/or MOMA at different stages.
V. Porokhin et al. Metabolic Engineering Communications 12 (2021) e00170
2
products due to promiscuous native enzymatic activities on native me-
tabolites (Amin et al., 2019; Hassanpour et al., 2020). Despite advances
in predicting promiscuous products, however, these efforts have not been
put forward in a systematic way to analyze metabolic network disruption
in engineered microbial hosts due to enzyme promiscuity.
We develop in this paper a computational method, M etabolic
Disruption Workﬂow (MDFlow), to analyze the disruptive impact of
enzyme promiscuity on engineered microbial hosts in a systematic
manner. We deﬁne metabolic disruption as off-target changes in host
metabolism that arise because of enzyme-substrate interactions upon
gene or pathway overexpression, where such interactions neither exist in
the wild-type chassis organism nor are they expected due to presence of
recombinant enzyme(s). Accordingly, this deﬁnition encompasses all
enzyme promiscuity that arises because of adding heterologous enzymes
and their chemical products to a host microbe. Therefore,MDFlow is
designed to consider two different disruption scenarios. In“Scenario 1”,
promiscuous activity is predicted in the context of overexpressed en-
zymes, whether heterologous or native, acting promiscuously on native
host metabolites. Meanwhile, in“Scenario 2,” predictions are made by
assuming that native enzymes exhibit promiscuous interactions with
synthesis pathway metabolites introduced with engineering changes. Of
course, in a biological system, both scenarios would occur simulta-
neously to some degree, and even higher-order interactions would be
possible (e.g., subsequent use of promiscuous reaction products as sub-
strates for additional transformations). Using PROXIMAL (Yousofshahi
et al., 2015) and ﬂux analysis (Orth et al., 2010; Segr/C18e et al., 2002),
MDFlow models and evaluates such promiscuous scenarios. We demon-
strate the use ofMDFlow to evaluate how engineered microbial hosts are
impacted by enzyme promiscuity under three engineering strategies.
First, MDFlow is used to explain how essential gene deletion can be
suppressed by overexpression of another native gene. Next,MDFlow is
used to identify multi-step interactions that may compensate for essential
gene knockouts. Third, MDFlow is used to evaluate the potential
disruption when a heterologous pathway is added to a microbial host.
The ﬁrst two cases represent Scenario 1 and are evaluated against
experimentally veriﬁed data. The last case represents a simultaneous
application of both Scenarios 1 and 2 and demonstrates that the choice of
synthesis pathway can impact metabolic disruption scenarios.
This work is novel as it is theﬁrst to systematically investigate effects
of heterologous and native enzyme promiscuity on host metabolism and
its consequences on biocatalysts. Our method serves as theﬁrst compu-
tational tool that can assist metabolic engineers in (1) identifying sources
of unexpected byproducts, (2) assessing the consequences of metabolic
engineering on the host, and (3) quantifying pathway-host in-
compatibility using metabolic network disruption. Outcomes from this
work will aid in future studies to design robust systems with more pre-
dictable behaviors and improved desired product yield.
2. Methods
MDFlow (Fig. 1) is an integrated method that combines several
techniques to analyze cellular metabolic disruption that may occur due to
enzyme promiscuity. To predict such putative interactions,MDFlow relies
on PROXIMAL (Yousofshahi et al., 2015) to predict byproducts resulting
from promiscuous activities under Scenarios 1 and 2. Stoichiometrically
balanced reactions are then derived based on substrate, product, and the
reaction associated with the promiscuous enzymatic transformation
pattern. To assess the disruption impact in a systematic fashion, the host
metabolic network model is incrementally modiﬁed and evaluated after
each change – ﬁrst to set a baseline, then augmented with the engi-
neering strategy of interest. Quantitative ﬂux analysis (Flux Balance
Analysis (FBA) (Orth et al., 2010) and/or Minimization of Metabolic
Adjustment (MOMA) (Segr/C18e et al., 2002)) was then used to evaluate the
impact of such changes on biomass growth rates or product yield. We
provide a detailed overview of each of these steps.
2.1. Step 1 – establish the baseline growth rate and/or target yield using
FBA
To model theE. colimetabolic network, we built upon theiML1515
model published by Monk et al. (Monk et al., 2017). When evaluating
gene knockout modiﬁcations, we used a derivative of that model,
iML1428, that offers improved accuracy of lethality predictions in such
experiments. iML1428 achieves this improvement by removing isozymes
that are minimally expressed in glucose M9 media, thus preventing them
from incorrectly compensating for the removal of essential genes. We
used the conditions suggested by the authors of iML1515 for
constraint-based modeling– the lower bounds of all exchange reactions
were set to zero, except for glucose, oxygen, and all inorganic ions: the
lower bound for each of those reactions was set to–10, –20, and–1000
mmol gDW
–1 h–1, respectively. With the constraints conﬁgured for aer-
obic growth on glucose, we evaluated the baseline growth rate, and
target metabolite yield (if applicable), of the host using FBA. Then, we set
the lower bound on biomass growth to be equal to 10 % of the baseline
growth rate to prioritize minimum growth of the strain required to
ensure its long-term survival. This lower bound may be increased or
decreased as appropriate for the application.
2.2. Step 2 – evaluate direct impact of the engineering change usingﬂux
analysis
We implemented intended changes for metabolic engineering in the
context of addition or removal of reactions and metabolites in the
network. To construct a synthesis pathway for transforming a metabolite
within a host into a target compound, we added each synthesis step to the
stochiometric matrix (S-matrix) of the metabolic model as a new reac-
tion, along with a demand reaction for the target metabolite. To model a
gene knockout, we enacted the effect of deleting the gene from the model
by settingﬂux to zero for all inactive reactions, identiﬁed based on their
individual gene-protein-reaction (GPR) rules ( Schellenberger et al.,
2011). The new“engineered” model was then evaluated using FBA to
demonstrate the impact of introduced changes. At this stage in the
workﬂow, it is important to verify that the model’s prediction reﬂects
expectations or experimental data.
2.3. Step 3 – predict promiscuous interactions using PROXIMAL
The modiﬁed model from the previous step was used to predict pro-
miscuous byproducts for Scenarios 1 and 2. Each added reaction was
assumed reversible unless indicated otherwise. For each scenario,
PROXIMAL ﬁrst created a lookup table of all known biotransformation
operators based on catalogued reactions within the model. These oper-
ators encode molecular transformation patterns associated with an
enzyme and the reactions it catalyzes. Given a query molecule, PROX-
IMAL ﬁrst identiﬁed operators in the lookup tables that can act on the
molecule. Then, the query molecule was mapped to possible byproducts.
An operator acts on a query molecule if its reaction center and its nearest
neighbor atom(s) exactly match those of the native substrate, as encoded
in the lookup tables. Each potential byproduct was reported in the form
of a molﬁle, which was then used to identify if the potential byproduct is
a known metabolite. The molﬁle was matched to either a metabolite in
the model, a KEGG ID, or a PubChem ID using InChIKeys (Heller et al.,
2015) generated by an open-source chemical toolbox RDKit (RDKit).
For Scenario 1, biotransformation operators were derived from the
overexpressed enzymes along the synthesis pathway and applied to all
native metabolites in the model. For Scenario 2, biotransformations were
derived from native host enzymes within the model and applied to
pathway metabolites in the engineered pathway. Applying PROXIMAL
operators resulted in a list of byproducts for each scenario. For each
predicted byproduct, we developed a new balanced enzymatic reaction
based on the catalyzing enzyme’s reaction pattern. A reaction template
with suitable cofactors was obtained from reaction(s) associated with
V. Porokhin et al. Metabolic Engineering Communications 12 (2021) e00170
3
each enzymatic biotransformation. A reaction is balanced when the
number of atoms for each element on the reactant side matches those on
the product side. Reactions were veriﬁed to be balanced using ChemPy
(Dahlgren, 2018). If a reaction was not balanced, it was discarded and not
considered for further analysis as it violated the assumptions of FBA.
2.4. Step 4 – evaluate network disruption usingﬂux analysis
To predict the effect of promiscuity, the engineered model network was
augmented with balanced promiscuous reactions. The metabolites in these
reactions were either mapped to existing metabolites in the model or added
to the model along with the corresponding exchange reactions allowing
unlimited export (but not import) of a metabolite from the host. Each pre-
dicted reaction wasﬁrst added to the engineered model separately. Theﬂux
range of each promiscuous reaction was calculated by minimizing (“min”)
and maximizing (“max”)i t sﬂux. Since the new reactions did not have any
particular direction associated with them, and the most disruptive one was
not yet known at this stage,ﬂux ranges calculations were performed twice:
once assuming a forward (“fwd”) ﬂux direction and another assuming the
reverse (“rev”) ﬂux. As a result, fourﬂux values were estimated for each
reaction: vfwd_min, vfwd_max, vrev_min,a n dvrev_max. The maximum reverseﬂux
(vrev_max)a n dm i n i m u mf o r w a r dﬂux (vfwd_min) may be trivial solutions;
however, they could be non-zero for reactions that were required for the
model to maintain the minimum growth rate. The added reactions were
either new to the model or formed biotransformation routes that were
catalyzed differently than those already in the model. This updated network
represented the“disrupted” model.
To model promiscuous activity, we assumed a non-zeroﬂux through
the added reaction (vfwd_added, vrev_added) based on a pre-deﬁned per-
centage p, referred to as acoupling percentage, of the calculated maximum
ﬂux. As in case of all reactions when performing FBA, the absolute
maximum for any reaction was set at/C6 1,000 mmol/h/gDW. The con-
straints imposed on the reaction can be described by the following in-
equalities – the ﬁrst one pertains to the forwardﬂux through the reaction,
while the second describes the reverseﬂux:
vfwd_min þ p ⋅ (vfwd_max – vfwd_min) /C20 vfwd_added /C20 1000
–1000 /C20 vrev_added /C20 vrev_max þ p ⋅ (vrev_min – vrev_max)
Once constraints were set, the metabolic network disruption caused
by the developed reactions could be evaluated. The disrupted yield value
was calculated and compared with the value of the yield of the undis-
rupted engineered model. The direction of each reaction was thenﬁxed
to the one that caused maximum disruption. For the purposes of subse-
quent analysis, reactions were considered irreversible and their indi-
vidual ﬂux was constrained by only one of the two inequalities.
Disruption in yield was then evaluated under various coupling percent-
ages, with a random subset of developed reactions added to the undis-
rupted model. The results were then placed on a scatter plot relating the
extent of metabolic disruption to the intensity of promiscuous activity for
visualization purposes.
2.5. Implementation
The workﬂow was written in Python, targeting versions 3.7 and up,
and is available on GitHub (https://github.com/HassounLab/MDFlow).
Instructions for running the workﬂow are provided on the project’s
GitHub page and in the READMEﬁle accompanying the source code.
Promiscuous reactions predicted by PROXIMAL (Yousofshahi et al.,
2015)( https://hassounlab.cs.tufts.edu/proximal/) are provided in the
repository. The FBA implementation and model handling logic were
provided by the COBRApy package (Ebrahim et al., 2013), and all visu-
alizations were built using matplotlib (Hunter, 2007), seaborn (Waskom,
2020), and RDKit (RDKit). All experiments were conducted on an Intel®
Core™ i7-2600 machine with 8 GB of RAM, though the workﬂow does
not require the use of any speciﬁc hardware platform.
3. Results
3.1. MDFlow explains how suppressors can rescue growth of essential gene
deletions
We ﬁrst demonstrated that MDFlow can be used to predict how
enzymatic promiscuity suppresses the effect of gene deletions. We vali-
dated MDFlow against experimental data suggested by Patrick et al.
(Patrick et al., 2007). The authors set out to identify and categorize
multifunctional genes that enabled cells’adaptability to genetic lesions.
Within the Keio collection (Baba et al., 2006), the authors identiﬁed 107
single-gene knockout strains that were unable to grow on the M9-glucose
medium. Patrick et al. found 21 strains that could be rescued via over-
expression of one non-cognate gene, for a total of 41 unique suppression
examples. Comparing structural superimpositions of deleted proteins and
their suppressors, Patrick et al. observed signiﬁcant structural homology
between a handful of enzyme pairs and attributed several examples to
substrate ambiguity and catalytic promiscuity (Patrick et al., 2007). The
fact that an essential gene deletion was suppressed by overexpression of
another native gene and that enzyme/substrate non-speciﬁcity played a
role in the rescue suggests that the responsible mechanism in many in-
stances could have been a single enzymatic reaction mediated by pro-
miscuous activity of overexpressed enzymes– that is, activity following
Scenario 1. In this test case, we appliedMDFlow to each of the 41 unique
knockout-suppressor pairs and evaluated its effectiveness in explaining
the suppression of gene deletion via overexpression of another native
gene. The observations made by Patrick et al. were thus used to both
guide the workﬂow and validate it against experimental data.
To establish the baseline for validating rescue, weﬁrst determined if
the deletion of each of the 20 essential genes responsible for the 41 pairs
arrests the growth of the strain. To this end, we performed gene knock-
outs iniML1428 and measured the biomass growth rate reported by FBA.
Out of the 20 lethal knockouts reported by the authors, we were able to
conﬁrm lack of growth for 9 of them, accounting for 15 out of the 41
unique knockout-suppressor pairs. Since we cannot computationally
validate rescue without ﬁrst establishing the lethality of the genetic
lesion, we only focused on those 15 cases where the deletion led to no
biomass growth. For each of the suppressor genes, we used PROXIMAL to
generate promiscuous reactions due to Scenario 1 type interactions (e.g.,
overexpressed gene acting on native metabolites) and then applied FBA
to determine their individual effect on the biomass, resulting in the
complete recovery of 6 strains (ΔilvE, ΔglnA, ΔilvD, ΔhisH, ΔpabA, and
ΔilvA). In the majority of the recovered cases, a promiscuous reaction
replicated the deleted essential reaction either exactly (e.g.,ΔilvA/tdcB,
ΔpabA/pabB, andΔhisH/hisF) or with different cofactors (e.g.,ΔilvE/avtA
and ΔglnA/asnB). BothpabA/pabB and hisH/hisF form well-characterized
heterodimeric enzymes consisting of a larger subunit (PabB and HisF)
and a smaller one (PabA and HisH). In both cases, the larger subunit has
shown activity in the absence of the smaller subunit (Ye et al., 1990;
Klem and Davisson, 1993). Therefore, overexpressing PabB and HisF
could be reasonably expected to compensate for the deletions in the
ΔpabA and ΔhisH strains. Meanwhile, in theΔilvA/tdcB case, the two
proteins are known to be isozymes of one another, thus having the same
function (Patrick et al., 2007). Therefore, there is biological justiﬁcation
for the rescuer enzyme’s potential ability to exactly replicate the re-
actions lost by the deletion. From the perspective of our method, both the
deleted gene and its suppressor had the same Enzyme Commission (EC)
numbers, which made them interchangeable for the purposes of trans-
formation pattern extraction. In the other 3 case sets, however, the
outcome appears to be due to enzyme promiscuity– although the ﬁrst
two or three EC groups matched in two instances, the deleted protein and
its replacement were not identical enzymes in all three. ForΔ
glnA/asnB,
the promiscuous activity was responsible for creating a reaction edge
between L-glutamate and L-glutamine, which appears to be the mecha-
nism of recovery. ForΔilvE/avtA, the promiscuous reaction allowed the
production of L-isoleucine, which is essential for survival as double
V. Porokhin et al. Metabolic Engineering Communications 12 (2021) e00170
4
mutants (ΔilvE ΔavtA) are known to require supplementation of both,
isoleucine and valine, for growth (Whalen and Berg, 1982). Notably, the
deletion ofilvE also caused the loss of an L-valine-producing reaction in
the model, however, its essentiality was not conﬁrmed through FBA. For
ΔilvD/avtA, no single predicted reaction was responsible for growth re-
covery, however, including various combinations of two predicted re-
actions demonstrated rescuing effect. When using MOMA, the lethality
and rescuing effects of knockouts and multicopy suppressors were
identical as predicted when using FBA. A summary of multicopy sup-
pression results can be found inTable 1 along with example compen-
sating reactions predicted for each case. A complete set of predicted
reactions is provided in Supplementary File 1.
3.2. MDFlow can identify multi-step bypasses to essential gene functions
Because MDFlow anticipates interactions between native metabolites
and enzymes due to multiple genes that are simultaneously overex-
pressed, MDFlow can be used to identify multi-step interactions where a
native pathway contributes metabolites to an unexpected, serendipitous
process. We validatedMDFlow for predicting promiscuous interactions in
the serendipitous pathway identiﬁed by Kim et al. (Kim et al., 2010). The
authors identiﬁed a four-step chain of interactions that compensated for
an essential gene knockout. ThepdxB gene deletion disrupted the PLP
synthesis pathway, resulting in its inability to grow on M9-glucose at 37
/C14 C. Simultaneous overexpression of seven other genes, however, rescued
the strain. Using genetic complementation experiments, the authors were
able to separate those genes into groups and describe one of the rescuing
pathways in detail. The serendipitous pathway, shown inFig. 2, was
found to bypass the knocked-out enzyme in the PLP pathway by diverting
ﬂux from serine biosynthesis. The interactions comprising this pathway
were catalyzed by three enzymes– two of which exhibited either pro-
miscuity (ThrB) or broad speciﬁcity (LtaE). The function of the third
enzyme (YeaB) was unknown, and one of the interactions appeared to be
non-enzymatic. Therefore, at least part of the pathway could have
emerged due to promiscuous activity classiﬁed as Scenario 1 type in-
teractions by our method.
The new pathway bypasses the lesion by diverting a metabolite (3-
phosphohydroxypyruvate, 3-PHP) from the serine production pathway
and converting it to a metabolite (L-4-phosphohydroxythreonine, 4-PHT)
downstream the PLP synthesis pathway via a series of 4ad-hoc reactions
(Kim et al., 2010). Assuming that the reactions comprising the pathway
are due to promiscuity, discovering each step of the pathway entails pre-
dicting interactions between the candidate enzymes– that is, all native
enzymes except the knocked out PdxB– and all available metabolites in
the model– which includes the native metabolites as well as metabolites
generated by promiscuous activity in previous steps. Repeating this pro-
cess up to four times, in principle, would allow the extraction of the entire
pathway. Unfortunately, this approach would be computationally inten-
sive as it amounts to an exhaustive enumeration of all possible promis-
cuous reaction sequences. However, because the steps comprising the
Table 1
Conﬁrmed-lethal single-gene deletion strains from Patrick et al. (Patrick et al., 2007) with the corresponding multicopy suppressors (MS) and representative subsets of
predicted compensating reactions. Biomass growth rate in the disrupted network computed using FBA is presented as a percentage of the wild type strain growth rate.
Deletion De ﬁcient Reactions MS MS
Biomass
Compensating Reactions
ΔilvA
(4.3.1.19)
L-threonine → 2-oxobutanoate þ NH4
þ tdcB (4.3.1.17,
4.3.1.19)
100.00% L-threonine → 2-oxobutanoate þ NH4
þ
100.47% L- allo-threonine → 2-oxobutanoate þ NH4
þ
ΔilvE
(2.6.1.42)
(S)-3-methyl-2-oxopentanoate þ L-glutamate → 2-
oxoglutarate þ L-isoleucine
3-methyl-2-oxobutanoate þ L-glutamate → 2-oxoglutarate þ
L-valine
avtA
(2.6.1.66)
100.00% ( S)-3-methyl-2-oxopentanoate þ L-alanine → L-isoleucine þ
pyruvate
100.79% 3 3-methyl-2-oxobutanoate þ 2 L-alanine→ 2 L-isoleucineþ 3
pyruvate
ΔglnA
(6.3.1.2)
ATP þ L-glutamate þ NH4
þ → ADP þ L-glutamine þ Hþ þ
PO4
3-
asnB (6.3.5.4) 100.94% AMP þ L-asparagine þ L-glutamate þ P2O7
4- → L-aspartate þ ATP
þ L-glutamine þ H2O
101.26% L-glutamate þ NH4
þ → L-glutamine þ H2O
99.38% AMP þ L-asparagine þ D-glucose 1-phosphateþ L-glutamate →
ADP-glucose þ L-aspartate þ L-glutamine þ H2O
(and others)
ΔilvD (4.2.1.9) ( R)-2,3-dihydroxy-3-methylbutanoate → 3-methyl-2-
oxobutanoate þ H2O
(R)-2,3-dihydroxy-3-methylpentanoate → (S)-3-methyl-2-
oxopentanoate þ H2O
avtA
(2.6.1.66)
100.23% 2 Pyruvate þ 3 L-valine→ 2( S)-3-methyl-2-oxopentanoate þ 3L -
alanine
2 4-methyl-2-oxopentanoateþ 3 L-alanine→ 2 pyruvateþ 3L -
valine
100.23% 3 3-methyl-2-oxobutanoate þ 2 L-alanine→ 2 L-isoleucineþ 3
pyruvate
2 L-leucineþ 3 Pyruvate→ 3 3-methyl-2-oxobutanoateþ 2L -
alanine
(other combinations may be possible)
ΔhisH
(4.3.2.10,
3.5.1.2)
L-glutamine þ phosphoribulosylformimino-AICAR-
phosphate → AICAR þ erythro-imidazole-glycerol-
phosphate þ L-glutamate þ H
þ
hisF (4.3.2.10) 100.02% L-glutamine þ phosphoribulosylformimino-AICAR-phosphate →
AICAR þ erythro-imidazole-glycerol-phosphate þ L-glutamate
100.02% L-glutamine þ phosphoribosylformiminoaicar-phosphate →
AICAR þ erythro-imidazole-glycerol-phosphate þ L-glutamate
100.05% L-glutamine þ 2 phosphoribulosylformimino-AICAR-phosphate→
(S)-2-hydroxyglutarate þ 2 AICARþ 2 erythro-imidazole-glycerol-
phosphate
(and others)
ΔpabA
(2.6.1.85)
chorismate þ L-glutamine → 4-amino-4-deoxychorismate þ
L-glutamate
pabB
(2.6.1.85)
100.00% chorismate þ L-glutamine → 4-amino-4-deoxychorismate þ L-
glutamate
100.00% 2 chorismate þ L-glutamine → 2 4-amino-4-deoxychorismateþ
(S)-2-hydroxyglutarate
100.00% chorismate þ L-glutamine → 4-amino-4-deoxychorismate þ O-
acetyl-L-serine
100.00% L-asparagine þ chorismate → 4-amino-4-deoxychorismate þ L-
aspartate
100.00% L-glutamine þ isochorismate → 4-amino-4-deoxychorismate þ L-
glutamate
100.00% L-glutamine þ prephenate → 4-amino-4-deoxychorismate þ L-
glutamate
V. Porokhin et al. Metabolic Engineering Communications 12 (2021) e00170
5
serendipitous PLP pathway are already known, verifying if the exhaustive
search would eventuallyﬁnd the pathway can be done efﬁciently. At each
step, instead of predicting interactions for all available metabolites, we
only considered the small subset that overlaps with theΔpdxB bypass
pathway, signiﬁcantly reducing the search space. UsingMDFlow conﬁg-
ured in this way, we were able to rediscover 3 out of the 4 reactions along
this novel pathway. The elusive step, the LtaE-catalyzed transformation of
glycolaldehyde to L-4-hydroxythreonine (4-HT), was not predicted due to
the lack of an appropriate reaction pattern in PROXIMAL’s operator
lookup table. This observation highlights an important shortcoming of
rule-based methods such as BioTransformer (Djoumbou-Feunang et al.,
2019) and PROXIMAL (Yousofshahi et al., 2015): their metabolism pre-
dictions are limited to theﬁnite set of biotransformation rules encoded in
their knowledgebase. Nonetheless, the results for this pathway and
multicopy suppressors from (Patrick et al., 2007) show that our technique
can be used to discover experimentally validated unexpected interactions
that lead to the survival of the host.
To further illustrate the utility ofMDFlow in predicting multi-step
pathways, we usedMDFlow to discover two-step promiscuous pathways
in iML1515 that may compensate for the deletion ofpdxB. Such a two-
step pathway transforms a metabolite withiniML1515 to one of the
following metabolites that are downstream from 4-phosphoerythronate:
2-oxo-3-hydroxy-4-phosphobutanoate, 4-hydroxy-L-threonine, pyridoxal
5-phosphate. Intermediate metabolites at each step were predicted by
PROXIMAL using biotransformations speciﬁct o E. coli as listed in the
KEGG database. Then, we retained pathways that only had intermediates
with known PubChem IDs. We furtherﬁltered these results based on
thermodynamic feasibility of the pathways as estimated by eQuilibrator
(Flamholz et al., 2011; Noor et al., 2012; Noor et al., 2013; Noor et al.,
2014). There were 21 such feasible two-step pathways. There were 13
and 8 pathways that terminated on pyridoxal 5-phosphate and 2-oxo-3--
hydroxy-4-phosphobutanoate, respectively, whereas none that termi-
nated on 4-hydroxy-L-threonine. As theiML1428 model does not capture
the lethality of knocking outpdxB, we were unable to evaluate the impact
of these two-step pathways on growth rates using FBA. A complete set of
predicted two-step pathways is provided in Supplementary File 2.
3.3. MDFlow predicts metabolic disruption during 3-hydroxypropionic acid
(3-HP) biosynthesis adversely affects yield
We used our workﬂow to analyze metabolic disruption through Sce-
narios 1 and 2 for two different synthetic 3-HP pathways, an important
precursor metabolite to useful derivatives such as acrylic acid, 1,3-pro-
panediol, and malonic acid (Chen and Nielsen, 2013; Della Pina et al.,
2011; Kumar et al., 2013). Several groups have reported production of
3-HP in various organisms (Jiang et al., 2009; Huang et al., 2013),
including E. coli(Raj et al., 2008; Kim et al., 2014). UsingE. colias a host,
we ﬁrst added a two-step 3-HP synthesis pathway (Rathnasingh et al.,
2012)( Fig. 3A) catalyzed by malonyl-CoA reductase (MCR) (Cheng et al.,
2016) and 3-hydroxyacid dehydrogenase (YdfG). Then, separately, we
added a three-step 3-HP pathway (Wang et al., 2014)( Fig. 3B) comprising
of panD, gabT, andydfG. The 3-HP yield of the baseline unmodiﬁed model
was estimated to be 0.90 mol/mol of glucose, and the addition of the new
pathways increased that to 1.62 mol/mol of glucose for theﬁrst pathway
and 1.66 mol/mol for the second. These ﬁgures correspond to the
maximum theoretical yield of 3-HP assuming no disruption. When using
MOMA instead of FBA to evaluate the 3-HP yield, we found that the added
reactions do not increase the yield of 3-HP over the baseline. We believe
this is a direct consequence of the MOMA approach: when the engineering
change is the addition of reactions, the problem of minimizingﬂux
redistribution has a trivial solution that allows noﬂux through the new
reactions. As a result, we do not believe MOMA is applicable to this
particular case. Thus, we conducted all subsequent analysis using FBA
only. After the addition of a synthesis pathway toE. coli, our workﬂow
utilized PROXIMAL to predict derivatives for both Scenarios 1 and 2. For
both Scenarios, identities of predicted derivatives were looked up in either
iML1515, KEGG, or PubChem. As not all predicted derivatives were
identiﬁable through this method, we considered only derivatives that are
documented in at least one of the three databases. Example reactions for
each Scenarios 1 and 2 are shown inFig. 3, panels C and D, respectively.
Other predicted reactions are given in Supplementary File 3.
Balanced predicted reactions due to each scenario wereﬁrst evalu-
ated using FBA to determine the range ofﬂuxes they can potentially
Fig. 2. Serendipitous pathway discovered by Kim et al. that bypasses the deletion of an intermediate genepdxB in the native PLP pathway by siphoning off material
from the serine biosynthesis pathway. Circles highlight reaction steps that were predicted– or not predicted– by PROXIMAL. Pathway layout for the drawing was
adapted from the authors’original paper.
V. Porokhin et al. Metabolic Engineering Communications 12 (2021) e00170
6
sustain in the context of theE. colimetabolic model. The model was then
augmented with all predicted reactions, along with the 3-HP synthesis
pathway. We then assumed that each of the predicted reactions exhibits a
certain minimum activity, measured as a fraction of its maximum
possible ﬂux. We refer to this fraction as thecoupling percentageof a given
reaction.
As not all enzymes and metabolites inE. coli are present in high
concentrations, not all predicted promiscuous reactions occur at appre-
ciable levels to disrupt the metabolic network. In addition, the level of
promiscuous activity is not constant across the network and is likely to
vary from reaction to reaction. To address these issues, we performed a
two-stage randomized probabilistic analysis. For each scenario, we
assumed that only a portion of the predicted promiscuous reactions act
on their target molecules. First, a random mean coupling percentage
pmean was sampled from a normal distribution withμ ¼ 1 % andσ ¼ μ/3.
The standard deviation was chosen in such way to place 99.7 % of the
samples within a range strictly above 0 %, and in the remaining 0.3 % of
the cases, the coupling percentage was resampled repeatedly to obtain a
value above 0 %, still. Then, we randomly selected 10 % of the developed
reactions to exhibit promiscuous activity. For each of the selected re-
actions, a coupling percentage was chosen randomly from another
normal distribution withμ ¼ pmean and σ ¼ μ/3. The selected coupling
percentage was then used to set the minimum requiredﬂux for the re-
action according to one of the inequalities presented earlier in the
methods section, while the lower and upper bounds of all other (non-
selected) developed reactions were set to zero. Sampling the mean
coupling percentage thus allowed us to vary the extent of the overall
promiscuous activity, while sampling individual reaction-speci ﬁc
coupling percentages allowed each reaction to behave independently
from any other. 10,000 FBA runs were performed, each time selecting a
different set of promiscuous reactions and re-sampling the mean and
individual reaction coupling percentages. In each run, the FBA objective
was to maximize the yield of 3-HP while maintaining biomass growth of
at least 10 % of wildtype. The analysis was also repeated assuming 25 %
and 50 % of the developed reactions to have promiscuous activity.
Additionally, another run was performed, where the total number of
active reactions wasﬁxed at 10 and each Scenario was either allocated
the entire set (10) or half of it (5). This was done to account for the fact
that Scenario 2 reactions were much more plentiful than Scenario 1 re-
actions. Avoiding overrepresentation of the former reactions enabled
qualitative comparison of the two scenarios.
The results inFig. 4(A, B, C, and D) for both pathways and scenarios
exhibit similar trends. Higher disruption tends to be correlated with more
active reactions and with higher coupling percentages. As the mean
coupling percentage increases, so does the disruption, and the relation-
ship is almost linear in all but Pathway 1, Scenario 1 (Fig. 3A). The mean
coupling percentage was sampled from a normal distribution and the
resulting distribution of disruption values followed a very similar bell
Fig. 3. Overview of the two heterologous 3-HP pathways integrated into theE. colimodel and the method used to construct putative promiscuous reactions for each
scenario. (A) Pathway 1, which converts malonyl-CoA into 3-HP via two reactions catalyzed by malonyl-CoA reductase (MCR) and YdfG. (B) Pathway 2 thatproduces
3-HP from L-aspartate using PanD and GabT in addition to YdfG. Developed reactions examples of Scenario 1 (C) and Scenario 2 (D). Both panels (C) and (D)are
divided in three sections: i. the native reaction catalyzed by the potentially promiscuous enzyme, ii. the RDM pattern showing the rction center in red where the
biotransformation occurs, and iii. the developed balanced reaction indicating the reactants, products, and the promiscuous enzyme. (For interpretation of the ref-
erences to colour in thisﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
V. Porokhin et al. Metabolic Engineering Communications 12 (2021) e00170
7
curve. The same effect occurs with an increase in the number of active
reactions – note the mean of the distribution of disrupted yields shifts
towards increased disruption with greater reaction activities. In fact,
Scenario 2 has between 1.5- and 2-times the number of reactions
compared to Scenario 1 (e.g., 34 vs. 17 for pathway 1 and 91 vs. 60 for
pathway 2), which leads to a proportional difference in magnitude of
disruption observed in the experiments as well, and when the total
number of reactions is set to aﬁxed value as opposed to a percentage, the
difference between the two Scenarios almost vanishes (Fig. 4F).
Scenario 1 for Pathway 1 was an exception to this trend, however. In
that instance, only ~17 % of predicted reactions had any effect on 3-HP
yield disruption when measured individually– suggesting that only a
small fraction of sampled reactions would have a disruptive impact at any
given instant under those conditions. As a result, there is a dispropor-
tionately large number of instances where promiscuous reactions led to a
low magnitude of disruption, particularly for low coupling percentages
(Fig. 4A). The comparison of the two Scenarios for that Pathway further
demonstrates the difference in behavior, with Scenario 1 being signiﬁ-
cantly less disruptive than Scenario 2 on average (Fig. 4C). This outcome
highlights the downside of considering Scenario 1 alone: when few
Fig. 4. Comparison of simulation runs for the two pathways and both Scenarios, demonstrating the effect of mean coupling percentage and fraction of active pro-
miscuous reactions (10, 25, 50 %) on the yield disruption of 3-HP. (A, D) Pathways 1 and 2 with only Scenario 1-type promiscuous interactions incorporated. (B, E)
Pathways 1 and 2 with Scenario 2 interactions. (C, F) Comparison of Scenario 1 (S1) and 2 (S2) interactions for each pathway given aﬁxed total number of pro-
miscuous reactions. The scatter plots document the results of each individual experiment, while the distribution plots on the right represent the probability density of
obtaining a given disruption under the speciﬁed conditions.
V. Porokhin et al. Metabolic Engineering Communications 12 (2021) e00170
8
enzymes are being evaluated, the results are highly sensitive to the set of
transformation patterns that can be derived from them – subject to
knowledge limitations and enzymatic behaviors. Under more realistic
biological circumstances, a more diverse range of enzymes participates in
metabolism, allowing for more representative results. These observations
imply that as promiscuous activity is intensiﬁed, it directly competes
with 3-HP synthesis pathwayﬂux causing signiﬁcant disruption. How-
ever, such high activity of promiscuous reactions is unlikely under
physiological settings, so these exercises likely overestimate the actual
extent of disruption.
Overall, Pathway 1 was found to experience comparatively less
disruption compared to pathway 2 under the same circumstances,
possibly due to a lower number of enzymes, fewer intermediates, and/or
lower promiscuous activity of MCR relative to PanD and GabT. In light of
our analysis and considering the similar yield of Pathways 1 and 2, the
design of Pathway 1 may be the preferred design option.
4. Discussion
In metabolic engineering, a number of strategies are employed to
produce a target metabolite of interest, including the introduction of
heterologous enzymes and selective overexpression and deletion of
certain genes. After such interventions or combinations thereof, it is not
uncommon for unexpected and/or undesirable metabolite product pro-
ﬁles to arise from various interactions between the introduced and native
machinery in the host. UsingMDFlow, it is possible to predict such in-
teractions in the form of single- and multi-step pathways enabled by
promiscuous enzymatic activity. The method utilizes PROXIMAL to
construct reactions arising from promiscuity and relies on FBA to assess
their impact on yield or biomass growth rate in pre- and post-
modiﬁcation hosts. The results for the single-gene deletions that were
rescued via single- and multi-step enzymatic pathways, which were
experimentally validated in prior studies, provide evidence of the ability
of MDFlow in predicting metabolic network disruption. The results for the
3-HP case illustrate how MDFlow can help identify promiscuous in-
teractions early in the design cycle. Further, our sampling-based FBA
analysis shows that promiscuity can cause unexpected byproducts and
results in yield disruption. Importantly,MDFlow can be used to explain
byproducts often observed but not well explained in the literature.
Our Scenario 1 and 2 disruption classiﬁcation has direct correspon-
dence to the network inference classiﬁcation proposed by Kim et al. (Kim
and Copley, 2012). Interference is classiﬁed into three groups: those due
to (i) heterologous metabolites in new pathways interfering with native
metabolism, (ii) native metabolites interfering with a heterologous
pathway, and (iii) heterologous pathway intermediates being diverted by
promiscuous activity of native enzymes.MDFlow identiﬁes the same in-
teractions as long as they’re caused by enzyme substrate promiscuity–
with groups (i) and (iii) corresponding to Scenario 2 predictions and
group (ii) represented by Scenario 1-type interactions.
The computational methodology inMDFlow can be further enhanced.
It currently uses PROXIMAL to predict promiscuous byproducts; it is
possible to use alternatives for promiscuous product prediction. We
selected PROXIMAL because we have established conﬁdence in its ca-
pabilities in predicting organism-speciﬁc enzymatic transformations. Our
earlier study of promiscuity using PROXIMAL on non-engineeredE. coli
allowed the discovery of 17 putative enzymatic reactions that explained
metabolomics measurement (Yousofshahi et al., 2015). Regardless of the
tool, however, there always remains the issue of false positives. In our
work with PROXIMAL, we discarded byproducts that were not docu-
mented prior in PubChem, KEGG, or i
ML1515/1428. Using
machine-learning tools that evaluate the likelihood of compound-enzyme
interactions, such as EPP-HMCNF (Visani et al., 2020), might provide
further conﬁdence in such predictions. Importantly, better prediction of
enzymatic products and their likelihood can improve the workﬂow’s
ability to uncover unexpected interactions and evaluate their impact on
the engineered host.
Metabolism simulation aspect ofMDFlow also offers opportunities for
improvement. In certain applications, MOMA can be an attractive alter-
native to FBA. While FBA utilizes linear programming to maximize an
objective function, typically yield or biomass, MOMA approaches cell
modeling from the perspective of minimizing redistribution of metabolic
ﬂuxes compared to the wildtype conditions. MOMA can provide
improved correlation of predictions with experimentalﬂux data over the
steady-state modeling provided by FBA (Segr/C18e et al., 2002). Additionally,
the model itself can be tailored to the speciﬁc circumstances of an
experiment. For example, isozymes that are minimally expressed in
glucose M9 media were removed from theiML1515 model to create
iML1428. As a result of this reduction in degrees of freedom, the deriv-
ative context-speciﬁc model tends to offer more accurate lethality pre-
dictions than iML1515 in gene knockout experiments (Monk et al.,
2017). Such adjustments can be informed by manual investigation of the
host’s metabolic network, by leveraging detailed kinetic models (Kho-
dayari and Maranas, 2016), or via techniques such as13C Metabolic Flux
Analysis (Long and Antoniewicz, 2019). Of course, depending on the
application, it may be helpful to consider using more complex techniques
that can capture translation and regulation aspects of underground
metabolism, though we believe– in the three cases we have considered–
the overexpressed genes are the dominating factor. Knowing more about
the biological sample, such as the concentrations of metabolites and
enzymes can shed further light on the amount of disruption.
Another area of improvement is the approach used to determine the
direction and maximumﬂux limits of the predicted reactions. We rely on
the preset 1% average mean coupling percentage to estimate the limits of
all reactions, which may not be representative of the higher or lower
actual mean coupling percentage under the conditions of a given
experiment. Future studies may re-evaluate directions andﬂux limits in
the context of each experiment individually. Despite these limitations,
the presented results are promising and call for further design explora-
tion of the impact of enzyme promiscuity on engineered microorganisms.
5. Conclusion
We presented MDFlow, a method for quantitatively evaluating the
side effects of engineered modiﬁcations on the host metabolic network
resulting from enzyme promiscuity. Without mitigation, such side effects
may lead to either unexpected behaviors during experiments or failure to
take advantage of potentially bene ﬁcial interactions. By combining
PROXIMAL and ﬂux analysis in a streamlined workﬂow, MDFlow is
capable of both discovering new interactions and evaluating their effects
without the need for costly, time-consuming studies ofin vivo experi-
ments. MDFlow can be used at all stages of the metabolic engineering
process. Prior to any design work, the method can be applied to expose
native background promiscuous activity, revealing potentially inter-
fering enzymes and metabolites that may be present but not documented
in the model, resulting in building Extended Metabolic Models (EMM), as
we demonstrated in prior works (Amin et al., 2019; Hassanpour et al.,
2020). The workﬂow can then actively guide the pathway construction
process by providing feedback on engineering decisions as they are being
made, thus helping to identify modiﬁcations that create more robust
strains. And ﬁnally, MDFlow may be leveraged to compare a fully
designed pathway to other candidate pathways for the same target
compound: when implemented, a pathway with less predicted metabolic
disruption may have a higher yield.MDFlow is a ﬁrst systematic auto-
mated analysis step towards the evaluation of underground metabolism
and its interaction with engineered cellular machinery.
Author statement
Conceptualization: NUN, SH.
Methodology: NUN, SH, VP, SA, VEG, TN.
Software: VP, SA.
Investigation: VP, SA.
V. Porokhin et al. Metabolic Engineering Communications 12 (2021) e00170
9
Data Curation: VP, SA, VEG, TN.
Funding acquisition: SH, NUN.
Writing - Original Draft: VP, SA.
Writing - Review& Editing: VP, SH, NUN, TN.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competingﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to inﬂuence
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the funding provided by NIH grant
#DP2HD91798 (to N.U.N) and NSF grant #1909536 (to S.H. and
N.U.N.).
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online athttps://doi.
org/10.1016/j.mec.2021.e00170.
References
Amin, S.A., et al., 2019. Towards creating an extended metabolic model (EMM) for E. coli
using enzyme promiscuity prediction and metabolomics data. Microb. Cell Factories
18 (1), 109.
Atsumi, S., et al., 2008a. Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for 1-butanol
production. Metab. Eng. 10 (6), 305–311.
Atsumi, S., Hanai, T., Liao, J.C., 2008b. Non-fermentative pathways for synthesis of
branched-chain higher alcohols as biofuels. Nature 451 (7174), 86.
Baba, T., et al., 2006. Construction of Escherichia coli K-12 in-frame, single-gene
knockout mutants: the Keio collection. Mol. Syst. Biol. 2, 2006.0008.
Campodonico, M.A., et al., 2014. Generation of an atlas for commodity chemical
production in Escherichia coli and a novel pathway prediction algorithm, GEM-Path.
Metab. Eng. 25, 140–158.
Chen, Y., Nielsen, J., 2013. Advances in metabolic pathway and strain engineering paving
the way for sustainable production of chemical building blocks. Curr. Opin.
Biotechnol. 24 (6), 965–972.
Cheng, Z., et al., 2016. Enhanced production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glucose via
malonyl-CoA pathway by engineered Escherichia coli. Bioresour. Technol. 200,
897–904.
Cho, A., et al., 2010. Prediction of novel synthetic pathways for the production of desired
chemicals. BMC Syst. Biol. 4 (1), 35.
D’Ari, R., Casadesús, J., 1998. Underground metabolism. Bioessays 20 (2), 181–186.
Dahlgren, B., 2018. ChemPy: a package useful for chemistry written in Python. J. Open
Source Software 3 (24), 565.
Della Pina, C., Falletta, E., Rossi, M., 2011. A green approach to chemical building blocks.
The case of 3-hydroxypropanoic acid. Green Chem. 13 (7), 1624.
Djoumbou-Feunang, Y., et al., 2019. BioTransformer: a comprehensive computational
tool for small molecule metabolism prediction and metabolite identiﬁcation.
J. Cheminf. 11 (1), 2.
Ebrahim, A., et al., 2013. COBRApy: COnstraints-based reconstruction and analysis for
Python. BMC Syst. Biol. 7, 74.
Finley, S.D., Broadbelt, L.J., Hatzimanikatis, V., 2009. Computational framework for
predictive biodegradation. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 104 (6), 1086–1097.
Flamholz, A., et al., 2011. eQuilibrator–the biochemical thermodynamics calculator.
Nucleic Acids Res. (D1), D770–D775.
Fujisawa, H., Nagata, S., Misono, H., 2003. Characterization of short-chain
dehydrogenase/reductase homologues of Escherichia coli (YdfG) and Saccharomyces
cerevisiae (YMR226C). Biochim. Biophys. Acta Protein Proteonomics 1645 (1),
89–94.
George, K.W., et al., 2015. Isoprenoid drugs, biofuels, and chemicals— artemisinin,
farnesene, and beyond. In: Biotechnology of Isoprenoids. Springer, pp. 355–389.
Hadadi, N., et al., 2016. ATLAS of biochemistry: a repository of all possible biochemical
reactions for synthetic biology and metabolic engineering studies. ACS Synth. Biol. 5
(10), 1155–1166.
Hassanpour, N., et al., 2020. Biologicalﬁltering and substrate promiscuity prediction for
annotating untargeted metabolomics. Metabolites 10 (4), 160.
Heller, S.R., et al., 2015. InChI, the IUPAC international chemical identiﬁer. J. Cheminf.
7, 23.
Huang, Y., et al., 2013. Co-production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid and 1, 3-propanediol
by Klebseilla pneumoniae expressing aldH under microaerobic conditions. Bioresour.
Technol. 128, 505
–512.
Hunter, J.D., 2007. Matplotlib: a 2D graphics environment. Comput. Sci. Eng. 9 (3),
90–95.
Inui, M., et al., 2008. Expression of Clostridium acetobutylicum butanol synthetic genes in
Escherichia coli. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 77 (6), 1305–1316.
Jeffryes, J.G., et al., 2015. MINEs: open access databases of computationally predicted
enzyme promiscuity products for untargeted metabolomics. J. Cheminf. 7, 44
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13321-015-0087-1.
Jessen, H., et al., 2015. Compositions and Methods for 3-hydroxypropionic Acid
Production. Google Patents.
Jiang, X., Meng, X., Xian, M., 2009. Biosynthetic pathways for 3-hydroxypropionic acid
production. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 82 (6), 995–1003.
Khersonsky, O., Roodveldt, C., Tawﬁk, D.S., 2006. Enzyme promiscuity: evolutionary and
mechanistic aspects. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 10 (5), 498–508.
Khodayari, A., Maranas, C.D., 2016. A genome-scale Escherichia coli kinetic metabolic
model k-ecoli457 satisfyingﬂux data for multiple mutant strains. Nat. Commun. 7
(1).
Kim, J., Copley, S.D., 2012. Inhibitory cross-talk upon introduction of a new metabolic
pathway into an existing metabolic network. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. Unit. States Am.
109 (42), E2856–E2864.
Kim, J., et al., 2010. Three serendipitous pathways in E. coli can bypass a block in
pyridoxal-5’-phosphate synthesis. Mol. Syst. Biol. 6, 436.
Kim, K., et al., 2014. Enhanced production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol by
modulation of glycerol metabolism in recombinant Escherichia coli. Bioresour.
Technol. 156, 170–175.
Klem, T.J., Davisson, V.J., 1993. Imidazole glycerol phosphate synthase: the glutamine
amidotransferase in histidine biosynthesis. Biochemistry 32 (19), 5177–5186.
Kumar, V., Ashok, S., Park, S., 2013. Recent advances in biological production of 3-
hydroxypropionic acid. Biotechnol. Adv. 31 (6), 945–961.
Lee, S.K., et al., 2008. Metabolic engineering of microorganisms for biofuels production:
from bugs to synthetic biology to fuels. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 19 (6), 556–563.
Lee, S.Y., et al., 2009. Metabolic engineering of microorganisms: general strategies and
drug production. Drug Discov. Today 14 (1–2), 78–88.
Li, C., et al., 2004. Computational discovery of biochemical routes to specialty chemicals.
Chem. Eng. Sci. 59 (22–23), 5051–5060.
Li, L., et al., 2013. MyCompoundID: using an evidence-based metabolome library for
metabolite identiﬁcation. Anal. Chem. 85 (6), 3401–3408.
Long, C.P., Antoniewicz, M.R., 2019. High-resolution 13C metabolicﬂux analysis. Nat.
Protoc. 14 (10), 2856–2877.
Madison, L.L., Huisman, G.W., 1999. Metabolic engineering of poly (3-
hydroxyalkanoates): from DNA to plastic. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 63 (1), 21–53.
Monk, J.M., et al., 2017.iML1515, a knowledgebase that computesEscherichia colitraits.
Nat. Biotechnol. 35, 904–908. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.3956.
Moriya, Y., et al., 2010. PathPred: an enzyme-catalyzed metabolic pathway prediction
server. Nucleic Acids Res. 38 (Suppl 2), W138–W143.
Nakamura, C.E., Whited, G.M., 2003. Metabolic engineering for the microbial production
of 1, 3-propanediol. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 14 (5), 454–459.
Nielsen, D.R., et al., 2009. Engineering alternative butanol production platforms in
heterologous bacteria. Metab. Eng. 11 (4–5), 262–273.
Nobeli, I., Favia, A.D., Thornton, J.M., 2009. Protein promiscuity and its implications for
biotechnology. Nat. Biotechnol. 27 (2), 157.
Noor, E., et al., 2012. An integrated open framework for thermodynamics of reactions
that combines accuracy and coverage. Bioinformatics 28 (15), 2037–2044.
Noor, E., et al., 2013. Consistent estimation of Gibbs energy using component
contributions. PLoS Comput. Biol. 9 (7), e1003098.
Noor, E., et al., 2014. Pathway thermodynamics highlights kinetic obstacles in central
metabolism. PLoS Comput. Biol. 10 (2), e1003483.
Orth, J.D., Thiele, I., Palsson, B.Ø., 2010. What isﬂux balance analysis? Nat. Biotechnol.
28 (3), 245–248.
Patrick, W.M., et al., 2007. Multicopy suppression underpins metabolic evolvability. Mol.
Biol. Evol. 24 (12), 2716–2722.
Raj, S.M., et al., 2008. Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol by a novel
recombinant Escherichia coli BL21 strain. Process Biochem. 43 (12), 1440–1446.
Rathnasingh, C., et al., 2012. Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid via malonyl-CoA
pathway using recombinant Escherichia coli strains. J. Biotechnol. 157 (4), 633–640.
RDKit. Open-source cheminformatics. Available from:http://www.rdkit.org.
Schellenberger, J., et al., 2011. Quantitative prediction of cellular metabolism with
constraint-based models: the COBRA Toolbox v2.0. Nat. Protoc. 6 (9), 1290–1307.
Segr/C18e, D., Vitkup, D., Church, G.M., 2002. Analysis of optimality in natural and perturbed
metabolic networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99 (23), 15112–15117.
Tawﬁk, O.K., Dan, S., 2010. Enzyme promiscuity: a mechanistic and evolutionary
perspective. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 79, 471–505.
Trantas, E.A., et al., 2015. When plants produce not enough or at all: metabolic
engineering ofﬂavonoids in microbial hosts. Front. Plant Sci. 6.
Trinh, C.T., et al., 2011. Redesigning Escherichia coli metabolism for anaerobic
production of isobutanol. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77 (14), 4894–4904.
Visani, G.M., Hughes, M.C., Hassoun, S., 2020. Hierarchical Classiﬁcation of Enzyme
Promiscuity Using Positive, Unlabeled, and Hard Negative Examples arXiv:
2002.07327 [q-bio.CB].
Wang, Q., et al., 2014. Metabolic engineering of Escherichia coli for poly(3-
hydroxypropionate) production from glycerol and glucose. Biotechnol. Lett. 36 (11),
2257–2262.
Waskom, M.e., 2020. A.Seaborn: Statistical Data Visualization. https://doi.org/10.5281/
zenodo.592845.
Whalen, W.A., Berg, C.M., 1982. Analysis of an avtA::Mu d1(Ap lac) mutant: metabolic
role of transaminase C. J. Bacteriol. 150 (2), 739–746.
V. Porokhin et al. Metabolic Engineering Communications 12 (2021) e00170
10
Ye, Q.Z., Liu, J., Walsh, C.T., 1990. p-Aminobenzoate synthesis in Escherichia coli:
puriﬁcation and characterization of PabB as aminodeoxychorismate synthase and
enzyme X as aminodeoxychorismate lyase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 87 (23),
9391–9395.
Yoshikuni, Y., et al., 2008. Redesigning enzymes based on adaptive evolution for optimal
function in synthetic metabolic pathways. Chem. Biol. 15 (6), 607–618.
Yousofshahi, M., et al., 2015. PROXIMAL: a method for prediction of xenobiotic
metabolism. BMC Syst. Biol. 9 (1), 94.
V. Porokhin et al. Metabolic Engineering Communications 12 (2021) e00170
11