Academic Editor: Myung-Ji Seo
Received: 2 December 2024
Revised: 23 December 2024
Accepted: 24 December 2024
Published: 30 December 2024
Citation: Fina, A.; Àvila-Cabré, S.;
Vázquez-Pereira, E.; Albiol, J.; Ferrer, P .
A Rewired NADPH-Dependent Redox
Shuttle for Testing Peroxisomal
Compartmentalization of Synthetic
Metabolic Pathways inKomagataella
phaffii. Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
microorganisms13010046
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
A Rewired NADPH-Dependent Redox Shuttle for Testing
Peroxisomal Compartmentalization of Synthetic Metabolic
Pathways in Komagataella phaffii
Albert Fina †
 , Sílvia Àvila-Cabré †
 , Enrique Vázquez-Pereira
 , Joan Albiol
 and Pau Ferrer *
Department of Chemical, Biological and Environmental Engineering, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Carrer de les Sitges, s/n, 08193 Bellaterra, Catalonia, Spain; albertfina@gmail.com (A.F.);
silvia.avila@uab.cat (S.À.-C.); enrique.vazquez@uab.cat (E.V .-P .); joan.albiol@uab.cat (J.A.)
* Correspondence: pau.ferrer@uab.cat
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract: The introduction of heterologous pathways into microbial cell compartments
offers several potential advantages, including increasing enzyme concentrations and re-
ducing competition with native pathways, making this approach attractive for producing
complex metabolites like fatty acids and fatty alcohols. However, measuring subcellular
concentrations of these metabolites remains technically challenging. Here, we explored
3-hydroxypropionic acid (3-HP), readily quantifiable and sharing the same precursors—
acetyl-CoA, NADPH, and ATP—with the above-mentioned products, as a reporter metabo-
lite for peroxisomal engineering in the yeast Komagataella phaffii. To this end, the malonyl-
CoA reductase pathway for 3-HP production was targeted into the peroxisome of K. phaffii
using the PTS1-tagging system, and further tested with different carbon sources. There-
after, we used compartmentalized 3-HP production as a reporter system to showcase
the impact of different strategies aimed at enhancing the peroxisomal NADPH pool. Co-
overexpression of genes encoding a NADPH-dependent redox shuttle from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae (IDP2/IDP3) significantly increased 3-HP yields across all substrates, whereas
peroxisomal targeting of the S. cerevisiae NADH kinase Pos5 failed to improve 3-HP pro-
duction. This study highlights the potential of using peroxisomal 3-HP production as
a biosensor for evaluating peroxisomal acetyl-CoA and NAPDH availability by simply
quantifying 3-HP , demonstrating its potential for peroxisome-based metabolic engineering
in yeast.
Keywords: peroxisome; metabolic engineering; 3-hydroxypropionic acid; Pichia pastoris;
Komagataella phaffii; acetyl-CoA; NADPH; redox shuttle
1. Introduction
The yeast Komagataella phaffii (syn. Pichia pastoris) has been widely used as a model
organism to study peroxisomes at the genetic and molecular levels [1]. Peroxisomes, whose
proliferation is induced during growth on methanol or oleic acid, contain essential enzymes
involved in the metabolic pathways for the utilization of these carbon sources. For this
reason, K. phaffii strains with deficient peroxisomal assembly are unable to grow on such
substrates. This phenotypic trait was used to identify genes responsible for the correct
assembly of peroxisomes and the ones enabling the transport of proteins into the peroxi-
somal lumen [2]. Moreover, human genes homologous to the K. phaffii genes responsible
for peroxisomal biogenesis were identified and used to extrapolate the information on
peroxisomal biogenesis mechanisms from lower to higher eukaryotes.
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms13010046
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 2 of 15
Peroxisomes are subcellular organelles involved in a variety of metabolic functions. In
methylotrophic yeasts, such as K. phaffii, these organelles harbour essential enzymes for the
initial oxidation of methanol and detoxification processes, notably alcohol oxidases and
catalases [3]. Additionally, β-oxidation of fatty acids is confined to these compartments,
allowing yeasts to metabolize both saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, producing
intraperoxisomal acetyl-CoA and NADH [4]. Acetyl-CoA, a central metabolite in numerous
metabolic pathways, is exported from the peroxisomal lumen to the mitochondrial matrix
via two transport systems. In the glyoxylate cycle, which occurs partially in the peroxisomes,
acetyl-CoA is converted into C4 dicarboxylic acids that subsequently enter the mitochondria.
Alternatively, acetyl-CoA is converted into acetylcarnitine by carnitine acetyl-transferase
(Cat2), allowing its transport across the peroxisomal membrane. Once in the cytosol or
mitochondria, the reverse reaction is catalyzed by cytosolic Yat2 or Yat1, or by mitochondrial
Cat2, releasing acetyl-CoA [5–7].
In recent years, the implementation of heterologous pathways in yeast organelles has
attracted increasing attention [8–12]. For instance, since β-oxidation of fatty acids occurs in
peroxisomes, these organelles have been harnessed to produce acyl-CoA-derived chemicals,
such as medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs), fatty alcohols, alkanes, and olefins [8,13].
While most studies on the metabolic engineering of peroxisomes focus on Saccha-
romyces cerevisiae, a few have explored the potential of K. phaffii peroxisomes for producing
value-added chemicals. Early research reported the production of polyhydroxyalkanoates
(PHA) in K. phaffii using glucose and oleic acid as co-substrates, achieving a final intracellu-
lar PHA weight of 1.0% [14]. Carotenoid pathway enzymes have also been successfully
targeted to K. phaffii peroxisomes and shown their functionality using different carbon
sources [15–17]. Additionally, simultaneous production of α-farnesene in both the cytosol
and peroxisomes of K. phaffii led to 2.1-fold higher titers than those achieved by strains
producing α-farnesene solely in the cytoplasm [18]. Recently, a multi-step pathway resem-
bling the Calvin–Benson–Bassham cycle has been engineered into K. phaffii peroxisomes by
targeting the enzymes with PTS1 signals, enabling this yeast to grow autotrophically on
CO2 [19]. Furthermore, this strain was used as a platform chassis to produce organic acids
(i.e., lactic acid and itaconic acid) [20]. Other products such as nucleoside analogues and
sesquiterpenes have also been produced lately in peroxisome-engineered K. phaffii [21,22].
Peroxisomes offer significant potential advantages in metabolic engineering for several
reasons: (i) They can proliferate and occupy up to 80% of the cell volume under certain con-
ditions, such as growth on methanol or fatty acids [23], providing a large compartment for
introducing synthetic pathways [24]. (ii) Protein targeting is straightforward using PTS1 or
PTS2 sequences [25,26]. (iii) Co-localizing enzymes within smaller compartments increases
enzyme concentrations, leading to higher reaction rates [ 8]. (iv) Physically separating
enzymes into a different compartment prevents competition between the recombinant
and endogenous pathways for the same substrates [27]. (v) It protects essential enzymes
in other compartments from interacting with toxic intermediates [ 27]. (vi) Acetyl-CoA
and NADH, key precursors for numerous metabolic engineering applications, are readily
produced in peroxisomes by the abovementioned pathways. (vii) The permeability proper-
ties of the single peroxisomal membrane allow free movement of small-molecule solutes
through nonselective channels while isolating metabolic intermediates or products from
the cytosol [28].
The peroxisomal membrane does not allow the free diffusion of ‘bulky’ compounds
such as ATP and cofactors like NAD(H), NADP(H), and CoA under in vivo conditions.
However, these organelles possess specific transporter(s) for cytoplasmic ATP import
(Ant1) [29] as well as CoA derivative export (i.e., the carnitine system and the glyoxylate
shunt) [5,6]. Redox cofactors NAD(H) and NADP(H) are not physically exchanged between
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 3 of 15
the cytoplasm and the peroxisome lumen. As a result, peroxisomes have their own pool
of cofactors and redox shuttle systems allowing the transmembrane transfer of electron
carriers [6,30]. In S. cerevisiae, two NADH-dependent redox shuttles have been identified
as crucial for maintaining the intraperoxisomal redox balance through the reoxidation of
NADH under various growth conditions. These are the malate/oxaloacetate (Mdh3) [6,31]
and the glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 1 (Gpd1) [32] shuttles. On the other hand,
S. cerevisiae contains a peroxisomal NADP +-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase (Idp3)
that catalyzes the oxidation of isocitrate to α-ketoglutarate, yielding NADPH. After that,
α-ketoglutarate is exported to the cytoplasm where it is re-reduced to isocitrate by the
cytosolic isocitrate dehydrogenase (Idp2), establishing a putative NADPH-regenerating
redox system, which is ATP-neutral. The exchange of redox equivalents between the
two compartments takes advantage of the permeability of the peroxisomal membrane to
small molecules, as both α-ketoglutarate and isocitrate can freely cross the peroxisomal
membrane [33,34]. Thereby, peroxisomal targeting of metabolic pathways requiring acetyl-
CoA and NAD(P)H as precursors poses a significant challenge. Studies exploring cofactor
availability in the peroxisome to further improve the production of value-added chemicals
are still scarce [35,36].
In this study, we introduced the malonyl-CoA reductase pathway for the production of
the platform chemical 3-hydroxypropionic acid (3-HP) [37], which requires acetyl-CoA and
NADPH, in the peroxisome of K. phaffii to serve as a test bench for metabolic engineering
strategies aimed at boosting peroxisomal production of compounds derived from the same
key precursors. Yeast peroxisomal membranes are permeable to small metabolites [ 38],
which can cross the membrane through pore-forming proteins, with transport occurring
in a size-dependent manner [ 28,39]. This property likely enables the free movement of
3-HP , facilitating its subsequent transport to the extracellular space. Consequently, product
quantification is simplified compared to the more complex methods required for measuring
fatty acids and fatty alcohols [40,41]. Furthermore, 3-HP cannot be used as a carbon source
by K. phaffii [42]. Therefore, 3-HP makes it an attractive reporter metabolite candidate for
investigating peroxisomes as compartmentalized cell factories.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Construction of Strains
The plasmids and the strains used for this study are listed in Table 1. A detailed
description of the molecular biology protocols to obtain each plasmid can be found in
Supplementary File S1.
K. phaffii (P . pastoris) X-33 (Invitrogen-Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA)
was used as a parental strain. Electrocompetent cells were obtained using a previously de-
scribed protocol [43]. Plasmid DNA was linearized as follows: pBIZi_pGAP_MCR_NC_PTS1
was cut with AvrII; BB3eH_ACC_PTS1 was cut with PmeI; and BB3rN_POS5_PTS,
BB3rN_cPOS5, and BB3aK_IDP2/IDP3 were cut with AscI. The restricted DNA was run on
an agarose gel and the appropriate band was purified. An amount of 200 ng of linear DNA
were transformed into an 80 µL aliquot of electrocompetent K. phaffii cells. Electroporation
was performed using a Gene Pulser MXCell Electroporation System (Biorad, Hercules,
CA, USA). Right after the pulse, the cells were incubated for 2 h at 30 ◦C with vigorous
shaking. Finally, the cells were plated on YPDagar medium (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone,
2% glucose, 1.5% agar) supplemented with the appropriate antibiotic (100 µg/mL Zeocin,
200 µg/mL Hygromycin, 500 µg/mL Geneticyn, or 100 µg/mL clonNAT). All antibiotics
were purchased from Invivogen (San Diego, CA, USA). The plates were incubated for 48 h
at 30 ◦C.
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 4 of 15
Twelve clones were re-streaked on YPD supplemented with the appropriate antibiotic
and incubated for 48 h and 30 ◦C. Positive clones were checked by colony PCR.
Table 1. Plasmids and K. phaffii strains used in this study.
Plasmid Name Expression Cassettes in Each Plasmid Source
pBIZi_pGAP_MCR_NC PGAP-mcrCa(N-ter)-AOX1tt
PGAP-mcrCa(C-ter)-AOX1tt [42]
pBIZi_pGAP_MCR_NC_PTS1 PGAP-mcrCa(N-ter)_PTS1-AOX1tt
PGAP-mcrCa(C-ter)_PTS1-AOX1tt This study
BB3eH_ACC1 P GAP-ACC1Yl(∆BbsI)-ScCYC1tt [42]
BB3eH_ACC1_PTS1 P GAP-ACC1Yl(∆BbsI)_PTS1-ScCYC1tt This study
BB1_12_pGAP [44]
BB1_23 [44]
BB1_34_RPS3tt [44]
BB1_23_cPOS5 cPOS5Sc [42]
BB3rN_14 [44]
BB3rN_POS5_PTS P GAP-POS5Sc_PTS1-RPS3tt This study
BB3rN_cPOS5 P GAP-POS5Sc-RPS3tt This study
BB3aK_AC [44]
BB3aK_IDP2/IDP3 PTEF2- IDP2Sc-RPS3tt
PMDH3-IDP3Sc-ScCYC1tt This study
Strain name Parental strain +
New plasmid integration Source
X-33 Invitrogen—Thermo Fisher Scientific
PpM X33 + pBIZi_pGAP_MCR_NC_PTS1 This study
PpMA PpM + BB3eH_ ACC1_PTS1 This study
PpMAP PpMA+ BB3rN_ POS5_PTS This study
PpMAS PpMA + BB3aK_ IDP2/IDP3 This study
PpMAC PpMA + BB3rN_c POS5 This study
PpMASC PpMAS + BB3rN_c POS5 This study
PpHP2 X33 + pBIZi_pGAP_MCR_NC [42]
PpHP4 PpHP2 + BB3eH_ ACC1 [42]
PpHP6 PpHP2 + BB3eH_ ACC1_cPOS5 [42]
2.2. Screening Conditions
Buffered Minimal medium (100 mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 6, 1.34% yeast
nitrogen base with ammonium sulphate without amino acids (Becton Dickinson Difco™,
Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA), 0.4 mg/L biotin) was supplemented with the appropriate carbon
source: glucose (BMD; 20 g/L of glucose), glycerol (BMG; 1% v/v glycerol), methanol
(BMM; 0.5% v/v methanol), or oleic acid (BMO; 1% v/v oleic acid and 0.5% v/v Tween80).
Cells were cultured overnight on 5 mL of YPD (1% yeast extract, 2% peptone, 2%
glucose) in 50 mL falcon tubes at 30 ◦C and 200 rpm. The day after, 24-deep-well plates
containing 2 mL of medium (BMD, BMG, BMM, or BMO) were inoculated at a starting
OD600 of 0.1 and incubated at 25 ◦C and 220 rpm in a Multitron Standard incubator shaker
(Infors HT, Bottmingen, Switzerland) with a 2.5 cm orbit using a platform with a slope of
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 5 of 15
20◦. The cultures on BMD or BMG were incubated for 48 h. The cultures on BMO were
incubated for 72 h. In the case of BMM, a pulse of 1% v/v methanol was performed on each
culture after 24 h of cultivation. The BMM cultures were harvested after 48 h of incubation.
2.3. Analytical Methods
At the end of the cultures, 2 mL samples were centrifuged at 12,000× g for 10 min. The
supernatants were filtered through a 0.22 µm filter (Millex SLLGX13, Millipore, CA, USA).
Full consumption of the substrates was checked using a previously described HPLC
protocol [42]. An HPLC Ultimate3000 (Dionex—Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a UV detec-
tor at 210 nm and a Refractive Index (RI) detector (Dionex—Thermo Fisher Scientific) was
used together with an ionic exchange column ICSep ICE-COREGEL 87H3 (Transgenomic,
Omaha, NE, USA) to separate the compounds of the supernatant. The flow rate of the
mobile phase (6 mM sulphuric acid) was set to 0.6 mL/min and the injection volume was
set to 20 µL. The 3-HP produced by the cytosolic variants (PpHP strains) was quantified
from the RI spectrum.
For 3-HP quantification in samples derived from the peroxisomal variants constructed
in this study, a previously described HPLC-MS method was used [42]. A Prominence HPLC
(Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) with a single-quadrupole Shimadzu-2010A mass spectrometry
(MS) detector with an electrospray ionization source was used. An ICSep 87H USP L17
column (Transgenomic, NE, USA) was used to separate the metabolites of the supernatant.
The flow rate of the mobile phase (16 mM formic acid) was set to 0.15 mL/min. The injection
volume was set to 2µL. The MS analyser was set to 89m/z for negatively charged molecules.
The detector settings were as follows: curved desolvation line (CDL) temperature at 200 ◦C,
heat block temperature at 200 ◦C, voltage of the detector at 1.5 kV , nebulizing gas (nitrogen)
flow at 1.5 L/min, and drying gas (nitrogen) flow at 10 L/min. All samples were analyzed
in duplicate.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Construction of K. phaffii Strains Engineered for 3-HP Production in Peroxisomes
In a previous study, we showed that the individual expression of the two enzymatic
domains of the bi-functional malonyl-CoA reductase from Chloroflexus aurantiacus (MCR
C- and N-terminal), catalyzing two consecutive NADPH-consuming reactions converting
malonyl-CoA into 3-HP , leads to higher 3-HP production in the cytosol ofK. phaffii com-
pared to the expression of the undissected mcrCa gene [42]. Following up on this, the genes
encoding for the MCR C- and N-terminal domains were expressed under the control of
the GAP promoter (pGAP) and tagged with the PTS1 C-terminal sequence for its compart-
mentalization in peroxisomes, resulting in strain PpM (Figure 1). Aiming at increasing the
availability of the pathway precursor malonyl-CoA, the acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC1)
gene from Yarrowia lypolitica fused to a PTS signal encoding sequence was expressed using
the pGAP in strain PpM, obtaining strain PpMA.
The second precursor limiting 3-HP production via the malonyl-CoA pathway is
NADPH. In the present work, we have studied different strategies aiming at increasing
this cofactor’s delivery to the K. phaffii peroxisome. Two independent mechanisms were
considered: First, a mitochondrial NADH kinase from S. cerevisiae (POS5) was expressed
under the control of pGAP and targeted to the peroxisome of strain PpMA by substituting
the mitochondrial tag sequence with PTS1 (p POS5), resulting in strain PpMAP . Pos5
catalyzes the ATP-dependent conversion of NADH into NADPH. Ectopic expression of
the cytosolic-targeted version of POS5 (cPOS5) in K. phaffii has been proven to increase
the NADPH/NADP+ ratio, thereby increasing the production of heterologous proteins
and bulk chemicals [ 42,45]. A strain harbouring the c POS5 gene was also constructed
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 6 of 15
(PpMAC). Second, we considered a cyclic pathway that delivers NADPH redox equivalents
from the cytosol into the peroxisome, namely the Idp2/Idp3 shuttle [33]. To date, an IDP3
homologous gene has not been identified in the K. phaffii genome [46]. Thus, IDP2 and
IDP3 genes originating from S. cerevisiae were heterologously expressed in PpMA using
the TEF2 and MDH3 constitutive promoters, respectively, resulting in strain PpMAS. The
original Idp3 from S. cerevisiae contains a PTS1 sequence tag at its C-terminal end and,
therefore, is prone to being imported from the cytosol into the peroxisomal matrix of K.
phaffii. Furthermore, the expression of the NADPH-linked redox shuttle was combined
with the expression of cPOS5 in strain PpMASC, aiming at increasing the cytosolic NADPH
pool and the subsequent transport flux of NADPH to the peroxisome (Figure 1).
Microorganisms 2025, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 17 
 
 
bulk chemicals [42,45]. A strain harbouring the c POS5 gene was also constructed 
(PpMAC). Second, we considered a cyclic pathway that delivers NADPH redox equiva-
lents from the cytosol into the peroxisome, namely the Idp2/Idp3 shuttle [33]. To date, an 
IDP3 homologous gene has not been identi ﬁed in the K. phaﬃi genome [46]. Thus, IDP2 
and IDP3 genes originating from S. cerevisiae were heterologously expressed in PpMA us-
ing the TEF2 and MDH3 constitutive promoters, respectively, resulting in strain PpMAS. 
The original Idp3 from S. cerevisiae contains a PTS1 sequence tag at its C-terminal end and, 
therefore, is prone to being imported from the cytosol into the peroxisomal matrix of K. 
phaﬃi. Furthermore, the expression of the NADPH-linked redox shu ttle was combined 
with the expression of c POS5 in strain PpMASC, aiming at increasing the cytosolic 
NADPH pool and the subsequent transport ﬂux of NADPH to the peroxisome (Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1. Metabolic pathway engineering for peroxisomal 3-HP synthesis in K. phaﬃi from various 
carbon sources. Heterologous and endogenous ge nes are presented in purp le and black, respec-
tively. MCR-C and MCR-N, C- and N-terminal do mains of malonyl-CoA reductase, respectively; 
ACC, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; POS5, NADH kinase; IDP2 and IDP3, NADP-dependent isocitrate 
dehydrogenases isoenzymes; AOX, alcohol oxidase; PDC, pyruvate decarboxylase; ALD, acetalde-
hyde dehydrogenase; ACS, acetyl-CoA synthetase; YAT1,2 and CAT2, carnitine acetyl-transferases; 
FAS1,2, fa tty acid synthases; FAA2, acyl-CoA synthetase; ANT1, ATP transporter; PXA1,2, ABC 
transporter family D; FALD, formaldehyde; Xu5P , xylulose-5-phosphate; G3P, glyceraldehyde-3-
phosphate; DHA, dihydroxyacetone; DHAP, dihydr oxyacetone phosphate; G6P, glucose-6-phos-
phate; GYC, glyoxylate cycle; Ac -carn, acetylcarnitine; MSA, ma lonate semialdehyde; 3-HP, 3-hy-
droxypropionic acid; αKG, α-ketoglutarate; FFA, free fatty acids; LCFA, long-chain fatty acids. 
3.2. Using 3-HP Produced from Oleic Acid as a Reporter Metabolite to Detect Peroxisomal 
NADPH Levels 
Peroxisomal production of 3-HP was ﬁrst investigated using an unsaturated fa tty 
acid (oleic acid) as a substrate to ensure suﬃcient delivery of acetyl-CoA. Moreover, oleic 
acid is known to promote the proliferation of the peroxisomes. In this way, we also en-
sured that this organelle would have su ﬃcient capacity to allocate the heterologous en-
zymes needed for 3-HP synthesis. 
Figure 1. Metabolic pathway engineering for peroxisomal 3-HP synthesis in K. phaffii from various
carbon sources. Heterologous and endogenous genes are presented in purple and black, respectively.
MCR-C and MCR-N, C- and N-terminal domains of malonyl-CoA reductase, respectively;ACC, acetyl-
CoA carboxylase; POS5, NADH kinase; IDP2 and IDP3, NADP-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenases
isoenzymes; AOX, alcohol oxidase; PDC, pyruvate decarboxylase; ALD, acetaldehyde dehydrogenase;
ACS, acetyl-CoA synthetase; YAT1,2 and CAT2, carnitine acetyl-transferases; FAS1,2, fatty acid
synthases; FAA2, acyl-CoA synthetase; ANT1, ATP transporter; PXA1,2, ABC transporter family
D; FALD, formaldehyde; Xu5P , xylulose-5-phosphate; G3P , glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate; DHA,
dihydroxyacetone; DHAP , dihydroxyacetone phosphate; G6P , glucose-6-phosphate; GYC, glyoxylate
cycle; Ac-carn, acetylcarnitine; MSA, malonate semialdehyde; 3-HP , 3-hydroxypropionic acid;αKG,
α-ketoglutarate; FFA, free fatty acids; LCFA, long-chain fatty acids.
3.2. Using 3-HP Produced from Oleic Acid as a Reporter Metabolite to Detect Peroxisomal
NADPH Levels
Peroxisomal production of 3-HP was first investigated using an unsaturated fatty acid
(oleic acid) as a substrate to ensure sufficient delivery of acetyl-CoA. Moreover, oleic acid is
known to promote the proliferation of the peroxisomes. In this way, we also ensured that
this organelle would have sufficient capacity to allocate the heterologous enzymes needed
for 3-HP synthesis.
Three independent clones of strain PpM, engineered to express the genes encoding
for the MCR C- and N-terminal domains in the peroxisome of K. phaffii, were grown in
triplicate on Buffered Minimal medium supplemented with oleic acid (BMO) for 72 h.
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 7 of 15
While peroxisomal Acc1 activity has not been conclusively confirmed in yeast, and the
presence of malonyl-CoA in this organelle remains a matter of debate, strain PpM produced
17.9 ± 1.0 mg/L of 3-HP in BMO (Figure 2). We hypothesize that this significant 3-HP
production stems from cytosolic malonyl-CoA, as proteins tagged with a PTS1 signal are
initially synthesized and folded in the cytosol, where they transiently reside before being
transported into the peroxisomal matrix.
Microorganisms 2025, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 17 
 
 
Three independent clones of strain PpM, engineered to express the genes encoding 
for the MCR C- and N-terminal domains in the peroxisome of K. phaﬃi, were grown in 
triplicate on Bu ﬀered Minimal medium supplemented with oleic acid (BMO) for 72 h. 
While peroxisomal Acc1 activity has not been conclusively con ﬁrmed in yeast, and the 
presence of malonyl-CoA in this organelle remains a ma tter of debate, strain PpM pro-
duced 17.9 ± 1.0 mg/L of 3-HP in BMO (Figure 2). We hypothesize that this signi ﬁcant 3-
HP production stems from cytosolic malonyl-CoA, as proteins tagged with a PTS1 signal 
are initially synthesized and folded in the cy tosol, where they transiently reside before 
being transported into the peroxisomal matrix. 
 
Figure 2. Average ﬁnal 3-HP concentration produced from oleic acid by each K. phaﬃi recombinant 
strain. Data are presented as the mean ± SD of biological triplicates. Statistically signi ﬁcant diﬀer-
ences between two groups are shown in the graph. Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-
tailed unpaired Student’s t-test (* p < 0.01, ** p < 0.001, *** p < 0.0001). Raw data available in Supple-
mentary File 2. 
The expression of the Y. lipolytica gene encoding an acetyl-CoA carboxylase ( ACC1) 
targeted to the peroxisome of strain PpMA signiﬁcantly increased the production of 3-HP 
by 15% in comparison with PpM strain (p < 0.001), reaching 20.6 ± 0.9 mg/L of 3-HP (Figure 
2). The delivery of acetyl-CoA is ensured when oleic acid is used as a substrate, and thus 
the availability of this metabolite should not be a limiting factor for producing 3-HP in 
this strain. Hence, PpMA was considered as a suitable platform strain to test di ﬀerent 
strategies aiming at increasing NADPH peroxisomal availability, using 3-HP production 
as a reporter metabolite and oleic acid as reference substrate. 
Expression of the gene encoding S. cerevisiae’s POS5 NADH kinase targeted to the 
cytosol (cPOS5) of K. phaﬃi has already shown positive eﬀects on the production of both 
recombinant proteins and 3-HP [42,45]. However, when POS5 was targeted to the perox-
isome (pPOS5) of PpMA, the resulting strain PpMAP produced 21.0 ± 1.8 mg/L of 3-HP, 
which was statistically comparable to the amount produced by its parental strain (Figure 
Figure 2. Average final 3-HP concentration produced from oleic acid by eachK. phaffii recombinant
strain. Data are presented as the mean ± SD of biological triplicates. Statistically significant dif-
ferences between two groups are shown in the graph. Statistical analysis was conducted using a
two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-test (* p < 0.01, ** p < 0.001, *** p < 0.0001). Raw data available in
Supplementary File S2.
The expression of the Y. lipolytica gene encoding an acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC1)
targeted to the peroxisome of strain PpMA significantly increased the production of 3-HP
by 15% in comparison with PpM strain ( p < 0.001), reaching 20.6 ± 0.9 mg/L of 3-HP
(Figure 2). The delivery of acetyl-CoA is ensured when oleic acid is used as a substrate, and
thus the availability of this metabolite should not be a limiting factor for producing 3-HP
in this strain. Hence, PpMA was considered as a suitable platform strain to test different
strategies aiming at increasing NADPH peroxisomal availability, using 3-HP production as
a reporter metabolite and oleic acid as reference substrate.
Expression of the gene encoding S. cerevisiae’s POS5 NADH kinase targeted to the
cytosol (cPOS5) of K. phaffii has already shown positive effects on the production of both
recombinant proteins and 3-HP [ 42,45]. However, when POS5 was targeted to the per-
oxisome (pPOS5) of PpMA, the resulting strain PpMAP produced 21.0 ± 1.8 mg/L of
3-HP , which was statistically comparable to the amount produced by its parental strain
(Figure 2). The Pos5 NADH kinase converts NADH and ATP into NADPH and ADP . It is
well reported that low peroxisomal ATP availability is another limiting factor regarding
the use of the peroxisomes for metabolic engineering applications [ 8]. Thus, failure of
this strategy to increase the NADPH availability for 3-HP production may be ascribed to
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 8 of 15
its ATP dependence concomitant with the mentioned ATP limitation. Some strategies to
increase the availability of ATP in the peroxisome of yeast include the overexpression of
Ant1, a peroxisomal ATP transporter [ 35] (Figure 1). In this study, we have considered
alternative strategies to increase NADPH availability in the peroxisome that do not rely on
the use of peroxisomal ATP .
The S. cerevisiae Idp2/Idp3 shuttle was expressed in strain PpMA. Idp2 catalyzes
the conversion of cytosolic α-ketoglutarate to isocitrate consuming cytosolic NADPH,
while Idp3 catalyzes the production of isocitrate from α-ketoglutarate in the peroxisome,
generating peroxisomal NADPH. The K. phaffii strain overexpressing the Idp2/Idp3 shuttle
(PpMAS) produced 23.5 ± 0.8 mg/L of 3-HP . Such 3-HP production is significantly higher
(13.8%, p < 0.001) than the amount produced by the parental strain PpMA (Figure 2). The
fold change increase with the implementation of the NADPH shuttle is consistent with
previous findings in S. cerevisiae, where the overexpression of the Idp2/Idp3 shuttle led
to an increase of 15–20% in squalene production [ 35]. The increase in 3-HP production
provides strong evidence for the peroxisomal localization of the synthetic malonyl-CoA
reductase pathway. Should this route be cytosolic, enhancing peroxisomal NADPH levels
would not have improved 3-HP production, as the peroxisomal membrane is impermeable
to NADPH, preventing its exchange between the cytosol and this compartment.
Since the PpMAS strain shuttles NADPH redox equivalents from the cytosol into the
peroxisome, we hypothesized that increasing the cytosolic NADPH/NADP+ ratio would
boost exchange fluxes through the Idp2/Idp3 shuttle, leading to higher NADPH avail-
ability in the peroxisome and, consequently, increased 3-HP production. To this end, we
overexpressed cPOS5 in the PpMAS strain. The resulting strain (PpMASC) produced
26.0 ± 0.4 mg/L of 3-HP , a significant 10.8% improvement over PpMAS ( p = 0.003).
These findings demonstrate that co-expression of cytosolic NADH kinase (cPos5) with the
Idp2/Idp3 shuttle enhanced both cytosolic and peroxisomal NAPDH availability, lead-
ing to improved 3-HP production. This is consistent with the fact that strain PpMAC,
which harbours the cPos5 but lacks the Idp2/Idp3 shuttle, produced significantly less 3-HP
compared to strain PpMASC (15.6 ± 1.8 mg/L) (p < 0.0001). Moreover, strain PpMAC
showed 24.2% lower 3-HP production compared to its parental strain, PpMA (Figure 2).
Introduction of the cytosolic Pos5 NADH kinase in K. phaffii has been reported to cause an
energy drain due to increased ATP consumption [45], which may explain the reduced yield
in this strain. These results also suggest that K. phaffii lacks any major native peroxisomal
NADPH-dependent redox shuttle that is metabolically active under the tested conditions.
3.3. Testing the Potential of Peroxisomal 3-HP Production as a Synthetic Biosensor in K. phaffii
Strains Growing on Different Carbon Sources
To further investigate the applicability of peroxisomal 3-HP production as a reporter
pathway when glucose, glycerol, and methanol are used as substrates, the same series of
strains were cultured on Buffered Minimal medium supplemented with glycerol (BMG),
glucose (BMD), or methanol (BMM).
When growing on oleic acid, acetyl-CoA is directly produced in the peroxisome
through the β-oxidation of fatty acids. Conversely, the glycolysis of carbon sources such
as glucose and glycerol to acetyl-CoA via pyruvate occurs in the cytosol (Figure 1). Al-
ternatively, the mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase complex can also catalyze the
conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA. On the other hand, methanol is first oxidized to
formaldehyde by alcohol oxidase (Aox) in the peroxisome and can then be assimilated via
the xylulose-5-phosphate pathway, leading to the formation of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
(G3P), an intermediate in glycolysis. This G3P is channelled into lower glycolysis, where
it can be converted into pyruvate. Importantly, acetyl-CoA cannot freely diffuse across
cellular membranes, including those of the nucleus and peroxisome. Nevertheless, acetate,
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 9 of 15
which can be produced from pyruvate, can readily diffuse to different cell compartments,
where it can be converted into acetyl-CoA by means of acetyl-CoA synthetases (Acs) [47].
In the cytosol, acetyl-CoA is carboxylated by Acc1 in an ATP-dependent reaction
to form malonyl-CoA, both of which are key precursors for fungal de novo fatty acid
biosynthesis, catalyzed by cytosolic fatty acid synthases (Fas1, Fas2). Free fatty acids (FFAs)
are transported across the peroxisomal membrane and subsequently activated inside the
peroxisome by the acyl-CoA synthetase Faa2, whereas fatty acyl-CoA esters are taken
up through the ABCD transporters Pxa1 and Pxa2 [ 48]. Once inside the peroxisome,
these activated fatty acids undergo β-oxidation, contributing to the pool of peroxisomal
acetyl-CoA (Figure 1). Interestingly, genes encoding fatty acid synthases (FAS1, FAS2) are
up-regulated in methanol-grown cells, while under glucose-limited conditions, there is a
strong induction of genes involved in fatty acid utilization (e.g., FAA2, PXA1, PXA2) [49].
Several studies have highlighted the biosynthetic potential of yeasts to produce acetyl-
CoA-derived compounds within peroxisomes from carbon sources such as glycerol, glucose,
and methanol. These compounds include squalene [35], fatty alcohols [36,41,50], alkanes
and olefins [50], terpenes [16], and polyketides [51,52]. Similarly, the malonyl-CoA-to-3-HP
pathway has been confirmed to function effectively within the peroxisomal compartment.
This is evidenced by the detectable production of 3-HP across all strains engineered in this
study, even when using these alternative carbon sources (Figure 3).
Microorganisms 2025, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 17 
 
 
the xylulose-5-phosphate pathway, leading to the formation of glyceraldehyde-3-phos-
phate (G3P), an intermediate in glycolysis. This G3P is channelled into lower glycolysis, 
where it can be converted into pyruvate. Importantly, acetyl-CoA cannot freely di ﬀuse 
across cellular membranes, including those of the nucleus and peroxisome. Nevertheless, 
acetate, which can be produced from pyruvate, can readily di ﬀuse to diﬀerent cell com-
partments, where it can be converted into acetyl-CoA by means of acetyl-CoA synthetases 
(Acs) [47]. 
In the cytosol, acetyl-CoA is carboxylated by Acc1 in an ATP-dependent reaction to 
form malonyl-CoA, both of which are key precursors for fungal de novo fa tty acid bio-
synthesis, catalyzed by cytosolic fatty acid synthases (Fas1, Fas2). Free fatty acids (FFAs) 
are transported across the peroxisomal membrane and subsequently activated inside the 
peroxisome by the acyl-CoA synthetase Faa2, whereas fatty acyl-CoA esters are taken up 
through the ABCD transporters Pxa1 and Pxa2  [48]. Once inside the peroxisome, these 
activated fatty acids undergo β-oxidation, contributing to the pool of peroxisomal acetyl-
CoA (Figure 1). Interestingly, genes encoding fa tty acid synthases ( FAS1, FAS2) are up-
regulated in methanol-grown cells, while under glucose-limited conditions, there is a 
strong induction of genes involved in fatty acid utilization (e.g., FAA2, PXA1, PXA2) [49]. 
Several studies have highlighted the biosynthetic potential of yeasts to produce ace-
tyl-CoA-derived compounds within peroxisome s from carbon sources such as glycerol, 
glucose, and methanol. These compounds include squalene [35], fatty alcohols [36,41,50], 
alkanes and ole ﬁns [50], terpenes [16], and polyketides [51,52]. Similarly, the malonyl-
CoA-to-3-HP pathway has been conﬁrmed to function eﬀectively within the peroxisomal 
compartment. This is evidenced by the detect able production of 3-HP across all strains 
engineered in this study, even when using these alternative carbon sources (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Final 3-HP concentrations an d overall product yields (Y P/S) obtained from BMO, BMM, 
BMD, and BMG by platform strain PpMA and its derivative strains. Data are presented as the mean 
± SD of biological triplicates. Statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences between PpMA and each derivative 
strain are indicated in the graph. Statistical an alysis was conducted usin g a two-tailed unpaired 
Student’s t-test (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.001, *** p < 0.0001, **** p < 0.00001, n.s. not signiﬁcant). Raw data 
available in Supplementary File S2. 
As expected, the highest 3-HP levels were achieved in BMO, since the β-oxidation of 
fatty acids delivers large amounts of peroxisoma l acetyl-CoA (a precursor for 3-HP) and 
energy. Moreover, fatty acids induce peroxisomal proliferation, increasing both the copy 
number and size of peroxisomes involved in the pathway. Notably, across the other 
Figure 3. Final 3-HP concentrations and overall product yields (YP/S) obtained from BMO, BMM,
BMD, and BMG by platform strain PpMA and its derivative strains. Data are presented as the
mean ± SD of biological triplicates. Statistically significant differences between PpMA and each
derivative strain are indicated in the graph. Statistical analysis was conducted using a two-tailed
unpaired Student’s t-test (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.001, *** p < 0.0001, **** p < 0.00001, n.s. not significant).
Raw data available in Supplementary File S2.
As expected, the highest 3-HP levels were achieved in BMO, since the β-oxidation of
fatty acids delivers large amounts of peroxisomal acetyl-CoA (a precursor for 3-HP) and
energy. Moreover, fatty acids induce peroxisomal proliferation, increasing both the copy
number and size of peroxisomes involved in the pathway. Notably, across the other culture
media, the order of highest to lowest 3-HP production rank was BMD, BMM, and BMG,
regardless of the strain used (Figure 3). Similar results were described by Bhataya et al. [16],
with higher lycopene production in K. phaffii peroxisomes on glucose than on glycerol or
methanol. Overall, our synthetic biosensor revealed the differences in relative peroxisomal
acetyl-CoA availability under various culture conditions.
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 10 of 15
Several studies have shown how K. phaffii’s metabolism can adapt to the consumption
of different carbon sources, highlighting the widespread effects of substrate choice at the
transcriptomic level [49,53]. Thereby, the divergent behaviour of the 3-HP-producing strains
growing under different carbon sources is plausible despite the expression of the same
set of heterologous genes (Figure 3). Nevertheless, a few consistent trends were observed
across all conditions: The final 3-HP concentrations obtained by strain PpMAP were either
similar to or lower than those observed in strain PpMA, regardless of the substrate used,
indicating that targeting the NADH kinase gene to the peroxisome (pPOS5) did not enhance
3-HP production. Conversely, overexpression of the S. cerevisiae Idp2/Idp3 shuttle in strain
PpMA, yielding strain PpMAS, significantly increased 3-HP production on all substrates
except methanol, which remained unchanged (p < 0.001 for BMO and BMG; p = 0.030 for
BMD). Increasing the cytosolic NADPH/NADP+ ratio through overexpression of cPOS5
(strain PpMAC) also failed to yield any noticeable changes on BMM and BMD, since the
excess NADPH in the cytosol is unable to cross the peroxisomal membrane. Moreover, it
led to a reduction in 3-HP titers on BMO compared to strain PpMA. However, combining
both strategies in strain PpMASC led to a significant enhancement in 3-HP production
across all substrates tested ( p < 0.0001 for BMO; p < 0.001 for BMM; p < 0.01 for BMD;
p < 0.00001 for BMG) (Figure 3).
Indeed, strain PpMASC consistently achieved the highest concentrations of 3-HP , with
increases ranging from 10 to 30% depending on the substrate, in comparison to strain PpMA.
These results confirm the beneficial effect of simultaneously harbouring the NADPH-
dependent redox shuttle and the cytosolic NADH kinase. While the enhancement in 3-HP
yield concomitant with the introduction of IDP2/IDP3 and cPOS5 genes was confirmed
regardless of the substrate used, we cannot discard the hypothesis that acetyl-CoA may
become a limiting factor in strains growing on substrates such as glucose, glycerol, and
methanol. Consequently, the reporting system introduced here can only act as an indicator
of peroxisomal NADPH availability when cultivation media are enriched with a fatty acid
source to ensure sufficient acetyl-CoA delivery through β-oxidation.
To assess the carbon utilization efficiency for 3-HP production across the different
metabolic engineering strategies, we calculated the C-yield for each strain on each substrate
(Figure 3). The highest yields were observed when cells were grown on oleic acid, as the
carbon atoms in fatty acids are more reduced compared to those in glucose and glycerol.
Strain PpMASC achieved a remarkable 3-HP yield of 1.53 ± 0.02 mC-mol/C-mol of oleic
acid, the highest yield recorded among the tested strains and carbon sources.
The expression of genes encoding for the two MCR subunits, Acc1, and NADH kinase
was driven by the constitutive p GAP. Waterham et al. [ 54] first identified and cloned
pGAP to constitutively express a bacterial β-lactamase in K. phaffii growing on different
carbon sources. Expression levels of the recombinant protein were the lowest in methanol-
grown cells and the highest in glucose-grown cells, consistent with reports on reduced
pGAP transcriptional levels under methanolic growth conditions compared to glucose or
glycerol metabolism [55,56]. Interestingly, the 3-HP yields observed in this study increased
by 21–34% and 16–50% in methanol versus glucose or glycerol, respectively, depending
on the strain used. The average product yield from each substrate revealed statistically
significant differences between BMG and BMD when compared to BMM ( p < 0.001 and
p < 0.0001, respectively), while yields on BMG and BMD were comparable ( p = 0.68). A
rough estimation of lycopene production yield, based on data from Bhataya et al. [ 16],
indicated that the product yield on methanol was 1.6 to 1.7 times higher than that achieved
on glucose, consistent with our findings. These results point at the beneficial role of induced
peroxisome proliferation in enhancing 3-HP production within this organelle.
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 11 of 15
3.4. Comparison of the Peroxisomal and Cytosolic Variants of the 3-HP Producing Strains
In a previous study, we developed a series of K. phaffii strains expressing the cytosolic
version of the malonyl-CoA pathway for 3-HP production on glycerol [42]. In strain PpHP2,
individual genes encoding for each of the two domains of the malonyl-CoA reductase
(MCR C- and N-terminal) were co-expressed. The cytosolic overexpression of the ACC1
gene in strain PpHP2 resulted in strain PpHP4, whereas co-expression of both ACC1 and
cPOS5 in the parental strain PpHP2 resulted in strain PpHP6. All the expression cassettes
were under the control of pGAP. This series of strains represents the cytosolic counterparts
of strains PpM, PpMA, and PpMAC constructed in this work, respectively.
A representative clone from each PpHP strain was cultivated in triplicate on BMG,
BMD, BMM, and BMO media. Overexpression of Y. lypolitica ACC1 in strain PpHP4 led
to a statistically significant increase in 3-HP production on BMO and BMD (p = 0.03 and
0.02, respectively) compared to PpHP2 (Figure 4). This result aligns with the fact that
substantial amounts of acetyl-CoA are generated during the β-oxidation of fatty acids,
which occurs predominantly in BMO. When glucose is used as a substrate, cytosolic acetyl-
CoA is produced from pyruvate, primarily via acetaldehyde and acetate [57]. The increased
3-HP production upon ACC1 overexpression suggests that the carboxylation of acetyl-
CoA to form malonyl-CoA, catalyzed by endogenous Acc1, was a rate-limiting step for
3-HP synthesis under these conditions. In fact, cytosolic Acc1 activity in yeasts is reduced
through phosphorylation by Snf1 at serine residues when glucose is depleted, lowering
cytosolic malonyl-CoA synthesis [58]. Conversely, glycerol-grown cultures did not show
malonyl-CoA limitations for 3-HP production, as previously noted by Fina et al. [42].
Microorganisms 2025, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 17 
 
 
3.4. Comparison of the Peroxisomal and Cytosolic Variants of the 3-HP Producing Strains 
In a previous study, we developed a series of K. phaﬃi strains expressing the cytosolic 
version of the malonyl-CoA pathway for 3-HP production on glycerol [42]. In strain 
PpHP2, individual genes encoding for each of the two domains of the malonyl-CoA re-
ductase (MCR C- and N-terminal) were co-expressed. The cytosolic overexpression of the 
ACC1 gene in strain PpHP2 resulted in strain PpHP4, whereas co-expression of both ACC1 
and cPOS5 in the parental strain PpHP2 resulted in strain PpHP6. All the expression cas-
settes were under the control of pGAP. This series of strains represents the cytosolic coun-
terparts of strains PpM, PpMA, and PpMAC constructed in this work, respectively. 
A representative clone from each PpHP strain was cultivated in triplicate on BMG, 
BMD, BMM, and BMO media. Overexpression of Y. lypolitica ACC1 in strain PpHP4 led 
to a statistically signiﬁcant increase in 3-HP production on BMO and BMD ( p = 0.03 and 
0.02, respectively) compared to PpHP2 (Figure 4). This result aligns with the fact that sub-
stantial amounts of acetyl-CoA are generated during the β-oxidation of fatty acids, which 
occurs predominantly in BMO. When glucose is used as a substrate, cytosolic acetyl-CoA 
is produced from pyruvate, primarily via acetaldehyde and acetate [57]. The increased 3-
HP production upon ACC1 overexpression suggests that the carboxylation of acetyl-CoA 
to form malonyl-CoA, catalyzed by endogenous Acc1, was a rate-limiting step for 3-HP 
synthesis under these conditions. In fact, cyto solic Acc1 activity in yeasts is reduced 
through phosphorylation by Snf1 at serine re sidues when glucose is depleted, lowering 
cytosolic malonyl-CoA synthesis [58]. Conversely, glycerol-grown cultures did not show 
malonyl-CoA limitations for 3-HP production, as previously noted by Fina et al. [42]. 
Ectopic expression of cPOS5 in strain PpHP4, resulting in strain PpHP6, led to a sig-
niﬁcant reduction in 3-HP production across all substrates except for oleic acid when com-
pared to PpHP4. Speci ﬁcally, 3-HP titers decreased by 6.7%, 12.5%, and 24.6% on BMG, 
BMD, and BMM, respectively (p = 0.004, 0.020, and 0.021) (Figure 4). Pos5 overexpression 
increases ATP demand for consumption in the NADH kinase reaction, which drains cel-
lular energy [45]. Additionally, the cytosolic  pathway from pyruvate to acetyl-CoA re-
quires 2 ATP equivalents, and another ATP is consumed when Acc1 converts acetyl-CoA 
to malonyl-CoA. We hypothesize that this cumulative energy cost negatively impacted 3-
HP yield on these substrates. 
 
Figure 4. Final 3-HP concentrations an d global product yields (Y P/S) obtained from BMO, BMM, 
BMD, and BMG by each cytosolic K. phaﬃi strain. Data are presented as the mean ± SD of biological 
triplicates. The p-values resulting from two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-tests comparing two groups 
Figure 4. Final 3-HP concentrations and global product yields (Y P/S) obtained from BMO, BMM,
BMD, and BMG by each cytosolic K. phaffii strain. Data are presented as the mean ± SD of biological
triplicates. The p-values resulting from two-tailed unpaired Student’s t-tests comparing two groups
(PpHP4 vs. PpHP2 and PpHP6 vs. PpHP4) on each substrate are indicated. Raw data available in
Supplementary File S2.
Ectopic expression of c POS5 in strain PpHP4, resulting in strain PpHP6, led to a
significant reduction in 3-HP production across all substrates except for oleic acid when
compared to PpHP4. Specifically, 3-HP titers decreased by 6.7%, 12.5%, and 24.6% on BMG,
BMD, and BMM, respectively (p = 0.004, 0.020, and 0.021) (Figure 4). Pos5 overexpression
increases ATP demand for consumption in the NADH kinase reaction, which drains cellular
energy [45]. Additionally, the cytosolic pathway from pyruvate to acetyl-CoA requires 2
ATP equivalents, and another ATP is consumed when Acc1 converts acetyl-CoA to malonyl-
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 12 of 15
CoA. We hypothesize that this cumulative energy cost negatively impacted 3-HP yield on
these substrates.
Evidence for the successful translocation of the 3-HP-producing enzymes into perox-
isomes can be inferred from the observation that all strains harbouring the peroxisome-
targeted malonyl-CoA pathway exhibited higher 3-HP yields when grown on oleic acid
and methanol compared to glycerol or glucose (Figures 3 and 4), also suggesting that
the proliferation of peroxisomes, which is strongly induced by oleic acid and methanol,
considerably impacts 3-HP production. In contrast, the cytosolic strains (PpHP) showed
the opposite trend, achieving 3-HP yields up to 4 times higher on glucose and glycerol
than on methanol, and up to 10 times higher than on oleic acid. Nevertheless, the cytosolic
strains still outperformed peroxisomal strains in absolute 3-HP production across all carbon
sources. For instance, PpHP strains produced at least 10 times more 3-HP than peroxisomal
strains in BMO, with up to a 200-fold increase in BMG. These findings provide further
evidence that the PTS1-tagged enzymes recombinantly produced in the peroxisomal strains
series are properly localized and do not remain in the cytosol, in contrast to the PpHP strain
series, where recombinant enzymes are exclusively cytosolic.
The substantially lower 3-HP yields obtained with the peroxisome-engineered K.
phaffii strain series compared to its cytosolic counterparts suggest potential metabolic
bottlenecks remain. For instance, increasing the expression ratio of MCR-C to MCR-
N to balance subunit activity has been shown to enhance 3-HP production [ 59,60]. In
addition, the lower 3-HP titers could be attributed to transport limitations across both
the peroxisomal and plasma membranes, particularly when 3-HP is predominantly in its
dissociated form. This situation occurs when 3-HP is produced in the yeast peroxisomal
matrix, which has a pH between 5.8 and 6.0 [61], whereas the pKa value of 3-HP is 4.51 [62].
Overexpressing monocarboxylate transporters anchored to the peroxisomal membrane
might be a promising strategy to enhance 3-HP export to the cytosol. Notably, a recent
study has demonstrated that overexpression genes encoding for lactate transporters in the
plasma membrane of K. phaffii strains harbouring the synthetic b-alanine pathway for 3-HP
synthesis located in the cytosol led to a 42% increase in final product titers [63].
4. Conclusions
In this study, we successfully localized the malonyl-CoA pathway for 3-HP produc-
tion in the peroxisomes of K. phaffii via PTS1 protein tagging. Although 3-HP titers in
peroxisome-engineered strains were considerably low, this system enabled the construc-
tion of a synthetic biosensor to assess in vivo acetyl-CoA and NADPH availability in the
peroxisome. By quantifying 3-HP levels, we effectively sensed relative differences in per-
oxisomal acetyl-CoA availability in cells grown on different carbon sources, including
peroxisome-proliferating and -non-proliferating conditions. Additionally, 3-HP served as
a reporter metabolite to test two distinct strategies aimed at enhancing the peroxisomal
NADPH pool in K. phaffii. Co-expression of the Idp2/Idp3 redox shuttle with cytosolic
NADH kinase (cPos5) was shown to consistently boost 3-HP production regardless of the
substrate, demonstrating the potential of the biosensor to aid peroxisome-based metabolic
engineering strategies in yeast.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at https:
//www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/microorganisms13010046/s1: Supplementary File S1: Detailed
description for the generation of each plasmid and recombinant K. phaffii strain. Table S1: Primer list.
Supplementary File S2: Raw data from the 24-deep-well plate cultivations.
Author Contributions: A.F., J.A. and P .F. contributed to study conception, experimental design,
and data interpretation. A.F. was also involved in all strain construction and testing procedures.
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 13 of 15
S.À.-C. primarily conducted plasmid and strain construction. E.V .-P . performed HPLC-MS analyses
of culture supernatants and metabolite quantification. A.F., S.À.-C. and E.V .-P . conducted cultivation
and screening of all strains. A.F. and S.À.-C. drafted the manuscript, with contributions from E.V .-P .,
P .F. and J.A. to the final version. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This work was funded by project PID2019-104666GB-I00 from the Spanish Ministry of
Science and Innovation and 2021-SGR00143- from the Agència de Gestió d’Ajuts Universitaris i de
Recerca (AGAUR) of the Catalan Government. A.F.’s PhD scholarship was funded with an FPU grant
(FPU17/05434) from the Spanish Ministry of Science. S.À.-C. was supported with an FI scholarship
(2021FI_B_00742) from AGAUR. E.V .-P .’s scholarship was funded with an FI SDUR grant (2021 FISDU
00399) from AGAUR.
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in this study are included in the
article/Supplementary Material. Further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
References
1. Faber, K.N.; Elgersma, Y.; Heyman, J.A.; Koller, A.; Lüers, G.H.; Nuttley, W.M.; Terlecky, S.R.; Wenzel, T.J.; Subramani, S. Use of
Pichia pastoris as a model eukaryotic system. Peroxisome biogenesis. Methods Mol. Biol. 1998, 103, 121–147. [PubMed]
2. Bernauer, L.; Radkohl, A.; Lehmayer, L.G.K.; Emmerstorfer-Augustin, A. Komagataella phaffii as emerging model organism in
fundamental research. Front. Microbiol. 2021, 11, 607028. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Roggenkamp, R.; Sahm, H.; Hinkelmann, W.; Wagner, F. Alcohol oxidase and catalase in peroxisomes of methanol-grownCandida
boidinii. Eur. J. Biochem. 1975, 59, 231–236. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. van Roermund, C.W.T.; Waterham, H.R.; Ijlst, L.; Wanders, R.J.A. Fatty acid metabolism inSaccharomyces cerevisiae. Cell. Mol. Life
Sci. 2003, 60, 1838–1851. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Elgersma, Y.; van Roermund, C.W.T.; Wanders, R.J.A.; Tabak, H.F. Peroxisomal and mitochondrial carnitine acetyltransferases of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae are encoded by a single gene. EMBO J. 1995, 14, 3472–3479. [CrossRef]
6. van Roermund, C.W.T.; Elgersma, Y.; Singh, N.; Wanders, R.J.A.; Tabak, H.F. The membrane of peroxisomes inSaccharomyces
cerevisiae is impermeable to NAD(H) and acetyl-CoA under in vivo conditions. EMBO J. 1995, 14, 3480–3486. [CrossRef]
7. Kunze, M.; Pracharoenwattana, I.; Smith, S.M.; Hartig, A. A central role for the peroxisomal membrane in glyoxylate cycle
function. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 2006, 1763, 1441–1452. [CrossRef]
8. Hammer, S.K.; Avalos, J.L. Harnessing yeast organelles for metabolic engineering. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2017, 13, 823–832. [CrossRef]
9. Avalos, J.L.; Fink, G.R.; Stephanopoulos, G. Compartmentalization of metabolic pathways in yeast mitochondria improves the
production of branched-chain alcohols. Nat. Biotechnol. 2013, 31, 335–341. [CrossRef]
10. Baker, J.J.; Shi, J.; Wang, S.; Mujica, E.M.; Bianco, S.; Capponi, S.; Dueber, J.E. ML-enhanced peroxisome capacity enables
compartmentalization of multienzyme pathway. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2024. Erratum in Nat. Chem. Biol. 2024. [CrossRef]
11. Song, S.; Ye, C.; Jin, Y.; Dai, H.; Hu, J.; Lian, J.; Pan, R. Peroxisome-based metabolic engineering for biomanufacturing and
agriculture. Trends Biotechnol. 2024, 42, 1161–1176. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Yin, M.Q.; Xu, K.; Luan, T.; Kang, X.L.; Yang, X.Y.; Li, H.X.; Hou, Y.H.; Zhao, J.Z.; Bao, X.M. Metabolic engineering for
compartmentalized biosynthesis of the valuable compounds in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microbiol. Res. 2024, 286, 127815.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Wang, Z.; Su, C.; Zhang, Y.; Shangguan, S.; Wang, R.; Su, J. Key enzymes involved in the utilization of fatty acids bySaccharomyces
cerevisiae: A Review. Front. Microbiol. 2024, 14, 1294182. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Poirier, Y.; Erard, N.; Petétot, J.M.C. Synthesis of polyhydroxyalkanoate in the peroxisome of Pichia pastoris. FEMS Microbiol. Lett.
2002, 207, 97–102. [CrossRef]
15. Lee, P .C.; Yoon, Y.G.; Schmidt-Dannert, C. Investigation of cellular targeting of carotenoid pathway enzymes inPichia pastoris.
J. Biotechnol. 2009, 140, 227–233. [CrossRef]
16. Bhataya, A.; Schmidt-Dannert, C.; Lee, P .C. Metabolic engineering ofPichia pastoris X-33 for lycopene production. Process Biochem.
2009, 44, 1095–1102. [CrossRef]
17. Ye, C.; Hong, H.; Gao, J.; Li, M.; Gou, Y.; Gao, D.; Dong, C.; Huang, L.; Xu, Z.; Lian, J. Characterization and engineering of
peroxisome targeting sequences for compartmentalization engineering in Pichia pastoris. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2024, 121, 2091–2105.
[CrossRef]
18. Liu, H.; Chen, S.L.; Xu, J.Z.; Zhang, W.G. Dual regulation of cytoplasm and peroxisomes for improved A-farnesene production in
recombinant Pichia pastoris. ACS Synth. Biol. 2021, 10, 1563–1573. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 14 of 15
19. Gassler, T.; Sauer, M.; Gasser, B.; Egermeier, M.; Troyer, C.; Causon, T.; Hann, S.; Mattanovich, D.; Steiger, M.G. The industrial
yeast Pichia pastoris is converted from a heterotroph into an autotroph capable of growth on CO 2. Nat. Biotechnol. 2020, 38,
210–216. [CrossRef]
20. Baumschabl, M.; Ata, O.; Mitic, B.M.; Lutz, L.; Gassler, T.; Troyer, C.; Hann, S.; Mattanovich, D. Conversion of CO2 into organic
acids by engineered autotrophic yeast. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2022, 119, e2211827119. [CrossRef]
21. Gao, L.; Hou, R.; Cai, P .; Yao, L.; Wu, X.; Li, Y.; Zhang, L.; Zhou, Y.J. Engineering yeast peroxisomes forα-bisabolene production
from sole methanol with the aid of proteomic analysis. JACS Au 2024, 4, 2474–2483. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Zhao, B.; Li, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Pan, M.; Zhao, G.; Guo, Y. Low-carbon and overproduction of cordycepin from methanol using
engineered Pichia pastoris cell factory. Bioresour. Technol. 2024, 413, 131446. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Veenhuis, M.; Van Dijken, J.P .; Harder, W. The significance of peroxisomes in the metabolism of one-carbon compounds in yeasts.
Adv. Microb. Physiol. 1983, 24, 1–82. [PubMed]
24. van der Klei, I.J.; Harder, W.; Veenhuis, M. Biosynthesis and assembly of alcohol oxidase, a peroxisomal matrix protein in
methylotrophic yeasts: A review. Yeast 1991, 7, 195–209. [CrossRef]
25. de Hoop, M.J.; Ab, G. Import of proteins into peroxisomes and other microbodies. Biochem. J. 1992, 286, 657–669. [CrossRef]
26. Waterham, H.R.; Cregg, J.M. Peroxisome biogenesis. BioEssays 1996, 19, 57–66. [CrossRef]
27. Kulagina, N.; Besseau, S.; Papon, N.; Courdavault, V . Peroxisomes: A new hub for metabolic engineering in yeast.Front. Bioeng.
Biotechnol. 2021, 9, 659431. [CrossRef]
28. Antonenkov, V .D.; Hiltunen, J.K. Transfer of metabolites across the peroxisomal membrane.Biochim. Biophys. Acta. Mol. Basis. Dis.
2012, 1822, 1374–1386. [CrossRef]
29. Palmieri, L.; Rottensteiner, H.; Girzalsky, W.; Scarcia, P .; Palmieri, F.; Erdmann, R. Identification and functional reconstitution of
the yeast peroxisomal adenine nucleotide transporter. EMBO J. 2001, 20, 5049–5059. [CrossRef]
30. Antonenkov, V .D.; Sormunen, R.T.; Hiltunen, J.K. The rat liver peroxisomal membrane forms a permeability barrier for cofactors
but not for small metabolites in vitro. J. Cell Sci. 2004, 117, 5633–5642. [CrossRef]
31. Visser, W.F.; van Roermund, C.W.T.; Ijlst, L.; Waterham, H.R.; Wanders, R.J.A. Metabolite transport across the peroxisomal
membrane. Biochem. J. 2007, 401, 365–375. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Al-Saryi, N.A.; Al-Hejjaj, M.Y.; van Roermund, C.W.T.; Hulmes, G.E.; Ekal, L.; Payton, C.; Wanders, R.J.A.; Hettema, E.H. Two
NAD-linked redox shuttles maintain the peroxisomal redox balance in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 11868. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
33. van Roermund, C.W.T.; Hettema, E.H.; Kal, A.J.; van Den Berg, M.; Tabak, H.F.; Wanders, R.J.A. Peroxisomal β-oxidation of
polyunsaturated fatty acids in Saccharomyces cerevisiae: Isocitrate dehydrogenase provides NADPH for reduction of double bonds
at even positions. EMBO J. 1998, 17, 677–687. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Henke, B.; Girzalsky, W.; Berteaux-Lecellier, V .; Erdmann, R. IDP3 encodes a peroxisomal NADP-dependent isocitrate dehydroge-
nase required for the β-oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids. J. Biol. Chem. 1998, 273, 3702–3711. [CrossRef]
35. Liu, G.S.; Li, T.; Zhou, W.; Jiang, M.; Tao, X.Y.; Liu, M.; Zhao, M.; Ren, Y.H.; Gao, B.; Wang, F.Q.; et al. The yeast peroxisome:
A dynamic storage depot and subcellular factory for squalene overproduction. Metab. Eng. 2020, 57, 151–161. [CrossRef]
36. Zhai, X.; Gao, J.; Li, Y.; Grininger, M.; Zhou, Y.J. Peroxisomal metabolic coupling improves fatty alcohol production from sole
methanol in yeast. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2023, 120, e2220816120. [CrossRef]
37. Rathnasingh, C.; Raj, S.M.; Lee, Y.; Catherine, C.; Ashok, S.; Park, S. Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid via malonyl-CoA
pathway using recombinant Escherichia coli strains. J. Biotechnol. 2012, 157, 633–640. [CrossRef]
38. Douma, A.C.; Veenhuis, M.; Sulter, G.J.; Waterham, H.R.; Verheyden, K.; Mannaerts, G.P .; Harder, W. Permeability properties of
peroxisomal membranes from yeasts. Arch. Microbiol. 1990, 153, 490–495. [CrossRef]
39. DeLoache, W.C.; Russ, Z.N.; Dueber, J.E. Towards repurposing the yeast peroxisome for compartmentalizing heterologous
metabolic pathways. Nat. Commun. 2016, 7, 11152. [CrossRef]
40. Chen, L.; Zhang, J.; Chen, W.N. Engineering the Saccharomyces cerevisiae β-oxidation pathway to increase medium chain fatty acid
production as potential biofuel. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e84853. [CrossRef]
41. Sheng, J.; Stevens, J.; Feng, X. Pathway compartmentalization in peroxisome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to produce versatile
medium chain fatty alcohols. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 26884. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Fina, A.; Brêda, G.C.; Pérez-Trujillo, M.; Freire, D.M.G.; Almeida, R.V .; Albiol, J.; Ferrer, P . Benchmarking recombinantPichia
pastoris for 3-hydroxypropionic acid production from glycerol. Microb. Biotechnol. 2021, 14, 1671–1682. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Sears, I.B.; O’connor, J.; Rossanese, O.W.; Glick, B.S. A versatile set of vectors for constitutive and regulated gene expression in
Pichia pastoris. Yeast 1998, 14, 783–790. [CrossRef]
44. Prielhofer, R.; Barrero, J.J.; Steuer, S.; Gassler, T.; Zahrl, R.; Baumann, K.; Sauer, M.; Mattanovich, D.; Gasser, B.; Marx, H.
GoldenPiCS: A Golden Gate-derived modular cloning system for applied synthetic biology in the yeast Pichia pastoris. BMC Syst.
Biol. 2017, 11, 123. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2025, 13, 46 15 of 15
45. Tomàs-Gamisans, M.; Andrade, C.C.P .; Maresca, F.; Monforte, S.; Ferrer, P .; Albiol, J. Redox engineering by ectopic overexpression
of NADH kinase in recombinant Pichia pastoris (Komagataella phaffii): Impact on cell physiology and recombinant production of
secreted proteins. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2020, 86, e02038-19. [CrossRef]
46. De Schutter, K.; Lin, Y.C.; Tiels, P .; Van Hecke, A.; Glinka, S.; Weber-Lehmann, J.; Rouz é, P .; Van De Peer, Y.; Callewaert, N.
Genome sequence of the recombinant protein production host Pichia pastoris. Nat. Biotechnol. 2009, 27, 561–566. [CrossRef]
47. Nielsen, J. Synthetic biology for engineering acetyl coenzyme A metabolism in yeast. mBio 2014, 5, e02153. [CrossRef]
48. van Roermund, C.W.T.; Ijlst, L.; Majczak, W.; Waterham, H.R.; Folkerts, H.; Wanders, R.J.A.; Hellingwerf, K.J. Peroxisomal fatty
acid uptake mechanism in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. J. Biol. Chem. 2012, 287, 20144–20153. [CrossRef]
49. Prielhofer, R.; Cartwright, S.P .; Graf, A.B.; Valli, M.; Bill, R.M.; Mattanovich, D.; Gasser, B.Pichia pastoris regulates its gene-specific
response to different carbon sources at the transcriptional, rather than the translational, level. BMC Genomics 2015, 16, 167.
[CrossRef]
50. Zhou, Y.J.; Buijs, N.A.; Zhu, Z.; G ómez, D.O.; Boonsombuti, A.; Siewers, V .; Nielsen, J. Harnessing yeast peroxisomes for
biosynthesis of fatty-acid-derived biofuels and chemicals with relieved side-pathway competition. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138,
15368–15377. [CrossRef]
51. Yocum, H.C.; Bassett, S.; Da Silvia, N.A. Enhanced production of acetyl-CoA-based products via peroxisomal surface display in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2022, 119, e2214941119. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Lin, P .; Fu, Z.; Liu, X.; Liu, C.; Bai, Z.; Yang, Y.; Li, Y. Direct utilization of peroxisomal acetyl-CoA for the synthesis of polyketide
compounds in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. ACS Synth. Biol. 2023, 12, 1599–1607. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Liang, S.; Wang, B.; Pan, L.; Ye, Y.; He, M.; Han, S.; Zheng, S.; Wang, X.; Lin, Y. Comprehensive structural annotation ofPichia
pastoris transcriptome and the response to various carbon sources using deep paired-end RNA sequencing. BMC Genomics 2012,
13, 738. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Waterham, H.R.; Digan, M.E.; Koutz, P .J.; Lair, S.V .; Cregg, J.M.; Bernardi, A. Isolation of thePichia pastoris glyceraldehyde-3-
phosphate dehydrogenase gene and regulation and use of its promoter. Gene 1997, 186, 37–44. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Tomàs-Gamisans, M.; Ferrer, P .; Albiol, J. Fine-tuning the P . pastorisiMT1026 genome-scale metabolic model for improved
prediction of growth on methanol or glycerol as sole carbon sources. Microb. Biotechnol. 2018, 11, 224–237. [CrossRef]
56. Jordà, J.; Jouhten, P .; Cámara, E.; Maaheimo, H.; Albiol, J.; Ferrer, P . Metabolic flux profiling of recombinant protein secreting
Pichia pastoris growing on glucose:methanol mixtures. Microb. Cell Fact. 2012, 11, 57. [CrossRef]
57. Hynes, M.J.; Murray, S.L. ATP-citrate lyase is required for production of cytosolic acetyl coenzyme A and development in
Aspergillus nidulans. Eukaryot. Cell 2010, 9, 1039–1048. [CrossRef]
58. Woods, A.; Mundays, M.R.; Scott, J.; Yango, X.; Carlson, M.; Carlingn, D. Yeast SNF1 is functionally related to mammalian
AMP-activated protein kinase and regulates acetyl-CoA carboxylase in vivo. J. Biol. Chem. 1994, 269, 19509–19515. [CrossRef]
59. Takayama, S.; Ozaki, A.; Konishi, R.; Otomo, C.; Kishida, M.; Hirata, Y.; Matsumoto, T.; Tanaka, T.; Kondo, A. Enhancing
3-hydroxypropionic acid production in combination with sugar supply engineering by cell surface-display and metabolic
engineering of Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Microb. Cell Fact. 2018, 17, 176. [CrossRef]
60. Fina, A.; Heux, S.; Albiol, J.; Ferrer, P . Combining metabolic engineering and multiplexed screening methods for 3-hydroxyprionic
acid production in Pichia pastoris. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2022, 10, 942304.
61. Nicolay, K.; Veenhuis, M.; Douma, A.C.; Harder, W. A31P NMR study of the internal pH of yeast peroxisomes. Arch. Microbiol.
1987, 147, 37–41. [CrossRef]
62. Budavari, S. The Merck Index: An Encyclopedia of Chemicals, Drugs, and Biologicals, 11th ed.; Merck: Rahway, NJ, USA, 1989.
63. Àvila-Cabré, S.; Albiol, J.; Ferrer, P . Leveraging lactate transporters for superior 3-hydroxypropionic (3-HP) acid production from
methanol in Komagataella phaffii. J. Biol. Eng. 2024, preprint under review. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.