Methylmalonyl-coA epimerase deﬁciency: A new case, with an acute
metabolic presentation and an intronic splicing mutation in the
MCEE gene
Paula J. Watersa,⁎,1, Fanny Thuriota,1, Joe T.R. Clarkea,1, Serge Gravela,1, David Watkinsb,2,
David S. Rosenblattb,2,S é b a s t i e nL é v e s q u ea,1
a Medical Genetics Service, Department of Pediatrics, Centre hospitalier universitaire de Sherbrooke (CHUS) and University of Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada
b Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
abstractarticle info
Article history:
Received 11 August 2016
Received in revised form 2 September 2016
Accepted 3 September 2016
Available online 24 September 2016
Methylmalonyl-coA epimerase (MCE) follows propionyl-coA carboxylase and precedes methylmalonyl-coA mu-
tase in the pathway converting propionyl-coA to succinyl-coA. MCE deﬁciency has previously been described in
six patients, one presenting with metabolic acidosis, the others with nonspeciﬁc neurological symptoms or
asymptomatic. The clinical signiﬁcance and biochemical characteristics of this rare condition have been incom-
pletely deﬁned. We now describe a patient who presented acutely at 5 years of age with vomiting, dehydration,
confusion, severe metabolic acidosis and mild hyperammonemia. At presentation, organic acid proﬁles were
dominated by increased ketones and 3-hydroxypropionate, with moderately elevated methylcitrate and
propionylglycine, and acylcarnitine proﬁles showed marked C3 (propionylcarnitine) elevation with normal
C4DC (methylmalonylcarnitine + succinylcarnitine). Propionic acidemia was initially suspected, but it was sub-
sequently noted that methylmalonic acid was mildly but persistently elevated in urine, and clearly elevated in
plasma and cerebrospinalﬂuid. The overall biochemical proﬁle prompted consideration of MCE deﬁciency. Stud-
ies on culturedﬁbroblasts showed moderately decreased propionate incorporation. Complementation analysis
permitted assignment to theMCEE group. A heterozygous p.Arg47Ter (p.R47*) mutation in theMCEE gene was
identiﬁed by sequencing of exons, and RNA studies identiﬁed a novel intronic splicing mutation, c.379-
644A N G, conﬁrming the diagnosis of MCE deﬁciency. Following the initial severe presentation, development
has been normal and the clinical course over the subsequent six years has remained relatively uneventful on
an essentially normal diet. This report contributes to the clinical and biochemical characterisation of this rare dis-
order, while highlighting potential causes of under-diagnosis or of diagnostic confusion.
© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Keywords:
Methylmalonyl-coA epimerase
Methylmalonyl-coA racemase
Methylmalonic aciduria
Propionic aciduria
Complementation analysis
Intronic mutation
Splicing mutation
1. Introduction
Metabolism of propionyl-coA to succinyl-coA involves three succes-
sive enzymatic reactions (Fig. 1). Inherited defects in the enzymes
catalysing theﬁrst and third steps of this pathway, and in the metabo-
lism of their respective cofactors, cause well-characterised, clinically
signiﬁcant diseases[1–3]. In contrast, the physiological signiﬁcance of
the second enzymatic step, catalysed by methylmalonyl-coA epimerase
(MCE; also known as methylmalonyl-coA racemase), has remained less
clear. There is evidence that this reaction may be partially bypassed
in vivo, by a shunt pathway proceedingvia free methylmalonic acid
[4–5].
MCE deﬁciency wasﬁrst identiﬁed in 2006. Four cases, from three
families, have been described in case reports. One patient presented
with acute metabolic decompensation; an older sibling had develop-
mental delay attributable to co-existing hydrocephalus, but was other-
wise asymptomatic [5]. Two unrelated patients had progressive
neurological symptoms; however, each was also affected by a second
inherited disorder, sepiapterin reductase deﬁciency, which fully ex-
plained the clinical course [6–8]. All four patients presented with
methylmalonic aciduria which was persistent but usually mild or
Molecular Genetics and Metabolism Reports 9 (2016) 19–24
Abbreviations: MCE, methylmalonyl-coA epimerase; MCEE, gene encoding
methylmalonyl-coA epimerase; MMA, methylmalonic acid or methylmalonate; CSF, cere-
brospinal ﬂuid; PCC, propionyl-coA carboxylase; MUT, methylmalonyl-coA mutase; C3,
C3, (=propionyl) carnitine; C4DC, C4dicarboxyl (=methylmalonyl + succinyl) carnitine.
⁎ Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses:Paula.J.Waters@USherbrooke.ca(P.J. Waters),
Fanny.Thuriot@USherbrooke.ca(F. Thuriot),joeclarke@sympatico.ca(J.T.R. Clarke),
Serge.Gravel@USherbrooke.ca(S. Gravel),david.watkins@mcgill.ca(D. Watkins),
david.rosenblatt@mcgill.ca(D.S. Rosenblatt),Sebastien.A.Levesque@USherbrooke.ca
(S. Lévesque).
1 Postal address: Room 1428, Medical Genetics Service, CHUS-Fleurimont, 3001 12th
Avenue North, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada J1H 5N4.
2 Postal address: Research Institute, McGill University Health Centre, 1001 Décarie
Boulevard, Room EM0-2220, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H4A 3J1.
Contents lists available atScienceDirect
Molecular Genetics and Metabolism Reports
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ymgmr
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymgmr.2016.09.001
2214-4269/© 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
moderate. Two additional cases were identiﬁed by sequencing of the
MCEE gene in ﬁbroblasts banked from over 200 patients with
methylmalonic aciduria of unknown cause[9]. One of these two had
non-speciﬁc neurological symptoms; the other was asymptomatic. Of
the six cases reported overall,ﬁve were homozygous for a single non-
sense mutation, (c.139CN T, p.Arg47Ter, p.R47*) inMCEE, implying a
complete loss of MCE activity, and showed moderately decreased propi-
onate incorporation in culturedﬁbroblasts. The clinical signiﬁcance of
this rare disorder requires clariﬁcation.
We describe a new case of MCE deﬁciency, which contributes to the
clinical, biochemical and molecular characterisation of this condition.
2. Patient description
The proband is a French-Canadian female, born at term from an un-
complicated pregnancy. Parents were not consanguineous and the fam-
ily history was unremarkable. At the age of 5 years, following a
previously unremarkable medical history, she presented acutely with
vomiting, dehydration, confusion and visual hallucination. There was
severe metabolic acidosis with increased anion gap (pH = 6.96, bicar-
bonate 3.5 mmol/L and pCO2 15.9 mm Hg, anion gap 25.5 mmol/L), ac-
companied by mild hyperammonemia (107μmol/L; ref.b 50), elevated
creatine kinase (from 498 IU/L initially up to 3062 IU/L, ref.b 150), and
strong ketosis and ketonuria. There was no hyperlactatemia.
Biochemical testing at this time suggested a disorder in the pathway
of propionyl-coA metabolism, as described below inSection 3.
Following the initial acute episode, she was treated with carnitine
supplementation (100 mg/kg/day) and a protein restricted diet. Subse-
quently, the protein intake was gradually increased to a near-normal
diet, only avoiding excessive protein intake. During intercurrent ill-
nesses, the patient was treated with protein restriction, increased calo-
ric intake and other basic measures. Now at age 11 years, growth and
development are completely normal. There have been no further epi-
sodes of signiﬁcant metabolic acidosis. However, at the age of 9 years,
she manifested one episode of acute and transient diplopia, which oc-
curred in the context of a fever and lasted about a week.
3. Biochemical investigations and results
3.1. Metabolite proﬁles in bodyﬂuids
Organic acid proﬁles were analysed by gas chromatography–mass
spectrometry following trimethylsilyl derivatisation, using selective
ion monitoring for a panel of 58 metabolites. The related method for
dedicated quantitation of methylmalonic acid in serum included stable
isotope dilution. Serum acylcarnitine proﬁles were analysed by tandem
mass spectrometry with multiple reaction monitoring, following
derivatisation by butylation.
During the patient's acute presentation, the organic acid proﬁles in
urine, serum and cerebrospinalﬂuid (CSF) were dominated by massive
elevations of ketones. The urine proﬁle was complex, including marked
elevations of many metabolites considered secondary to the acute cata-
bolic state. The serum and CSF proﬁles were less complex.Table 1pre-
sents the results for methylmalonic acid (MMA) and for several by-
products of propionyl-coA, namely methylcitric acid, propionylglycine
and 3-hydroxypropionic acid (tiglylglycine was not analysed as part of
the organic acid proﬁle) which were observed in samples collected dur-
ing the acute episode. During subsequent follow-up, with the patient in
a stable condition, the organic acid proﬁles were always unremarkable
except for elevations of MMA, methylcitric acid and 3-
hydroxypropionic acid. The results obtained over a six-year period of
follow-up are also summarised inTable 1.
Acylglycine analysis of the two most recent urine samples, using a
sensitive LC–MS/MS method, showed unremarkable proﬁles, including
essentially normal results for propionylglycine and tiglylglycine (data
not shown).
The serum acylcarnitine proﬁle during the acute episode showed a
marked elevation of C3 (propionyl) carnitine: 21.6μmol/L (reference
range b 0.58). C5:1 carnitine, representing the sum of tiglylcarnitine
and methylcrotonylcarnitine, was moderately elevated: 0.19μmol/L
(ref. b 0.05); this was presumed to reﬂect increased tiglylcarnitine.
C4-OH carnitine (the sum of 3-hydroxybutyrylcarnitine and 3-
hydroxyisobutyrylcarnitine) was elevated: 2.13μ
mol/L (ref.b 0.19),
reﬂecting the observed ketosis. The acute proﬁle showed some other
mild elevations, considered secondary to the catabolic state. However,
C4DC carnitine, representing the sum of methylmalonylcarnitine and
succinylcarnitine, was well within reference range: 0.05 μmol/L
(ref. b 0.19). During the six-year follow-up, seven further serum
acylcarnitine proﬁles showed a persistent moderate elevation of C3 car-
nitine, ranging from 1.53 to 5.82μmol/L (median, 3.96; ref.b 0.58). The
acylcarnitine proﬁles during follow-up were otherwise unremarkable:
there was sometimes a mild elevation of free carnitine, attributable to
Fig. 1.Metabolism of propionyl-coA to succinyl-coA. The solid arrows depict known direct
enzymatic conversions. The hatched arrows represent a proposed alternative shunt
pathway. Enzyme Commission numbers are as follows: PCC, EC 6.4.1.3; MCE, EC
5.1.99.1; MUT, EC 5.4.99.2.
Table 1
Concentrations of organic acids relevant to metabolism of propionyl-coA and
methylmalonyl-coA, in urine, serum and cerebrospinalﬂuid, at the time of acute presen-
tation and during long-term follow-up.
During
the
acute
episode
During follow-up Reference
range:
Median Observed
range
Upper
limit
Organic acids in urine (mmol/mol creatinine)
Methylmalonate 53 78 47 –151 10
Methylcitrate 83 29 15 –61 11
3-hydroxypropionate 7310 150 26 –418 59
Propionylglycine 24 0 0 0
Organic acids in serum (μmol/L)
Methylmalonate 48 9 na 1
Methylcitrate 6 1 na 2
3-hydroxypropionate 498 76 na 11
Propionylglycine 0 0 na 0
Organic acids in CSF (μmol/L)
Methylmalonate 42 nd na 0
Methylcitrate 32 nd na 0
3-hydroxypropionate 114 nd na 1
Propionylglycine 0 nd na 0
Methylmalonate in serum, dedicated
assay (μmol/L) nd 5.16 3.63 –8.35 0.50
CSF, cerebrospinalﬂuid; nd, not determined; na, not applicable. Observed ranges and me-
dian values during follow-up are derived from 9 independent analyses of the urine organic
acid proﬁle and 4 independent assays of methylmalonic acid in serum.
20 P.J. Waters et al. / Molecular Genetics and Metabolism Reports 9 (2016) 19–24
dietary supplementation, and occasional mild elevations of a few other
acylcarnitines considered non-speciﬁc and non-signiﬁcant. C5:1 carni-
tine was persistently within reference range during follow-up. Notably,
C4DC carnitine always remained within reference range.
Plasma total homocysteine and serum cobalamin were not mea-
sured at the time of the acute episode. During follow-up, both were
within reference range.
3.2. Interpretation and differential diagnosis
The initial impression, at the time of the patient's acute presentation,
was of a likely propionic acidemia,i.e. ap r i m a r yd eﬁciency of propionyl-
coA carboxylase (PCC). This working diagnosis was based chieﬂyo nt h e
ﬁrst urine organic acid proﬁle and theﬁrst serum acylcarnitine proﬁle,
and the clinical presentation. The serum acylcarnitine proﬁle, with sub-
stantial elevation of C3 carnitine, moderate elevation of C5:1 carnitine
and normal C4DC carnitine, was typical of proﬁles seen in propionic
acidemia patients; whereas patients with severe methylmalonic
acidemia due to defects in methylmalonyl-coA mutase often show ele-
vation of C4DC, reﬂecting increased methylmalonylcarnitine, particular-
ly during episodes of acute decompensation.
In urine, the propionyl-coA metabolites methylcitric acid,
propionylglycine and 3-hydroxypropionic acid were all clearly elevated.
Although there was also a mild increase of methylmalonic acid (MMA)
in urine, its fold-elevation was less than that of any of the propionyl-coA
metabolites. While one would not ap r i o r iexpect patients with
propionic acidemia to show any elevation of MMA in urine, within the
context of an acute clinical state and an overall complex proﬁle, the sig-
niﬁcance of such a mild elevation of MMA was not immediately obvious.
Such mild elevations of MMA in urine are often seen as secondaryﬁnd-
ings in various contexts including disturbances of gastro-intestinal
structure or function and states of nutritional deﬁciency, including de-
creased intake of vitamin B12 (cobalamin)[10]. It is also worth noting,
however, that 3-hydroxypropionic acid, which was much more dramat-
ically elevated than the other propionyl-coA metabolites, can also be el-
evated due to several causes unrelated to inherited metabolic disorders,
including production by gut bacteria[10].
In the serum and CSF samples collected during the acute episode,
however, the overall proﬁles were less complex than in urine and the
relative elevations of MMA were more striking than in the urine; the po-
tential diagnostic signiﬁcance of the MMA therefore could not be readily
dismissed.
During follow-up, urine MMA remained persistently elevated, but
the elevations were always relatively mild. Methylcitric acid likewise
remained persistently but mildly elevated. The same was true of 3-
hydroxypropionic acid, in contrast to its striking elevation during the
initial episode of acute decompensation. Propionylglycine was never
again detectable in urine after the initial episode. In serum, MMA was
persistently elevated. The normal results for serum cobalamin and
total homocysteine argued against a nutritional deﬁciency of vitamin
B12 (cobalamin) and also against most defects of cobalamin uptake,
transport or metabolism.
Considering together all the biochemicalﬁndings at the time of
acute decompensation and during long-term follow-up, the overall bio-
chemical proﬁle was not typical of a defect acting at the level of PCC;
either a primary propionic acidemia or a deﬁciency of multiple carbox-
ylases due to defective biotin metabolism. Nor, however, was it typical
of a disorder at the level of methylmalonyl-coA mutase (MUT); either
a primary deﬁciency of this enzyme or a defect related to its cofactor, co-
balamin. While there was clearly evidence implying a disorder acting
within the propionyl-coA metabolic pathway (Fig. 1), the overall im-
pression was of an“intermediate” biochemical phenotype perhaps
reﬂecting a block at the intervening step between PCC and MUT. We
thus came to suspect a deﬁciency of methylmalonyl-coA epimerase
(MCE) as the most likely underlying cause.
As there was no suitable MCE enzyme assay available for direct ap-
plication to patient cells, two lines of investigation were pursued: mo-
lecular analysis of theMCEE gene and studies on culturedﬁbroblasts.
The three aims of theﬁbroblast studies were: to seek conﬁrmation of di-
minished capacity forﬂux through the propionyl-coA metabolic path-
way; to test the hypothesis of primary MCE deﬁciency; and to rule out
the possibility of diminished activity of PCC or MUT.
3.3. Studies on culturedﬁbroblasts
Assay of PCC enzymatic activity on the patient'sﬁbroblasts gave re-
sults within the reference range: 811 pmol/min/mg protein (control
mean 1123, range 295–1837). Moreover, no mutations were detected
in thePCCA or PCCB genes encoding the subunits of PCC. Activities of
other biotin-dependent enzymes, pyruvate carboxylase and 3-
methylcrotonyl-coA carboxylase, were also normal inﬁbroblasts (data
not shown). The results of these tests (performed in the laboratory of
Dr. M. Ugarte, Universidad Autonoma de Madrid) effectively ruled out
propionic acidemia and related disorders of biotin metabolism.
The synthesis of cobalamin coenzyme derivatives from [57Co]CNCbl
(assay method described in [11]) yielded results within reference
ranges. Synthesis of adenosylcobalamin by the patient'sﬁbroblasts
was 9.4% of total (control mean, 15.3%, standard deviation 4.2), while
synthesis of methylcobalamin was 60.0% (control mean 58.0%, SD 6.7).
Incorporation of [14C]propionate[11] was somewhat lower than con-
trol values, and did not respond to the presence of hydroxycobalamin in
the culture medium. In absence of hydroxycobalamin, the patient's cells
incorporated 4.1 nmol propionate/mg protein/18 h (control mean 10.8,
SD 3.7); in presence of hydroxycobalamin, the patient's cells incorporated
3.3 nmol propionate/mg protein/18 h (control mean 10.9, SD 3.5).
The moderately decreased propionate incorporation was conﬁrmed
in two successive experiments, in which complementation studies[11]
were also performed. Results are shown inTable 2.
Fusion of culturedﬁbroblasts from the patient with cells of themut,
cblA and cblB complementation classes respectively brought about an
increase in propionate incorporation, indicating that the patient did
not belong to any of those classes. However, fusion of cells from the
patient with cells from each of two known patients in theMCEE comple-
mentation class did not cause any increase in propionate incorporation.
Table 2
Results of cellular complementation analysis.
Cell lines
included
in assay
Incorporation of propionate (nmol/mg protein/18 h):
Cell line prior to
complementation
Complementation
without cell fusion
(− PEG)
Complementation
with cell fusion
(+ PEG)
Experiment 1:
Patient alone 3.3 na na
cblA 1.3 2.7 7.1
cblB 0.9 2.9 11.1
mut (1) 0.8 2.7 10.3
mut (2) 1.0 3.2 7.0
Experiment 2:
Patient alone 4.2 na na
mut (1) 0.6 2.1 5.6
MCEE (1) 4.3 4.6 4.1
MCEE (2) 2.9 3.2 2.9
MCEE (1) +MCEE (2)
a (as above) 2.4 2.2
Equal numbers ofﬁbroblasts from the patient being tested andﬁbroblasts from various
known complementation classes were mixed and fused by exposure to 40% (w/v) poly-
ethylene glycol (PEG). Propionate incorporation was compared in parallel fused and un-
fused cultures. Incorporation is increased in mixed fused cultures from different
complementation classes compared to parallel mixed unfused cultures. Cells from a
given patient complement cells from every complementation class except the class that
the patient belongs to. TheMCEE cell lines included in Experiment 2 are from two previ-
ously reported patients;MCEE (1) from[6] and MCEE (2) from[5].
aFusion of these two
MCEE cell lines with each other, without inclusion of the Patient cell line, was performed
as an internal control. na, not applicable.
21P.J. Waters et al. / Molecular Genetics and Metabolism Reports 9 (2016) 19–24
This indicated that this patient belongs to theMCEE class, i.e. that she is
deﬁcient in activity of methylmalonyl-coA epimerase, MCE.
4. Molecular investigations ofMCEE and results
Extracted DNA from blood was sequenced to screen for mutations in
the three coding exons and splice site junctions ofMCEE, by the Sanger
method using a 3730XL DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems), at the Mc-
Gill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Center. A heterozygous
variant (c.139CN T, p.Arg47Ter, Refseq NM_032601.3) was found in
exon 2 (Fig. 2). This mutation was previously reported in the homozy-
gous state in several unrelated patients with MCE deﬁciency, as de-
scribed above in the Introduction. Deletion/duplication analysis by
exon array (MitoMet V3.0 oligonucleotide microarray, performed by
BCM Medical Genetics Laboratories) yielded normal results.
We then searched for an intronic sequence variation that could re-
sult in an aberrant splicing of the transcript. Total RNA was extracted
from whole blood and reverse transcribed to cDNA using a standard
protocol (SuperScript® VILO cDNA Synthesis Kit, Life Technologies).
PCR-based ampliﬁcation ofMCEE transcript isoforms was performed,
as previously described, at the RNomics platform of Université de Sher-
brooke [12]. This showed expression of an additional transcript that in-
cluded a 92 bp sequence between exons 2 and 3, compared to control
(Fig. 2). The splicing index of this alternate transcript suggests that its
abundance is equal to that of the wild type transcript. cDNA sequencing
of this alternative transcript conﬁrmed that the additional 92 bp se-
quence mapped to intron 2 (genomic position hg19 chr2: 71,337,897–
71,337,988). This sequence corresponds to a putative 96 bp untranslat-
ed exon in a known spliced EST (CA427623), but missing the last 4 nu-
cleotides at the 3′ end. DNA sequencing of the 3′ end of this putative
untranslated exon showed a heterozygous variation (c.379-644 AN G,
genomic position hg19 ch2: 71,337,896) creating a new consensus
d o n o rs p l i c es i t eG T A A(Fig. 2). All the three alternative reading frames
result in a premature stop codon. This variation was not reported
previously in the dbSNP database. There is no sequencing coverage in
this region for the ExAC or EVS databases to allow an estimation of pop-
ulation frequency.
Sequencing of the mother's DNA revealed that the intronic variation
c.379-644 AN G was maternally inherited. Although DNA from the fa-
ther was not available, the mutation c.139CN T (p.Arg47Ter) was absent
in the mother's DNA, and was thus presumed to be paternally inherited.
5. Discussion
We describe a new patient with deﬁciency of methylmalonyl-coA
epimerase. While several previously reported MCE deﬁciency patients
did not present with an acute metabolic decompensation or with acido-
sis, and the clinical signiﬁcance of this biochemical disorder has
remained unclear, our patient is now the second recognised with an
acute metabolic presentation. MCE deﬁciency should therefore be con-
sidered as a condition with potentially signiﬁcant clinical implications.
Following the initial episode our patient subsequently has not required
aggressive ongoing management to maintain normal development, and
long-term clinical course remains relatively uneventful on a essentially
normal diet. The severity of the initial presentation led us to maintain a
careful approach by treating undercurrent illness with caloric supple-
mentation and protein restriction. While there is very little data avail-
able on similar cases, we advise prudence for clinicians encountering
patients with this disorder.
Five of the six cases described in previously published articles were
homozygous for the nonsense mutation c.139CN T, p.Arg47Ter. Com-
paring the observed propionate incorporation inﬁbroblasts from our
patient with data from thoseﬁve patients, the degree of diminution of
incorporation is similar. The splicing mutation identiﬁed in our patient
is predicted to result in a null mutation, as the incorporation of the
intronic sequence between exon 2 and 3 would result in a premature
stop codon. In accordance with this, results from ourin vitromethod
suggest that the relative abundance of this alternate transcript
Fig. 2.MCEE mutations in the affected patient. The three coding exons are numbered and an additional 96 bp putative untranslated exon is shown between exons 2 and 3.( A )N o r m a l
splicing is shown (in blue). Aberrant splicing (shown in red) is caused by a mutation located 4 bp preceding the 3′ end of the untranslated exon, which creates a strong consensus
splice site resulting in a 92 bp fragment inserted between exons 2 and 3. The positions of the two mutations identiﬁed in the patients are localised by arrows. (B) Gene products: two
abnormal transcripts identiﬁed in the patient. The predicted translation of each is also shown. (C) The mutation p.Arg47Ter was validated by Sanger sequencing. It causes a premature
stop codon. (D) The mutation c.379–644 AN G was validated by Sanger sequencing. It causes an aberrant splicing.
22 P.J. Waters et al. / Molecular Genetics and Metabolism Reports 9 (2016) 19–24
containing the intronic insertion is ~50% of total, with the other allele
likewise accounting for ~50%. We cannot exclude the possibility that
up to 5% of wild type transcript could be produced by the intronic mu-
tation allele, permitting some residual MCE enzyme activity and possi-
bly contributing to a relatively late-onset presentation. However, it is
also important to note that, even in the presence of homozygosity for
an MCEE nonsense mutation, there is some residual propionate incorpo-
ration. This is presumably due to the existence of alternative shunt path-
ways allowing some conversion of propionyl-coA to succinyl-coA in the
situation where there is no MCE activity. This provides a plausible expla-
nation why complete MCE deﬁciency is clinically less severe than the
classic forms of propionic acidemia and methylmalonic acidemia.
The sixth previously reported case of MCE deﬁciency was homozy-
gous for a missense mutation (c.178 AN C,p.K60Q, p.Lys60Gln). In that
case, there was a clear elevation of methylmalonic acid in urine, but ob-
served propionate incorporation inﬁbroblasts was within reference
range. This patient was described as having deterioration of motor func-
tion, ataxia, mild spastic paraplegia and dysarthria[9]. This sequence
variant has been classiﬁed as “pathogenic” in the Clinvar database,
mainly based on that single brief report. However, results ofin silico
analysis are conﬂicting. According to SIFT, it is tolerated, and using
Polyphen 2 it is considered benign, whereas with PROVEAN it is consid-
ered deleterious. Notably, 8 homozygotes are reported in the ExAC da-
tabase (~60,000 individuals) and allele frequency is 1.5% in south
Asians. This population-based data tends to argue against pathogenicity,
or at least to imply that this mutation would give rise to a very mild con-
dition with normal survival and reproduction rate. Nonetheless, one
cannot exclude the possibility that partial MCE deﬁciency could be a fac-
tor putting individuals at increased risk of neurologic disease, but with
incomplete penetrance.
There is currently no MCE enzyme assay available which would be
directly applicable to human cells in the clinical setting. Direct assays
of the recombinant human enzyme and of recombinant MCE enzymes
from other species have been described[13–15], providing a possible
option forin vitroexpression analysis of missense mutant MCE proteins
if required, although these methods require the isolation of partially pu-
riﬁed proteins.
Our patient is theﬁrst to be described who is compound heterozy-
gous for two different mutations inMCEE rather than homozygous for
a single mutation. In the previously reported study of a series of cell
lines from patients with methylmalonic aciduria[9], there were two in
which only a single heterozygous MCEE sequence variation
(c.427CN T, p.R143C, p.Arg143Cys in both cases) was found by sequenc-
ing of exons. We have now tested both of those cell lines for the novel
intronic splicing mutation identiﬁed in our patient; with negative re-
sults. The signiﬁcance, if any, of the variation found in those two cases
thus remains unclear, particularly considering that propionate incorpo-
ration was within reference range in both heterozygous cell lines.In
silico predictions for this variant are as follows: Polyphen2, probably
damaging; PROVEAN, deleterious; SIFT, damaging. However, in the
ExAC dataset: 10 homozygotes are reported, and the allele frequency
in Finnish populations is 2.6%. This population data leads to a similar in-
terpretation as for the variant p.Lys60Gln. While we cannot exclude the
possibility that simple heterozygosity for certainMCEE
mutations could
cause mild elevation of MMA in urine or blood under certain conditions,
for example by a dominant negative effect, there is no existing positive
evidence to support such a phenomenon. Another remote possibility
could be that heterozygosity for anMCEE mutation together with a het-
erozygous mutation at another locus relevant to MMA metabolism
could cause elevation of MMA in bodyﬂuids. In the meantime, however,
these two heterozygous p.Arg143Cys cases remain unclassiﬁed and
they do not contribute to characterisation of the MCE deﬁciency clinical
or biochemical phenotype. Conversely, it is also possible that some mis-
sense mutations allowing signiﬁcant residual activity of MCE might not
cause methylmalonic aciduria, even in homozygosity or compound het-
erozygosity, thus contributing to the apparent rarity of this condition.
In addition to the six cases of MCE deﬁciency previously reported,
and the patient described in our present article, the identiﬁcation of a
further nine cases was indicated in an abstract[16]. These patients
were identiﬁed by sequencing ofMCEE in DNA from 150ﬁbroblast cell
lines banked from patients with mild or moderate methylmalonic
aciduria. Eight of these cases were homozygous for the same
previously-described nonsense mutation, p.Arg47Ter, while the ninth
was homozygous for a novel missense mutation. However, no clinical
description of cases was included in that abstract. Further characterisa-
tion of this group would contribute to understanding of this apparently
rare condition. One other abstract[17] brieﬂy describes a single patient,
homozygous for p.Arg47Ter, who presented with an episode of acute
metabolic acidosis.
The initial working diagnosis for our patient, at the time of her acute
presentation, was propionic acidemia. We previouslyﬂagged this po-
tential pitfall in a preliminary abstract[18], and now provide a detailed
description of the biochemical phenotype, its evolution during long-
term follow-up and the further biochemical and molecular investiga-
tions which were needed to conﬁrm the true diagnosis of MCE deﬁcien-
cy for this patient. Another recent abstract[19] refers to a patient
originally suspected to have propionic acidemia but for whom subse-
quent next-generation gene panel analysis instead revealed homozy-
gosity for the p.Arg47Ter mutation inMCEE. Such reports suggest that
MCE deﬁciency might thus far be underdiagnosed, particularly consid-
ering that the associated MMA elevations are often relatively mild
even in patients with genotypes predicting complete loss of MCE activ-
ity. On the other hand, the overall allele frequency of p.Arg47Ter in the
ExAC database is only 0.025% (0.042% in Europeans), with no homozy-
gotes listed. These data are compatible with the apparent rarity of this
condition.
The organic acid proﬁles of our patient were in fact not typical of
propionic acidemia, nor of classical methylmalonic acidemias, nor of
other ‘non-classical’ methylmalonic acidemias such as SUCLA or
SUCLG disorders. It is possible that the observed disproportionate eleva-
tion of 3-hydroxypropionic acid could be a particular feature of MCE de-
ﬁciency, as in this situation 3-hydroxypropionic acid might potentially
be formed by alternative metabolism of the accumulating D-
methylmalonyl-coA and/or of free methylmalonic acid. This would rep-
resent a route different from the pathway by which 3-hydroxypropionic
acid is generated from propionyl-coA in propionic acidemia[20]. Cer-
tain aspects of our patient's organic acid proﬁles during decompensa-
tion, namely ketoacidosis with marked elevation of 3-
hydroxypropionic acid, considerable elevation of methylcitric acid and
propionylglycine, and relatively mild elevation of MMA, together may
represent a characteristic pattern to be seen in other patients with
MCE deﬁciency.
In summary, we have identiﬁed and characterised a new case of the
rare disorder MCE deﬁciency, presenting with acute metabolic decom-
pensation. We have described the biochemical phenotype of this pa-
tient, highlighting a possibility of diagnostic confusion in the context
of an initial acute presentation, and emphasising that the observation
of persistent mild or moderate methylmalonic aciduria is a clue which
warrants consideration of MCE deﬁciency in the differential diagnosis.
The ﬁnding in this case of a novel intronic splicing mutation inMCEE
also shows that sequencing of exons alone is not sufﬁcient to diagnose
this condition in all cases, or to exclude it.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr. Patricie Burda, of the University Children's Hospital of
Zurich, for helpful discussions. We thank Elvy Lapointe, Mathieu Durand
and Philippe Thibault at the RNomics platform of Université de Sher-
brooke (http://rnomics.med.usherbrooke.ca ) for their help with the
cDNA analysis. We thank the reviewers for insightful comments and
suggestions.
23P.J. Waters et al. / Molecular Genetics and Metabolism Reports 9 (2016) 19–24
References
[1] N. Carrillo-Carrasco, C. Venditti, Propionic acidemia, in: R.A. Pagon, M.P. Adam, H.H.
Ardinger, S.E. Wallace, A. Amemiya, L.J.H. Bean, T.D. Bird, C.R. Dolan, C.T. Fong, R.J.H.
Smith, K. Stephens (Eds.), GeneReviews [Internet], University of Washington, Seat-
tle, 2012 1993-2015, updated.
[2] I. Manoli, C.P. Venditti, Methylmalonic acidemia, in: R.A. Pagon, M.P. Adam, H.H.
Ardinger, S.E. Wallace, A. Amemiya, L.J.H. Bean, T.D. Bird, C.R. Dolan, C.T. Fong,
R.J.H. Smith, K. Stephens (Eds.), GeneReviews [Internet], University of
Washington, Seattle, 2010 1993-2015, updated.
[3] M.R. Baumgartner, F. Hörster, C. Dionisi-Vici, G. Haliloglu, D. Karali, K.A. Chapman,
M .H u e m e r ,M .H o c h u l i ,M .A s s o u n ,D .B a l l h a u s e n ,A .B u r l i n a ,B .F o w l e r ,S . C .
Grünert, S. Grünewald, T. Honzik, B. Merinero, C. Pérez-Cerdá, S. Scholl-Bürgi, F.
Skovby, F. Wijburg, A. MacDonald, D. Martinelli, J.O. Sass, V. Valayannopoulos, A.
Chakrapani, Proposed guidelines for the diagnosis and management of
methylmalonic and propionic acidemia, Orphanet J. Rare Dis. 9 (2014) 130.
[4] J.A. Montgomery, O.A. Mamer, C.R. Scriver, Metabolism of methylmalonic acid in
rats. Is methylmalonyl-coenzyme A racemase deﬁciency symptomatic in man? J.
Clin. Invest. 72 (1983) 1937–1947.
[5] C.M. Dobson, A. Gradinger, N. Longo, X. Wu, D. Leclerc, J. Lerner-Ellis, M. Lemieux, C.
Belair, D. Watkins, D.S. Rosenblatt, R.A. Gravel, Homozygous nonsense mutation in
the MCEE gene and siRNA suppression of methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase expres-
sion: a novel cause of mild methylmalonic aciduria, Mol. Genet. Metab. 88 (2006)
327–333.
[6] H. Bikker, H.D. Bakker, N.G.G.M. Abeling, B.T. Poll-The, W.J. Kleijer, D.S. Rosenblatt,
H.R. Waterham, R.J.A. Wanders, M. Duran, A homozygous nonsense mutation in
the methylmalonyl-coA epimerase gene (MCEE) results in mild methylmalonic
aciduria, Hum. Mutat. 27 (2006) 640–643.
[7] N.G. Abeling, M. Duran, H.D. Bakker, L. Stroomer, B. Thöny, N. Blau, J. Booij, B.T. Poll-
The, Sepiapterin reductase deﬁciency an autosomal recessive DOPA-responsive dys-
tonia, Mol. Genet. Metab. 89 (2006) 166-120.
[8] M. Mazzuca, M.A. Maubert, L. Damaj, F. Clot, M. Cadoudal, C. Dubourg, S. Odent, J.F.
Benoit, N. Bahi-Buisson, L. Christa, P. de Lonlay, Combined sepiapterin reductase and
methylmalonyl-coA epimerase deﬁciency in a second patient: cerebrospinalﬂuid
polyunsaturated fatty acid level and follow-up under L-DOPA, 5-HTP and BH4 trials,
JIMD Rep. 22 (2015) 47–55.
[9] A.B. Gradinger, C. Bélair, L.C. Worgan, C.D. Li, J. Lavallée, D. Roquis, D. Watkins, D.
Rosenblatt, Atypical methylmalonic aciduria: frequency of mutations in the
methylmalonyl CoA epimerase gene (MCEE), Hum. Mutat. 28 (2007) 1045.
[10] A. Kumps, P. Duex, Y. Mardens, Metabolic, nutritional, iatrogenic and artifactual
sources of urinary organic acids: a comprehensive table, Clin. Chem. 48 (2002)
708–717.
[11] D. Watkins, N. Matiaszuk, D.S. Rosenblatt, Complementation studies in the CblA
class of inborn error of cobalamin metabolism: evidence for interallelic complemen-
tation and for a new complementation class (cblH), J. Med. Genet. 37 (2000)
510–513.
[12] J.P. Venables, R. Klinck, A. Bramard, L. Inkel, G. Dufresne-Martin, C. Koh, J. Gervais-
Bird, E. Lapointe, U. Froehlich, M. Durand, D. Gendron, J.P. Brosseau, P. Thibault, J.F.
Lucier, K. Tremblay, P. Prinos, R.J. Wellinger, B. Chabot, C. Rancourt, S.A. Elela, Iden-
tiﬁcation of alternative splicing markers for breast cancer, Cancer Res. 68 (2008)
9525–9531.
[13] T.A. Bobik, M.E. Rasche, Identiﬁcation of the human methylmalonyl-CoA racemase
gene based on the analysis of prokaryotic gene rearrangements, J. Biol. Chem. 276
(2001) 37194–37198.
[14] T.A. Bobik, M.E. Rasche, HPLC assay for methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase, Anal.
Bioanal. Chem. 375 (2003) 344–349.
[15] J. Kühnl, T. Bobik, J.B. Procter, C. Burmeister, J. Höppner, I. Wilde, K. Lüersen, A.E.
Torda, R.D. Walter, E. Liebau, Functional analysis of the methylmalonyl-CoA epimer-
ase fromCaenorhabditis elegans
, FEBS J. 272 (2005) 1465–1477.
[16] P. Burda, T. Suormala, C. Bürer, S. Froese, B. Fowler, M.R. Baumgartner,
Methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase (MCE) deﬁciency: nine new cases (abstract P-
214), J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 36 (Suppl 2) (2013) S170.
[17] E. Chronopoulou, S. Chapman, C. Turner, H. Waterham, M.P. Champion,
Methylmalonyl CoA epimerase deﬁciency presenting with acute metabolic acidosis
(abstract P-127), J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 33 (Suppl 1) (2010) S53.
[18] P.J. Waters, J.T.R. Clarke, D. Watkins, D. Rosenblatt, S. Lévesque, A patient with evi-
dence of methylmalonyl-coA epimerase (MCE) deﬁciency, presenting with severe
metabolic acidosis and biochemical proﬁles initially interpreted as propionic
acidemia (abstract P-187), J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 37 (Suppl 1) (2014) S93.
[19] L. Abily-Donval, S. Torre, A. Tebani, A. Samson, C. Acquaviva, S. Marret, J.F. Benoit, S.
Bekri, Methylmalonyl-CoA epimerase deﬁciency presenting as propionic aciduria
(abstract P-231), J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 38 (Suppl 1) (2015) S150.
[20] W. Fenton, R.A. Gravel, D.S. Rosenblatt, Disorders of propionate and methylmalonate
metabolism, Chapter 94 (pages 2165–2193), in: C.R. Scriver, A.L. Beaudet, W.S. Sly,
D. Valle (Eds.), The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease, 8th
edMcGraw-Hill, New York, 2001.
24 P.J. Waters et al. / Molecular Genetics and Metabolism Reports 9 (2016) 19–24