Phytate metabolism is mediated by microbial cross-feeding in 
the gut microbiota
Willem M. De Vos#1, Minh Nguyen Trung#2,3, Mark Davids4, Guizhen Liu5, Melany Rios 
Morales4, Henning Jessen5, Dorothea Fiedler2,3, Max Nieuwdorp 4,6, Thi Phuong Nam 
Bui1,4,*
1Laboratory of Microbiology, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
2Leibniz-Forschungsinstitut für Molekulare Pharmakologie, Berlin, Germany.
3Institute of Chemistry, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
4Departments of Internal and Experimental Vascular Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical 
Centers, Location AMC, , Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
5Institute of Organic Chemistry, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
6Department of Surgery, Spaarne Hospital, Hoofddorp, the Netherlands
# These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
Dietary intake of phytate has various reported health benefits. Previous work showed that the 
gut microbiota can convert phytate to short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), but the microbial species 
and metabolic pathway are unclear. Here, we identified Mitsuokella jalaludinii as an efficient 
phytate degrader, which works synergistically with Anaerostipes rhamnosivorans to produce the 
SCFA propionate. Analysis of published human gut taxonomic profiles revealed that Mitsuokella 
spp., in particular M. jalaludinii, are prevalent in human gut microbiomes. NMR spectroscopy 
using 13C-isotope labelling, metabolomic and transcriptomic analyses identified a complete 
phytate degradation pathway in M. jalaludinii, including production of the intermediate Ins(2)P/
myo-inositol. The major end product, 3-hydroxypropionate, was converted into propionate via 
a synergistic interaction with Anaerostipes rhamnosivorans both in vitro and in mice. Upon 
[13C6]phytate administration, various 13C-labelled components were detected in mouse cecum in 
This work is licensed under a BY 4.0 International license.
*Corresponding author, Correspondence to Thi Phuong Nam Bui. 
Author contributions 
T.P.N.B conceptualized the study, designed and performed the research. M.N.T and D.F synthesized and purified [13C6]InsP6 
and [13C6]myo-inositol and performed preparations for and conducting of NMR analyses for 13C-labelled compounds in in vitro 
and in vivo experiment. T.P.N.B performed the in vitro and in vivo studies. M.D performed computational analyses for microbial 
composition, transcriptomics and the human cohort study. G.J and H.G performed CE-MS and UHPLC-MS/MS analyses for plasma 
13C-InsPs and 13C-Inositol detection. MRM ran GC-MS measurement for mouse cecal 13C-SCFA detection. W.M.dV , M.N.T, M.D, 
G.L, H.J, A.H.Z, D.F, M.N and T.P.N.B analyzed the data. T.P.N.B and W.M.dV drafted the manuscript. All authors commented and 
approved for the final manuscript.
Competing interest 
W.M.dV . and M.N are founders and members of the Scientific Advisory Board of Caelus Pharmaceuticals, the Netherlands. However, 
none of these possible conflicts of interest bear direct relations to the outcomes of this specific study. The other authors declare that 
there are no conflicts of interest.
Europe PMC Funders Group
Author Manuscript
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
Published in final edited form as:
Nat Microbiol. 2024 July 01; 9(7): 1812–1827. doi:10.1038/s41564-024-01698-7.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
contrast with the absence of [13C6] InsPs or [13C6]-myo-inositol in plasma. Caco-2 cells incubated 
with co-culture supernatants exhibited improved intestinal barrier integrity. These results suggest 
that the microbiome plays a major role in the metabolism of this phytochemical and that its 
fermentation to propionate by M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans may contribute to phytate-
driven health benefits.
Introduction
Understanding the interaction between diet, the microbiome and the host is key to 
maintain host well-being1–2. The dietary component phytate (myo-inositol-1,2,3,4,5,6-
hexakisphosphate or InsP6) is widely distributed in the plant kingdom and especially 
abundant in wheat, rice and nuts3. The daily intake of this phytochemical is on average 
approximately 2.5 g phytate per person3–5. Phytate has been regarded as an anti-nutrient 
in animal feed6 owing to its strong metal-chelating properties. Yet, to date there is no 
evidence that phytate intake in human might be problematic due to reduced bioavailability 
of minerals and other food components. In contrast, health benefits have been reported 
for the consumption of plant-based diets, including phytate-rich products, like nuts, 
seeds and unprocessed whole grains2, 7–8. Dietary phytate supplementation reportedly 
promoted epithelial repair resulting in improved barrier function9, reduced serum levels 
of glycated hemoglobin HbA1c and Advanced Glycation End products10, improved glucose 
metabolism11, reduced inflammation12 and exerted protective effects against colon cancer13. 
Nevertheless, the molecular mechanism by which dietary phytate confers these health 
benefits is largely unknown.
Phytate not only derives from our diet but is also one of the most abundant inositol 
phosphates (InsPs) in mammalian cells and is synthesized as part of the intracellular 
metabolism of myo-inositol14–16. Phytate is involved in a variety of key physiological 
processes including glucose metabolism, insulin signaling, cell migration as well as cancer 
metastasis16–20. However, it is not clear whether dietary phytate can enter the systemic 
circulation and contribute to endogenous inositol polyphosphate biosynthesis. Studies in 
mice using radioactively labelled dietary phytate indicated that only a small fraction of 
phytate is reaching the systemic circulation as inositol21.
We recently reported that under anaerobic conditions, the human fecal microbiome can fully 
convert phytate into short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs), including propionate and butyrate22, 
which are well known microbial signaling molecules and strongly associated with host 
health23–24. Nevertheless, the microbes responsible for metabolizing phytate in the human 
gut are unknown. Only a few Bifidobacterium, Lactobacillus, Escherichia and Bacteroides 
spp. have been found to partially convert phytate to lower phosphorylated InsPs (isomers 
of InsP3; InsP4 and InsP5)9, 25–29. Previous efforts to detect and cultivate phytate-degrading 
microbes from human fecal samples have remained unsuccessful mainly due to the non-
optimal growth conditions for strict anaerobes30. This contrasts with animal studies that 
identified phytase-producing Mitsuokella spp. in ruminants31. Mitsuokella spp. are Gram-
negative gut anaerobes belonging to the Negativicutes and the rumen isolate M. multacida 
possesses a phytase (an enzyme to break down phytate) located in the outer membrane32.
De V os et al. Page 2
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
To investigate how dietary phytate is metabolized by human gut bacteria in vitro and in 
vivo, we here employed a combination of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy 
and stable-isotope labelling of phytate33, supported by capillary electrophoresis mass 
spectrometry (CE-MS) for the detection of inositol phosphates15. We identified Mitsuokella 
spp. as efficient and prevalent phytate-degrading bacteria in the human gut whose 
abundance is strongly associated with ethnicity and host health in large human cohorts. We 
further characterized the phytate degradation pathway of the most prevalent M. jalaludinii 
using [13C6]phytate, and transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses. Results revealed the 
production of the anti-microbial end-product 3-hydroxypropionate that can be efficiently 
converted by Anaerostipes rhamnosivorans in a synergistic interaction to propionate that 
improved barrier integrity. These results indicate that colonic phytate can be completely 
converted by a trophic chain involving M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans into propionate 
and acetate that may contribute to dietary phytate-driven health benefits.
Results
Identification of Mitsuokella spp. as efficient phytate degraders
To gain a better understanding which bacteria are involved in the rapid degradation of 
phytate, we incubated fresh fecal samples from two healthy donors (A and B) in a medium 
supplemented with [13C6]InsP6 as the sole carbon and energy source. The supernatants 
from [13C6]InsP6 enrichments were collected over time and used for the analysis of 
13C-labelled components by 13C-NMR. In parallel, non-labelled phytate fecal enrichments 
were repeatedly transferred to fresh phytate media to further enrich for phytate degrading 
microbes. We observed that the fecal microbiome of participant A metabolized [13C6]InsP6 
within a few hours to [13C2]acetate and [13C3]3-hydroxypropionate, which was subsequently 
converted to [13C3]propionate after 24h (Fig. 1a). The fecal microbiome of donor B slowly 
used [13C6]InsP6 to produce [13C4]butyrate and [13C2]acetate without the formation of any 
other intermediates (Fig. 1b). This difference in phytate metabolism was also reflected by 
the reduced microbial density in the first three non-labelled phytate enrichment transfers of 
donor B compared with that of donor A (Fig. 1a,b).
To identify the phytate-degrading microbes, genomic DNA was isolated from the third 
non-labelled phytate enrichment and subjected to 16S ribosomal RNA gene amplicon 
sequencing. We observed two different microbial communities enriched from faecal 
microbiomes, with Ruminococcaceae, Mitsuokella and Butyricicoccus as the most abundant 
taxa in donor A and Butyricicoccus, Mitsuokella and E.coli/Shigella as the most abundant 
taxa in donor B (Fig. 1c). This may explain the different phytate fermentation patterns where 
3-hydroxypropionate was formed as intermediate in donor A while donor B showed no 
intermediate. At the end of the phytate incubation, the relative abundance of most species 
decreased, whereas that of Mitsuokella spp. increased in both enrichments up to 10 % of 
total microbiome when phytate was used, with M. jalaludinii as the most dominant species 
(Fig. 1d,e). Of note, the relative abundance of Mitsuokella increased gradually during the 
first 48 h, which was in line with a rapid degradation of phytate within 30 h for donor A 
(Fig. 1d) whereas the relative abundance of Mitsuokella only increased after 24 h due to 
De V os et al. Page 3
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
the limited degradation of phytate during the first 24 h for donor B (Fig. 1e). Overall, these 
results suggest that M. jalaludinii is involved in phytate degradation in the human gut.
Mitsuokella as prevalent taxon in the human intestine and its health relation
To further investigate the prevalence of Mitsuokella in the general population and determine 
its ecological niche, we analyzed the microbiome of 6039 Amsterdam-located subjects 
in HELIUS cohort with different ethnicities34–35. We found three amplicon sequence 
variants (ASV) of Mitsuokella which represented 89 % of all Mitsuokella counts. These 
sequence variants were highly similar to those belonging to Mitsuokella multacida or 
Mitsuokella jalaludinii (Fig. 2a). A total of 1542 out of 6039 subjects were positive for 
one of these ASVs, indicating the moderate prevalence of Mitsuokella spp. that showed 
relative abundances between 0.01 to 10 % (Fig. 2b). Mitsuokella spp. are closely related 
to known fiber-degrading species, including ruminal Selenomonas spp. (Fig. 2a)36, one of 
which has been reported to contain an active periplasmic phytase31–32. Mitsuokella spp. 
were also strongly associated with the Prevotella enterotype (Fig. 2c), which has been 
linked with high fiber intake and health status37–38. The prevalence of different Mitsuokella 
spp. varied slightly among the ethnicities, but most participants harbored M. jalaludinii 
with highest prevalence in males (Fig. 2d,e). To verify its functionality, we isolated a 
dominant Mitsuokella jalaludinii strain from donor A and found it to grow fast on phytate 
and its genome sequence to be highly similar (an average nucleotide identity of 97.3 
%) to that of the type-strain M. jalaludinii DSM13811T with greatly identical (95-100 
%) phytate degradation pathway genes (Sup. Fig. 1 and Table S1). Hence, this confirms 
that M. jalaludinii is prevalent in humans. It was recently reported that the abundance of 
fecal Mitsuokella spp. was significantly lower in cardiometabolic patients compared to the 
healthy population39. This prompted us to further study the role of M. jalaludinii in phytate 
degradation and its contribution to host health.
Elucidation of phytate degradation pathway by Mitsuokella jalaludinii
We used M. jalaludinii DSM13811T 40 for proof-of-concept experiments and cultured it 
in a medium containing phytate or myo-inositol as the sole energy and carbon source. M. 
jalaludinii grew rapidly in phytate with a doubling time of 3.4 h while the doubling time 
with myo-inositol was 7 h (Fig. 3a). The metabolite production was similar between both 
conditions. On the basis of the observed stoichiometry of phytate conversion, we propose the 
net theoretical fermentative equation as: 1 phytate + 6 H20 → 1 3-hydroxypropionate + 0.4 
lactate + 0.2 succinate + 0.2 acetate + 0.6 CO2 + 6 phosphate. Of note, the formation of CO2 
was not determined due to the pre-existing bicarbonate in the medium but predicted on the 
basis of carbon and redox recovery.
To unambiguously identify the pathway, its intermediates and all end metabolites of phytate 
degradation, M. jalaludinii was grown in bicarbonate buffered medium containing either 
[13C6]phytate or [13C6]myo-inositol as the sole energy and carbon source. As observed 
by 1D-NMR and 2D-NMR spectroscopy33, M. jalaludinii converted [13C6]phytate rapidly 
to various metabolites with [13C3]3-hydroxypropionate, [13C3]lactate and [13C4]succinate 
as major end metabolites (Fig. 3b). We identified the accumulation of myo-inositol-2-
monophosphate (Ins(2)P) and myo-inositol during the first 7.5 h via 2D-NMR (Fig. 3c), 
De V os et al. Page 4
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
suggesting that these are intermediates of phytate degradation. The capacity to use myo-
inositol was confirmed by the growth of M. jalaludinii and conversion of [13C6]myo-inositol 
to [13C3]3-hydroxypropionate, [13C3]lactate and [13C4]succinate (Extended Fig. 1). The 
production of 3-hydroxypropionate from phytate confirmed our previous hypothesis that 
Mitsuokella spp. were responsible for the efficient fecal phytate degradation in which 
3-hydroxypropionate was detected as intermediate (Fig. 1a).
To further identify genes of M. jalaludinii involved in phytate metabolism, we analyzed 
transcriptomic profiles of cells grown in either phytate or myo-inositol (Sup. Fig. 2; Table 
S2). This analysis showed that the expression of the genes for an inositol transporter 
(MJ_0380) and a high-affinity phosphate transport system PstSCAB41 (MJ_0656-0658) 
were eight-fold increased during the growth on phytate, as well as the electron 
transport chain by a succinate dehydrogenase membrane complex42 (MJ_0311-0313) and 
ATP synthase (MJ_0861-0869). We also identified induced expression of 2-hydroxy-3-
oxopropionate reductase (MJ_1291) and a 3-hydroxypropionate permease (MJ_0911) 
involved in 3-hydoxypropionate production and transport, respectively. Remarkably, the 
gene encodes a periplasmic phytase (MJ_0021) was found to be constitutively expressed 
(Fig. 3d). Evolutionary analysis showed that the encoded phytase was only distantly related 
to other microbial and human phytases (Extended Fig. 2), which may imply its unique 
capacity to readily dephosphorylate phytate to inositol (Fig. 3b-c). In addition, genes 
involved in acetate, lactate and succinate, 3-hydroxypropionate production, glycolysis and 
ATP synthase were identified, all of which except a pyruvate carboxylase were expressed 
constitutively (Fig. 3d). The metabolomic and transcriptomic analyses imply that the faster 
growth of M. jalaludinii on phytate as compared to myo-inositol may probably be due to the 
increased activity of the inositol transporter. On the basis of the NMR and transcriptomic 
analyses, the entire metabolic phytate degradation pathway was reconstructed (Fig. 3e). 
The observation that a monoculture of M. jalaludinii mainly produced succinate and 3-
hydroxypropionate and not the canonical short chain fatty acids from phytate suggests that 
there are metabolic interactions between Mitsuokella with other commensal bacteria in the 
human colon.
In vitro synergy between M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans in phytate
We previously showed that supplementation of A. rhamnosivorans in fecal phytate 
enrichments increased propionate formation22. Hence, we investigated the potential synergy 
between M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans in phytate degradation. We observed that 
the co-cultures reached higher cell density compared to monocultures of M. jalaludinii 
independent of the phytate concentration (Extended Fig. 3a). We detected propionate and 
acetate in the cocultures, while 3-hydroxypropionate and lactate only accumulated in the 
M. jalaludinii monoculture (Extended Fig. 3b). This indicates a potential synergy between 
these two bacteria and hence we compared the phytate metabolism in a monoculture of 
M. jalaludinii versus a coculture of M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans using both non-
labelled and 13C6-isotopomer of phytate. We observed that 3-hydroxypropionate was first 
produced and subsequently converted to propionate after 8 h in the coculture (Fig. 4b-c), 
while 3-hydroxypropionate accumulated in the monoculture of M. jalajudinnii (Fig. 4a), 
suggesting a trophic chain involving 3-hydroxypropionate as an intermediate. We found that 
De V os et al. Page 5
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
A. rhamnosivorans was indeed able to convert 3-hydroxypropionate to propionate but only 
in presence of glucose as carbon source, indicating a co-metabolic conversion (Extended 
Fig. 4a-c). Of note, we observed that the growth of A. rhamnosivorans was inhibited by 3-
hydroxypropionate in a dose-dependent way (Extended Fig. 4d). These results imply that the 
synergy between the two intestinal bacteria was mainly via 3-hydropropionate interspecies 
transfer. Furthermore, 13C-NMR analysis confirmed 13C-labelled propionate, succinate and 
acetate as end metabolites from [13C6]InsP6 in the coculture (Fig. 4c), with [13C6]Ins(2)P 
and [13C6]Inositol as intermediates. The commonalities between the monocultures and 
cocultures indicate the limited influence of A. rhamnosivorans on phytate dephosphorylation 
by M. jalaludinii (Fig. 4c and Sup. Fig. 3).
To further investigate the microbial interaction at the molecular level, we assessed the 
differential expression of phytate and myo-inositol degradation pathway genes of M. 
jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans, respectively, during growth in monocultures compared 
with co-cultures using transcriptomic analyses. The results of the metabolic measurements 
showed high concentrations of 3-hydroxypropionate only in monocultures of M. jalaludinii 
at the expense of high propionate concentration in the cocultures in both phytate and 
myo-inositol (Extended Fig. 5a-b). We found that the number of cells of the two bacteria 
were similar when grown on phytate while the cell numbers of A. rhamnosivorans were 
sixfold higher than those of M. jalaludinii with myo-inositol as a carbon source (Extended 
Fig. 5c-d). A. rhamnosivorans had weak effects on the overall transcription profiles of M. 
jalaludinii grown in phytate in contrast to strong influence on M. jalaludinii transcriptomic 
profile grown in myo-inositol (Extended Fig. 5e). For M. jalaludinii, the expression of 
genes involved in phytate dephosphorylation, inositol uptake, inositol fermentation was 
highly similar between monoculture and coculture in phytate (Fig. 4d, Table S3-4) while 
genes involved in myo-inositol uptake and utilization and 3-hydroxypropionate export 
(MJ_911) were up to 70-fold decreased in the coculture grown on myo-inositol, indicating 
reduced uptake and consumption of myo-inositol by M. jalaludinii due to the presence 
of A. rhamnosivorans. Comparing the whole transcriptome profiles of A. rhamnosivorans 
between cocultures and monocultures, we identified an entire operon (AR1Y2_1112-1117) 
involved in 3-hydroxypropionate transport (AR1Y2_1114) and conversion to propionate, 
which was increased up to 19-fold in coculture versus monoculture (Fig. 4e, Table S5-7). 
This observation confirms the active conversion of 3-hydroxypropionate to propionate by 
A. rhamnosivorans in coculture, which is in line with the metabolic observations. In 
contrast, the expression in A. rhamnosivorans of the inositol uptake gene (AR1Y2_0316) 
and the inositol utilizing operon (AR1Y2_1104-1107) was decreased around 15-fold in the 
cocultures, suggesting the reduced use of myo-inositol in the presence of M. jalaludinii. 
Based on these results, we reconstructed a model of metabolic interaction between M. 
jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans for phytate utilization (Fig. 4f and Extended Fig. 6). We 
subsequently analysed the functionality of the supernatant of the coculture of M. jalaludinii 
and A. rhamnosivorans on phytate and showed it to improve epithelial barrier integrity 
similar to propionate (Extended Figs. 7 and 8).
De V os et al. Page 6
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
In vivo phytate conversion by the microbial synergy
We subsequently studied the in vivo synergy between M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans 
in mice that were gavaged with M. jalaludinii alone, both bacteria or a sterile control 
and challenged with [13C6]InsP6 (Fig. 5a). We observed that the cecal [13C6]InsP6 levels 
were significantly lower after 3 h and 6 h oral challenge in groups receiving bacteria (Fig. 
5b-c), indicating the active conversion of phytate. Mice that received the bacteria had less 
than 0.5 nmol of [13C6]InsP6 per mg cecal content as opposed to 4 nmol of [13C6]InsP6 
per mg cecal content from control mice after 3 h oral challenge. This was associated 
with high colonic levels of M. jalaludinii in bacterial treatment groups compared with 
the control group (Fig. 5d). Similarly, the colonic level of A. rhamnosivorans was high 
only the combination treatment (Fig. 5e). The difference of [13C6]InsP6 level between the 
treatment and control groups was smaller at 6 h after of oral challenge, suggesting the 
residual mouse microbiome was capable of degrading InsP6 but at a slower rate as compared 
to those with supplemented with M. jalaludinii (Fig. 5c). Importantly, no [13C6]InsPs and 
[13C6]-myo-inositol were detected in the mouse plasma at both 3 h and 6 h time points by 
CE-MS (Extended Fig. 9), indicating the microbiome was mainly responsible for dietary 
phytate consumption. Remarkably, we detected large enrichment of 13C-propionate but not 
13C-acetate or minor 13C-butyrate in mouse cecal samples, indicating the major production 
of propionate from oral phytate (Extended Fig. 10). However, no significant difference 
in propionate accumulation was observed between the treatment groups and the control 
group, likely reflecting the its rapid absorption by colonocytes43 (Sup. Fig. 4a-b). The 
[13C]3-hydroxypropionate cecal level was significantly higher in the M. jalaludinii only 
but not the combination group compared to the control (Sup. Fig. 4c-d), indicating active 
conversion of phytate to 3-hydroxypropionate by M. jalaludinii and a moderate conversion 
of 3-hydroxypropionate to propionate by A. rhamosivorans. While [13C6]InsP6 was the 
most abundant inositol phosphate component in the mouse cecum (Sup. Fig. 5), smaller 
amounts (<0.25nmol/mg cecum) of other inositol phosphates (InsP5[3OH], Ins(1,2,5,6)P4 
and/or its enantiomer Ins(2,3,4,5)P4 and InsP5[5OH]) were also detected in the cecum 
samples of the mice (Fig. 5f-h). Of note, InsP5[5OH] level was significantly lower in 
bacterial treatment groups (Fig. 5h) whereas InsP4 and InsP5[3OH] levels were higher in 
two treatment groups compared to the control group (Fig. 5f-g), implicating multiple phytate 
degradation pathways in presence and absence of these two administered bacteria. Based on 
these data, two main microbial phytate degradation routes in mouse cecum were deduced 
(summarized in Fig. 5i).
Discussion
Phytate is abundantly present in plant-based diets, and notably abundant in nuts, seeds and 
unprocessed whole grain. These diets have shown to provide a panoply of health benefits 
in mice and human10–11, 44–46. However, the role of the human microbiome in phytate 
metabolism has not been well studied. It is largely presumed that dietary phytate is absorbed 
in the intestine or partially converted to highly dephosphorylated myo-inositol derivatives 
(InsP3; InsP4 and InsP5) via activities of the human microbiome26–27. Our previous finding 
highlighted the capacity of the fecal microbiome to convert phytate to different SCFAs 
without identification of the bacterial species involved in phytate degradation and how 
De V os et al. Page 7
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
they interact with other bacteria for SCFA production22. Here, we showed that the human 
microbiome can convert phytate rapidly into different types of SCFAs depending on the 
microbial composition. In the current study, we identified Mitsuokella spp. as an efficient 
and prevalent phytate degrader in the human gut. This was demonstrated via in vitro and 
in vivo phytate consumption using a stable-isotope labeling approach (Fig. 3-5). This is in 
line with a previous report that M. multacida has an outer membrane located phytase32. 
We found that Mitsuokella is a prevalent genus in the general population cohort with M. 
jalaludinii as the most abundant species. Mitsuokella spp. were significantly correlated 
with the Prevotella enterotype, which has been associated with high fibre intake and good 
health37–38.
Using M. jalaludinii DSM13811T as a model phytate-degrading species40 in conjunction 
with 13C-labelling of phytate, we demonstrated that M. jalaludinii was able to degrade 
dietary phytate in vitro and in vivo to produce a gut metabolite 3-hydroxypropionate47. 
It has indeed been reported that supernatant of M. jalaludinii cultures inhibited growth 
of Salmonella and reduced virulent factors but this study did not identify the responsible 
compound48. Our data indicate that the observed growth inhibition was caused by the 
production of 3-hydroxypropionate by M. jalaludinii (Fig. 3-4a) as 3-hydroxypropionate 
is known to exhibit strong anti-microbial properties49. The production of the toxic 3-
hydroxypropionate may serve as a means to increase the competitiveness of M. jalaludinii in 
the colonic environment. This is supported by our observation that A. rhamnosivorans shows 
sensitivity to 3-hydroxypropionate but has developed a mechanism for its detoxification. 
By transcriptomic analysis we identified the induced genes involved in the entire phytate 
degradation pathway in M. jalaludinii, including a phytase, inositol utilization gene cluster, 
a succinate production gene cluster and an important 3-oxopropionate reductase for 3-
hydroxypropionate production. The production of 3-hydroxypropionate by the human M. 
jalaludinii H1-1 strain also confirmed the active degradation of phytate by Mitsuokella spp. 
in faecal enrichment cultures where 3-hydroxypropionate was found as an intermediate (Fig. 
1a and Sup. Fig. 6a, b)
We further demonstrated that M. jalaludinii formed a synergistic interaction with A. 
rhamnosivorans mainly via 3-hydroxypropionate (Fig. 4 and Sup. Fig. 6b, c), leading to 
the production of propionate from dietary phytate in vitro and in vivo. The metabolic pattern 
of phytate metabolism by these two bacteria mimicked the fecal phytate enrichment for 
which a rapid and consistent phytate degradation was observed over multiple transfers. This 
suggests this type of microbial synergy may be necessary for an efficient and persistent 
phytate degradation. Transcriptomic analyses indicated that A. rhamnosivorans had little 
influence on the activity of M. jalaludinii in the presence of phytate and mainly used 
released 3-hydroxypropionate via an identified scavenging pathway to produce propionate. 
Interestingly, we found that the bacterial supernatant of M. jalaludinii grown together with 
A. rhamnosivorans in phytate improved the barrier integrity via activation of tight junction 
genes similarly to treatment with propionate when being exposed to Caco-2 cells (Extended 
Fig. 8). Intestinal barrier disruption may lead to systemic infectious and inflammatory 
consequences of obesity and diabetes50. These results suggest that the production of 
propionate from phytate by M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans may provide metabolic 
benefits to the host. This is in line with our observation of the high prevalence of M. 
De V os et al. Page 8
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
jalaludinii in the healthy subjects in the HELIUS cohort (Fig. 2) as opposed to the reduced 
abundance of Mitsuokella spp. in cardiometabolic participants in the LifeLines cohort39.
To detail the in vivo synergy between the two bacteria, we administered C57Bl/6J mice 
either phytate alone, phytate with M. jalaludinii or phytate with both M. jalaludinii and 
A. rhamnosivorans for two weeks and performed [13C6]InsP6 oral challenge to study the 
phytate metabolism at 3 h and 6 h after administration (Fig. 5). We found that [13C6]InsP6 
and lower phosphorylated [13C6]InsPs were detected in the mouse cecum but absent in the 
plasma, indicating the microbiome was mainly responsible for dietary phytate metabolism. 
This is in line with previous reports that less than 20 % of phytate-derived inositol after oral 
phytate administration was detected in the mouse liver21. Three [13C6]InsPs were found in 
the mouse cecum after 3 h and 6 h oral challenge; InsP5[3OH] and InsP4 were enriched upon 
bacteria treatment while only InsP5[5OH] was enriched in [13C6]phytate-alone treatment. 
This suggests the M. jalaludinii not only significantly enhanced the phytate degradation 
capacity of the murine microbiome but also affected the intestinal phytate degradation 
pattern. Further studies, however, are needed to determine whether supplementation of 
Mitsuokella and Anaerostipes strains could improve phytate degradation and increase SCFA 
(mainly propionate) production, and the therapeutic doses to provide metabolic benefits in 
human.
In conclusion, we discovered a strong correlation between Misuokella spp. and phytate 
degradation in the human gut and showed the synergy of the prevalent M. jalaludinii with 
A. rhamnosivorans in phytate breakdown to SCFAs. This also suggests that the beneficial 
effects of dietary phytate on host health may derive from the modulation of the microbiome. 
Therefore, our work may promote strategic approaches employing this microbial synergy 
and dietary phytate to beneficially intervene in human human health.
Online Methods
The research complies with all relevant ethical regulations; Academic Medical Center 
(AMC) Medical Ethics Committee and Amsterdam Medical Center approved the study 
protocols.
Phytate degradation by fecal microbiome using stable isotope labeling
Fresh stools were collected from two healthy donors (one 59-year-old female and one 
54-year-old male) of whom informed consents were obtained in the BARIA study; this 
work protocol was approved by the Academic Medical Center (AMC) Medical Ethics 
Committee. We have complied with all relevant ethical regulations for work with human 
participants. Fresh stool samples from donor A and B were collected in falcon tubes and 
quickly brought to an anaerobic chamber to prepare fecal suspension for inoculation. 0.2 
ml of fecal suspension was added into 10ml bicarbonate buffered medium containing 
either 10 mM non-labelled phytate or [13C6]InsP6 as sole energy and carbon source. 
[13C6]InsP6 was synthesized and purified according to previously reports33, 51. Samples 
of [13C6]InsP6 enrichments were taken at several time points during a first few days after 
inoculation. The supernatants of these samples were used for 13C-NMR analysis to monitor 
substrate consumption and end metabolite production. [13C6]InsP6 was synthesized and 
De V os et al. Page 9
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
purified according to previously reported51. The first non-labeled phytate enrichments were 
subsequently transferred to fresh media with none-labelled phytate as the sole substrate to 
further enrich for phytate-degrading microbes. At the third transfer, phytate degradation 
capacity and metabolite production were assessed by HPLC analysis on the bacterial 
supernatant over 5 days, while the pellets were collected for gDNA extraction followed 
by 16S rRNA sequencing analysis to determine changes of the microbial composition 
during phytate incubation. Stools of donors A and B were used to extract gDNA and 
inositol phosphates to further determine the microbial composition by 16S rRNA sequencing 
analysis and inositol phosphate profiles by 1D- and 2D-NMR analyses (see below for 
detailed protocol).
1D- and 2D-NMR measurements
All chemicals were used without further purification unless specified. Deuterated solutions 
(deuterium oxide (D2O, cat. D215T for lyophilized samples), sodium deuteroxide (NaOD, 
cat. D076Y) and deuterium chloride (DCl, cat. D070Z) were obtained from Eurisotop, 
deuterium oxide (D2O, cat. 00506-100mL, for spiking and non-lyophilized samples) from 
Deutero, perchloric acid (HClO4, cat. 1.00518.1001) from Supelco, potassium hydroxide 
(KOH, cat. 6751.1) from Carl Roth, ammonia solution (cat. 338818-100mL) from Sigma 
Aldrich, tetramethyl phosphonium bromide (TMPBr, cat. A17907) from Alfa Aesar, 
titanium oxide particles (Titanosphere 5 μm, cat. 5020-75000) from GL Sciences.
For NMR measurements and NMR data analysis TopSpin 3.5 was used. For formatting 
the processed spectra were loaded into MestreNova 10.0 and exported into Adobe 
Illustrator where lines tracing accumulation of metabolites in stacked spectra were manually 
added. Measurements were conducted on a Bruker A V-III spectrometer (Bruker Biospin, 
Rheinstetten, Germany) operating at 600 MHz for 1H and 151 MHz for 13C nuclei equipped 
with a cryo-QCI probe. The pulse sequence for BIRD-{1H,13C}HMQC is based on the 
hmqcbiph pulse program from Bruker. Measurement parameters are adapted depending 
on sample composition. Typically, HMQC measurements of lyophilized bacterial culture 
samples were recorded with TD(13C) = 512, 64 scans, spectral width (13C) limited to 50 
– 90 ppm. HMQC measurements of cecal and plasma extracts were recorded with 128 
scans, and P1 pulses determined for every single sample, and otherwise identical parameters. 
For the measurement of 13C-NMR spectra of bacterial culture samples TD = 131072, 
2048 scans, and a spectral width of 220 ppm – -20 ppm were used. All samples were 
recorded at 310 K. BIRD-{1H,13C}HMQC-NMR spectra were processed without digital 
water suppression with manual phasing and automatic baseline correction. 13C-NMR spectra 
were processed with SI = 16384, manual phasing and segment-wise automatic baseline 
correction. Quantification of NMR data were conducted as follows: For cecal extracts 
InsPs were quantified against a known concentration of tetramethylphosphonium bromide 
(TMPBr). A standard curve for InsP6 against TMPBr was recorded earlier51. For other InsP 
species the standard curve for InsP6 was used as an approximation as there are no fully 
13C-labeled standards available. As the signals of the 2-positions are the sharpest and best 
resolved (due to the reduced coupling to the neighbouring CH groups), the 2-position signals 
were used for quantification.
De V os et al. Page 10
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
For the analysis of metabolites produced in bacterial cultures, capped NMR tubes were 
roughly sterilized by rubbing with 70 % ethanol and radiation with UV light for 20 min in an 
aseptic laminar flow hood. Thawed aliquots of bacterial culture samples were centrifuged (5 
min, 5000 g, 4 °C) and 500 μL of the supernatant were transferred under aseptic conditions 
into a sterilized NMR tube and 55 μL of D2O (from a previously unopened bottle which was 
kept under aseptic conditions) were added for locking during NMR measurements. Samples 
were kept at 4 °C until the measurement of 13C-NMR spectra on the same day. NMR 
samples which contained multiple InsP species according to the 13C-NMR were lyophilized, 
redissolved in D2O, and lyophilized again. Finally, the samples are taken up in 500 μL of 
D2O and pH adjusted to 6.0 with NaOD and DCl and submitted for recording HMQC and 
HMQC-CLIP-COSY spectra.
Microbiome profiling analysis
DNA from using from 1ml bacterial culture of fecal phytate enrichments using a repeated 
bead-beating protocol52. 16S rRNA amplicon libraries were generated with a single-step 
PCR targeting the V3-V4 region53. Amplicons were sequenced using an Illumina MiSeq 
with V3 chemistry and 2x251 cycles. For the enrichments 16S V3-V4 amplicon sequences 
were parsed using a vsearch54 (v2.15.2) based pipeline. Paired end reads were merged, 
with max differences set to 100 and allowing for staggered overlap. ASVs were inferred 
from reads with lower than 1.5 expected error rate using the ‘cluster unoise with centroids’ 
algorithm with a minsize of 4, after which chimeras were removed using the uchime3 
denovo method. For each sample ASV abundances were determined by mapping the 
merged reads against the ASV sequences with identical matches sequence set using the 
usearch_global algorithm with a 0.97 distance cut off. Taxonomy was assigned using R 
(V4.0.5) and the dada255 assign taxonomy function using the silva (v132)56 reference 
database (arb-silva.de).
Human cohort study
The HELIUS study is a population-based multi-ethnic prospective cohort study, based in 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Baseline data collection took place between 2011 and 2015 
among the six largest ethnic groups in Amsterdam (those of Turkish, Moroccan, African 
Surinamese, South-Asian Surinamese Ghanaian and Dutch origin). People in these groups 
who were aged 18-70 were randomly, stratified by ethnicity, recruited from the municipal 
registry. Data collection consisted of a questionnaire and a physical examination including 
the collection of biological samples. Faecal samples were collected from participants. 
Microbiome data from the HELIUS study was processed as previously described57. ASV 
variants with an average abundance of more than 0.1 % were selected as representatives. 
Sequences were placed phylogenetically placed in the tree from the Living tree project 
(LTP_06_2022) using MAFFT (V7.310) and Fastree (V2.1.11). The tree was subset to all 
members of the Selenomonadales order. Ordination of the microbiome was performed by 
principal coordinate analysis of the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity. Enterotypes were defined 
by pam-clustering of the Jensen-Shannon Distance and were labelled by their major 
representative clade. Association of the ASVs with the different principal coordinates was 
determined by calculating the weighted average scores using wascores from the vegan 
(V2.6.4) package. Differences in prevalence were tested with a chi-square test. Data were 
De V os et al. Page 11
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
visualized using ggplot2. The HELIUS study complies with all relevant ethical regulations, 
is in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki (6th, 7th revisions), and the study protocol 
is approved by the Academic Medical Center Medical Ethics Committee. All participants 
provided written informed consents. The participants were voluntarily enrolled in this study 
without compensation.
Isolation of prevalent Mitsuokella strain
The stool sample of donor A was suspended in anaerobic PBS buffer (P2272, Sigma 
Aldrich) in an anaerobic tent to make a serial dilution of fecal slurry from 10-1 to 10-5. A 
volume of 200 μl of these dilutions were smeared on a screening agar medium containing 
sodium phytate (P8810, Sigma Aldrich) as the sole energy and carbon source. The screening 
medium was prepared by saturating 20mM phytate with magnesium chloride (7786-30-3, 
Sigma Aldrich) to produce milky agar plates. The agar plates were subsequently incubated 
in an anaerobic jar filled with N2/CO2 at 37 °C up to 5 days. Colonies surrounded with 
clear zones as indication of phytate degradation activities were picked up and streaked on 
new agar medium to confirm the degradation activity. This streaking was repeated a several 
times before being inoculated in a liquid medium containing phytate as the sole energy 
and carbon source. The identity of the isolate was determined via 16S rRNA sequencing 
at Macrogen and a draft genome of the Mitsuokella jalaludinii isolate was sequenced by 
Illumina NovaSeq 6000 S4 PE150 XP and assembled using Genome de novo assembly 
pipeline at Eurofins. The genome of Mitsuokella jalaludinii H1-1 isolate is publicly available 
on the NCBI genome database (BioProject: PRJNA1032471)
Phylogeny of phytases
A phytase phylogenetic tree was constructed from amino acid sequences of phytases and 
phosphatases from all hosts ranging from mammals to bacterial species that were retrieved 
from the NCBI database. This included previously reported phytase and phosphatase amino 
acid sequences from all hosts58, E. coli phytase9, Akkermansia phytase59 and Mitsuokella 
phytase32. All amino acid sequences were aligned using the Clustal_X programme. A 
phylogenetic tree was constructed using the neighbour-joining algorithm by the MEGA 7 
with 1000 bootstraps to obtain confidence levels for the branches.
Bacterial culturing
Mitsuokella jalaludinii DSM13811T was obtained from DSMZ culture collection and 
Anaerostipes rhamnosivorans 1y-2T was isolated previously and is available as DSM26241T. 
These two bacteria were routinely maintained in a modified YCFA medium22 supplemented 
with myo-inositol (87-89-8, Sigma Aldrich) for A. rhamnosivorans or sodium phytate 
(P8810, Sigma Aldrich) for M. jalaludinii.
The growth experiments were performed in duplicate in 20 ml bicarbonate-buffered 
medium60 supplemented with 20 mM phytate filled with N2/CO2 (80:20, v/v) gas in the 
head phase. Phytate and inositol were filter sterilized as stock solutions of 0.2 M and 
0.5 M. respectively. The condition in which the bacteria were added to 20 ml bicarbonate-
buffered medium without substrate was used as control. The growth was monitored via 
De V os et al. Page 12
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
metabolite formation by HPLC and optical density measurement by a spectrophotometer at a 
wavelength of 600 nm.
Monoculture and coculture studies of phytate degradation
The coculture study was performed in a bicarbonate buffered medium supplemented with 
phytate as sole energy and carbon source. Monoculture of M. jalaludinii or coculture of 
M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans were inoculated with 10 mM phytate. Bacterial 
supernatants were collected from both conditions at several time points for substrate 
consumption and metabolite production by HPLC. To identify the intermediates of phytate 
degradation by the monoculture and the coculture, the bacteria were inoculated with 5 
mM [13C6]InsP6 and bacterial supernatants were collected during the growth for NMR 
measurements. M. jalaludinii DSM13811T and A. rhamnosivorans 1y-2T were pre-cultured 
in YCFA medium supplemented with 20 mM phytate or 20 mM myo-inositol respectively. 
These precultures were added with 2.5 % to the media of the test conditions.
To investigate the synergy between M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans, the bacteria were 
grown in mono culture and coculture in a medium containing 10 mM, 20 mM and 40 
mM phytate or 10 mM, 20 mM or 40 mM myo-inositol in 96-well plate incubated in an 
anaerobic tent for growth monitoring for 48 h. At the end of the growth period, the bacterial 
supernatants were collected to analyze the substrate consumption and metabolite production. 
The experiment was performed in biological triplicates.
To study the growth rate of M. jalaludinii in phytate and myo-inositol; the bacteria were 
inoculated in YCFA medium supplemented with either 10 mM or 40 mM phytate or 10 
mM or 40 mM myo-inositol. The experiment was performed in 96-well plate which was 
incubated at 37 °C in a plate reader in the anaerobic chamber to monitor the OD600 every 
30 min for 24 h. The doubling time was determined from OD600 readings during exponential 
growth.
To study the capacity of A. rhamnosivorans to use 3-hydroxypropionate, the bacterium 
was incubated in a bicarbonate buffered medium containing 10 mM 3-hydroxypropionate 
or 15 mM glucose or both. The cultures were collected during 48 h for OD600 and end 
metabolite measurements. The experiment was performed in biological duplicate. To study 
the influence of 3-hydroxypropionate on the growth on myo-inositol, A. rhamnosivorans 
was grown in 20mM myo-inositol supplemented with either 0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 mM 3-
hydroxypropionate and the growth was monitored by OD600 measurement every 30 minutes 
in a plate reader placed in an anaerobic tent. The experiment was performed in biological 
triplicates.
Analytical methods
Phytate, myo-inositol, succinate, 3-hydroxypropionate and other short-chain fatty acids and 
alcohols were quantified on a Shimadzu HPLC system equipped with a Shodex sugar 
SH1821 6 μm, 8.0 x 300 mm column. The column was kept at 45 °C while running with 
0.005 M H2SO4 as eluent under a flow of 1 ml/min. The detector was a refractive index 
detector. Chemicals at HPLC quality were used to prepare the standard curves. All analyses 
were performed in duplicate.
De V os et al. Page 13
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Transcriptomics
To identify genes involved in phytate degradation by M. jalaludinii DSM13811T, the 
bacterium was grown in two conditions including a bicarbonate buffered medium 
supplemented with 20 mM phytate or 20 mM myo-inositol. The experiments were 
performed in triplicate. The bacteria were harvested after 17 h incubation. Bacterial 
supernatants were collected to perform HPLC measurements of substrate consumption and 
metabolite production while the cell pellets were used for RNA extraction. Cells were 
harvested from 100 ml bacterial cultures by centrifugation at 4700 g for 30 min at 4 
°C in 50 ml-pre-cooled sterile falcon tubes. Pellets were washed with 20 ml, 20 mM 
TE-buffer (pH 7) at 4700 g for 30 min at 4 °C and re-suspended in 150 μl TE buffer. 
Cell suspension was incubated with Lysozyme at 37 °C for 10 min. Cell lysis and RNase 
inactivation was performed by addition of a mix containing 4 μl β-mercaptoethanol, 1 μl 
proteinase-K and 150 μl of Gram-positive lysis solution (Gram positive DNA extraction 
kit, Masterpure). Lysis was done at 65 °C for 15 min while vortexing every 5 min. After 
incubation, the mix was quickly cooled on ice for 5 min and proteins were precipitated 
by adding 175 μL of MPC protein precipitation reagent (Gram positive DNA extraction 
kit, Masterpure). Debris was removed via centrifugation at 4 °C 10000 g. The sample was 
further cleaned and purified via the automated Maxwell LEV simply RNA extraction kit 
(Promega, Madison, USA), according to manufacturer’s instructions. Quality and quantity 
of the RNA extracts was checked by spectrophotometer DS-11 FX (DeNovix) according 
to manufacturer’s instructions. RNA was collected in RNase free water and stored at −80 
°C till further analysis. Depletion of rRNA and RNA quality were again assessed by a 
Nanodrop (A260/280 ~ 2.0 and A260/230 ~ 2.0-2.2) and a fragment analyzer (Agent 5400) 
at Novogene (Hong Kong, China). The RNA samples once passed the QC for integrity 
and quality check, were subjected for whole transcriptome sequencing. Paired-end 150bp 
libraries were generated by Illumina NovaSeq 6000 sequencing system.
To investigate the interaction between M. jalaludinii DSM13811T and A. rhamnosivorans in 
phytate at molecular levels, M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans were grown either together 
or alone in a bicarbonate buffer medium supplemented with 20 mM phytate or 20 mM 
inositol. The experiments were performed in triplicate. The bacteria were harvested after 17 
h incubation. Bacterial supernatants (1ml) were collected to perform HPLC measurement 
for substrate consumption and metabolite production, while the cell pellets were used for 
quantification of M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans. qPCR primers for M. jalaludinii 
were designed to quantify M. jalaludinii in the cocultures and murine microbiome using 
Primer3 and Blast based on 16S rRNA sequence of M. jalaludinii DSM13811T. The primers 
were validated using gDNA of M. jalaludinii. Primers for M. jalaludinii were MJ_F1: 
5’-TCTGTTGTCGGGGACGAATG-3’ and MJ_R1:5’- ACGTAGTTAGCCGTGGCTTC-3’, 
which resulted in a 83 bp amplicon. The 16S rRNA gene of M. jalaludinii was used to 
optimize temperature and make standard curves. The qPCR programme was 95 °C for 5 min 
and 35 cycles consisting of 95 °C for 30 s, 60 °C for 10 s and 72 °C for 40 s; 95 °C for 1 min 
and 60 °C for 1 min. DNA copies were calculated based on standard curves. qPCR primers 
for A. rhamnosivorans were used as previously designed and validated22. Bacterial cultures 
(100 ml) were used for RNA extraction and sequencing as described above. Obtained reads 
were aligned against reference genomes (BioProject PRJNA223472) of M. jalaludinii and 
De V os et al. Page 14
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
A. rhamnosivorans using bowtie2 (V2.5.1). Gene counts were gathered in R (V4.0.5) using 
feature counts function of the R subread package (V4.3). Differential expression analysis 
was performed using DESeq2 (V 1.38.3). For analysis were re-annotated using an available 
genome from GenBank (BioProject PRJNA223472) and re-annotating the genome in Rapid 
Annotation using Subsystem Technology (RAST) (Table S3).
To select the proposed pathway genes, we first looked at genes with high homology to 
known genes that have been biochemically characterized. For examples, inositol utilization 
genes were identified via proteome analysis22 and biochemical analyses61. The function 
of key proteins was also verified by BLASTing the amino acid sequences in Pfam, 
InterPro, Brenda and Uniprot databases. Subsequently, we confirmed that these genes 
were detected in the transcriptome at highest gene counts, indicative of high expression 
in a given condition on inositol and phytate. Genes chosen were highly expressed in 
both condition (phytate and myo-inositol). For example, a few gene copies of inosose 
dehydratase were found in the genome, two of which (MJ_0910; MJ_0385) were detected 
in the transcriptome, and the expression of MJ_0910 was detected with around 13000 
gene counts while only 48 counts were assigned for gene with a locus tag MJ_0385. 
This indicated that MJ_0910 was actively involved in inositol utilization. In this case, we 
observed that the entire inositol utilization operon (MJ_0906-0910) were highly expressed 
in both conditions with high gene counts, indicating their active involvement in phytate and 
inositol metabolism. This process was repeatedly done to identify all genes of the proposed 
pathway.
Animal studies using a stable isotope approach
All animal experiments were done in 4-week-old male C57Bl/6J mice (Charles River) 
housed in individually ventilated cages with 2 mice per cage and 24 mice for all treatments 
in total. Sample size was calculated using an online tool (http://www.lasec.cuhk.edu.hk/
sample-size-calculation.html). With a power of 0.8 and alpha of 0.5, 4 mice per treatment 
group were needed to obtain statistical significance. This sample size was in line with the 
previous publication on significant difference of intestinal phytate degradation9. Mice were 
kept under constant temperature (19–21 °C); humidity of 40–70 % and a 12-h light/dark 
cycle with free access to food and water. The mice were on high-fat diet (D12492i, Bio 
Services) during the treatment. Food and water were renewed once a week. An enrichment 
with house and tissues were also provided for the mice. All animal experiments were 
conducted according to guidelines of the ‘Guide to the Care and Use of Experimental 
Animals’ approved by the Ethics Committee on Animal Care and Use in Academisch 
Medisch Centrum, the Netherlands. We complied with all relevant ethics regulations for 
animal testing and research.
A stable-isotope approach was employed to study in vivo conversion of phytate by 
Mitsuokella jalaludinii (MJ) and Anaerostipes rhamnosivorans (AR). Mice were received 
at the age of 4 weeks and randomized and divided in 2 mice per cage. Acclimatization 
time was 2 weeks. To reduce the interference of endogenous murine microbiome, mice 
were treated with antibiotic cocktail of 1 mg ml−1 ampicillin, 5 mg ml−1 streptomycin 
and 1 mg ml−1 colistin via oral gavage one time in 1 week prior to the intervention as 
De V os et al. Page 15
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
described previously9. To test the in vivo degradation of phytate MJ and AR, 0.2 ml oral 
administration of 0.1 mg/g body weight phytate or 0.1 mg/g body weight phytate and 109 
c.f.u.s of MJ or 0.1 mg/g body weight phytate and 109 c.f.u.s of MJ and 109 c.f.u.s of 
AR were given to a group of 8 mice every second day for 2 weeks. Bacterial suspension 
was prepared in 10 % trehalose as described previously62. In week 3, [13C6]phytate-AR-
MJ, [13C6]phytate-MJ or [13C6]phytate challenge were given to a group of 8 mice in 
corresponding group. To estimate the time preference of in vivo conversion of [13C6]InsP6, 
a vial of bacterial suspension of MJ and AR was inoculated in a medium supplemented 
with 5 mM phytate. Phytate conversion by the bacteria was monitored during 24 h via 
metabolite measurement by HPLC. The experiment was performed in biological duplicate. 
Each 4 mice per group were sacrificed after 3 h or 6 h of the 13C challenge, and cecum 
contents and blood were collected for targeted metabolomics analyses via NMR, CE-MS, 
GC-MS and UHPLC-MS/MS measurements. Detailed methods were described in following 
sections. Colon samples were collected for quantification of A. rhamnosivorans and M. 
jalaludinii by qPCR at 3 h and 6 h time points as described above. The oral gavage and 
data collection were randomized every week as well as in 13C challenge test in the end of 
the study. The data met the assumptions of the statistical tests used, including normality and 
equal variances were formally tested. Data collection and analysis were performed blind to 
the conditions of the experiments. All animals and data points were included in the analyses. 
All figures were made using Prism 8 (Graphpad).
Extraction of InsPs from mouse cecal and plasma samples for metabolomics
The protocol for the extraction of InsPs from cecal samples was adapted from published 
procedures but scaled to match the higher mass and volume (between 20-120 mg)63–64. The 
cecum content is resuspended in ice-cold 1 M aqueous perchloric acid (HClO4, Supelco, 0.1 
mL per 1 mg cecum content) in a 5 mL or 15 mL tube by pipetting up and down (using a 
1 mL pipette tip with the tip slightly cut off to widen the opening) and vortexing for ~20 
s until all major clumps have broken up. The suspension was then incubated for 20 min 
at 4 °C on a rotary shaker. The sample is then centrifuged (10 min, 21 000 g, 4 °C) in 2 
mL tubes and the supernatant transferred into a separate 5 mL or 15 mL tube containing 
TiO2 beads (Titanosphere 5 μm, GL Sciences, 0.5 mg of TiO2 per 1 mg original cecum 
content material), which were already washed with 1 mL Milli-Q® water and 1 mL 1 M 
perchloric acid. The extract and TiO2 beads were mixed by briefly vortexing and on a rotary 
shaker for 20 min at 4 °C. After centrifugation (10 min, 18 000 g, 4 °C) in fresh 2 mL 
tubes the supernatant was discarded (note: for transferring the supernatant without disturbing 
the TiO2 beads a 2 μL Eppendorf tip attached to the tip of a 1 mL tip was used with slow 
pipetting) and the beads united in a single 1.5 mL tube by resuspending in 1 mL HClO4 in 
total. After vortexing the suspension was again centrifuged (10 min, 18 000 g, 4 °C) and 
the supernatant discarded. To eluate InsPs from the TiO2 beads, the beads were incubated 
with 375 μL of 10 % ammonia solution for 5 min at room temperature on a rotary shaker. 
After centrifugation (IKA miniG, 2000 g, 1 min) the supernatant was collected in a separate 
tube. The elution step is repeated once more and the eluates are combined. The combined 
eluates are filtered through a 0.2 μm syringe filter (Sartorius Minisart RC4, cat. 17821-Q) 
which was subsequently rinsed with 150 μL of Milli-Q® water. The filtrate was collected 
in a new 1.5 mL tube and lyophilized. To reduce the water content for NMR analysis the 
De V os et al. Page 16
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
lyophilized eluates were redissolved in 500 μL D2O and lyophilized again. The lyophilized 
samples were taken up in 500 μL D2O and defined volumes of NaOD and DCl were used to 
adjust the pH to 7.0. Afterwards, 2.86 μL of a TMPBr stock solution (20 mM in D2O) were 
added for quantification and submitted for NMR measurement.
The extractions of InsPs from plasma samples were performed based on the procedures of 
TiO2 purification method as reported65. Briefly, 60-100 μL of plasma was thawed on ice and 
an equal amount of perchloric aid (2 M, 4 °C) was added. The sample was rotated for 30 
min at 4 °C and then centrifuged (15.000 g, 10 min, 4 °C). Transfer the supernatant to pre-
washed TiO2 beads (5 mg per sample, 5020-75000 GL Sciences) and incubate at 4 °C with 
rotation for 20 minutes. After that, the suspension was centrifuged (3.500 g, 1 min, 4 °C) 
and the supernatant was discarded. Wash the unbinding compounds with 0.5 mL perchloric 
acid (1 M) twice. For elution, NH4OH (200 μL, 3 % [v/v]) was used. The elution step was 
repeated and the eluents were combined. The combined eluents were centrifuged (17.000 
g, 1 min, 4 °C) to remove any insoluble residues. For subsequent CE-ESI-MS analysis, the 
supernatant was completely dried under vacuum evaporation (60 °C) and dissolved into 20 
μL of ultrapure water before measurement.
Extraction of myo -inositol from plasma samples for metabolomics
The extractions of inositol from plasma samples were performed based on the procedures as 
previously reported65. Briefly, plasma samples were thawed and vortexed before transferring 
50 μL to 250 μL of acetonitrile containing 1 % of formic acid for protein precipitation. 
After centrifuging, the supernatants were transferred into a HPLC vial for the UHPLC-MS 
analysis.
Capillary electrophoresis combined with triple quadrupole with electrospray ionization 
source analysis of [13C 6] InsPs in plasma samples
Known amounts of isotopic standards (2 μM [18O2] 5-InsP7) were spiked into samples 
for quantitation of [13C6] PP-InsPs and [18O12] InsP6 (2 μM) were spiked into samples 
for quantitation of [13C6] InsPs. For plasma samples, 2 μM [18O2] 5-InsP7 and 2 μM 
[18O12] InsP6 were spiked. For cecum samples, the samples were diluted 20-fold, then 4 
μM [18O2] 5-InsP7 and 20 μM [18O12] InsP6 were spiked. A CE-ESI-QQQ system is used 
for the measurement15, 66. Set MS source parameters and MRM transitions is provided in 
supplementary information. The injection for each sample is 30 nL.
13C-Myo -Inositol measurement in plasma samples
Plasma [13C6]myo inositol was quantified using UHPLC-MS/MS. Analysis was performed 
on a UHPLC (Agilent 1290 infinity II) coupled to a Q-TOF (Agilent 6546). 
Chromatographic separation was achieved using gradient elution on an UHPLC Acquity 
BEH Amide column (1.7 μm, 2.1 mm x 150 mm) at 30 °C at a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min. 
Mobile phase consisted of 0.04 % NH4OH (mobile phase A) and 100 % acetonitrile (mobile 
phase B). Setting of instrument parameters and gradient elution as shown in table. The 
elution started with 13 % mobile phase A, increased to 17 % mobile phase A between 0 
and 16 min then to 19 % mobile phase A between 16 to 19 min. Between 19 to 21 min, 
mobile phase A was increased to 30 % then held for 2 min. Stock solution of myo-inositol 
De V os et al. Page 17
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
(2 mg/mL) was prepared in ultrapure water, then was diluted in 87 % acetonitrile (starting 
mobile phase condition for analysis) to obtain five calibration levels (0.1 μg/mL, 0.5 μg/mL, 
1 μg/mL, 5 μg/mL, 10 μg/mL) for quantification of myo-inositol in plasma. Each calibration 
levels have three replicates.
Cecum SCFA measurement
SCFA concentration and 13C-enrichment in cecal sample were analyzed as described 
previously67. Briefly, samples were thawed, diluted in 500 μL PBS and spiked with 
50 μL of (0.5 mg/mL) 2-ethyl butyric acid as internal standard. After adding 10 μL 
of HCl (12M), samples were homogenized and centrifuged (20 min, 15 000 x g, 4 
°C). The supernatant was transferred to a glass vial with a spatula tip of solid NaCl. 
SCFAs were extracted in 2 mL diethylether. For SCFA derivatization, 500 μL of diethyl 
ether was derivatized with 50 uL N-tert-butyldimethylsilyl-N-methyltrifluoroacetamide 
(MTBSTFA) at room temperature overnight. For 3-hydroxypropionate, 1 ml of the diethyl 
ether was derivatized with N,Obis(trimethylsilyl)trifluoroacetamide (BSTFA) at 50 °C for 
1 hour. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed using an Agilent 5975C series gas 
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC-MS) (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA) 
equipped with a ZB-1 column (Phenomenex, Torrance, USA). The mass isotopologue 
spectra of ([M-57]+) fragment of the derivatives of acetate (m/z 117-1119, m0-m2), 
propionate (m/z 131-134, m0-m3), butyrate (m/z 173-149, m0-m4) and 3-hydroxypropionte 
(m/z 219-222, m0-m3) were monitored. The standard curves were prepared in a range of 10 
μM to 10 mM for acetate, 3 μM to 3 mM for propionate and butyrate; 0.5 μM to 30 μM for 
3-hydroxypropionate. These ranges covered all measured points.
Caco-2 cell testing
To investigate the effects of microbial metabolites on barrier integrity, TEER 
(Transepithelial electrical resistance) experiments in Caco-2 cells were performed. Caco-2 
cells were ordered from ATCC under accession number HTB-37. As propionate is the 
major metabolite from phytate break-down by the coculture, effect of propionate on 
barrier integrity was assessed in Caco-2 cell with transwell setting. To produce bacterial 
supernatants for Caco-2 cell work, a coculture of M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans 
was grown in YCFA containing 20mM phytate. The effects of propionate and bacterial 
metabolites on barrier integrity is expressed by TEER increase compared to the baseline 
(%). The pH of the cultures was monitored every day and adjusted to neutral pH after 
addition of substrates. The pH adjustment and substrate addition were conducted every day 
for 5 days. Bacterial supernatants were collected at all time points for HPLC measurement.
At 80 % of confluence of the Caco-2 cell culture, cells were treated with Trypsin-EDTA and 
seeded apically at 5x104 cells per well onto 12 mm ThinCert™ with 0.4 μm pore membrane 
(Coming, CLS3460) in a 24-well plate. Growth media were renewed every 2 days with 
DMEM containing 10 % fetal bovine serum (FBS), 1 % penicillin-streptomycin and 1 % 
of non-essential amino acids. Caco-2 cells were incubated in an incubator maintained in a 
humidified atmosphere at 37 °C with 5 % CO2. Caco-2 cells were seeded on transwells for 
21 days to obtain a monolayer for TEER measurement. TEER analyses were performed at 
day 7, 14, and 21 in culture. After 21 days, the medium in the apical compartment was 
De V os et al. Page 18
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
replaced with medium containing either 20mM propionate; 10 % M. jalaludinii and A. 
rhamnosivorans supernatant or 10 % YCFA medium as control. TEER measurement was 
performed at T0; 4 h; 7 h; 24 h and 30 h. Cells with fresh medium was used as control 
condition. At the end of the experiment, the supernatant in the apical compartment was 
collected for HPLC analysis while Caco-2 cells were washed with 300 uL of PBS and 
collected in 300 uL of Trizol/Tripure®. These cells were then stored at -80 °C freezer for 
RNA extraction and qPCR to quantify the activity of tight junction genes. The experiment 
was performed in biological triplicate.
In order to assess the influence of propionate and bacterial metabolites on barrier integrity, 
total RNA was extracted from cells incubated with either water or 20 mM propionate, 10 
% bacterial supernatant of the coculture of M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans, 10 % 
bacterial medium using TriPure reagent according to manufacturer’s instruction. Quality 
and concentration of extracted RNA were determined by a Nanodrop spectrometer. The 
cDNA was amplified using SensiFAST SYBR Green PCR Kit (Meridian bioscience, USA), 
following the manufacturer’s instructions. Human tight junction genes (Claudin 1, Occludin, 
E-cadherin, Claudin 2 and ZO1)68 were amplified using specific primers, with expression 
being normalized to 18S and 36B4 genes. The sequences of the primers are provided in 
the supplementary information. The qPCR programme was 10 minutes at 95 °C, 39 cycles 
consisting of 15 seconds at 95 °C and 30 seconds at 60 °C and melting curves were obtained 
at between 65 °C to 95 °C with an increment of 0.5 °C every 5 seconds. Fold changes were 
calculated using 2-ΔCq. Cq is the number of amplification cycles that is needed to reach a 
threshold of fluorescence signal. qPCR was performed with technical duplicates.
De V os et al. Page 19
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Extended Data
Extended Figure 1. Stable-isotope analysis of myo -inositol metabolism in M. jalajudinii.
13C-NMR analysis shows rapid [13C6]myo-inositol conversion by M. jalaludinii 
DSM13811T to [13C3]3-hydroxypropionate, [13C3]lactate, [13C4], and [13C2]acetate after 
24 h and 48 h incubation. incubation. Raw NMR data are provided as supplementary data 
(Bui_NMR_data 4).
De V os et al. Page 20
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Extended Figure 2. Phylogeny of phytases.
A phylogenetic tree derived from the alignment of predicted phytases from M. jalaludinii 
and M. multacida (bold) and MINPP protein representatives from different kingdoms of 
life was constructed using the Maximum Likelihood algorithm. The different kingdoms 
have been assigned the following background colours: Animal, blue; plants, green; protists. 
orange; bacterial, yellow. Bar, 20 % sequence divergence.
De V os et al. Page 21
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Extended Figure 3. Concentration independent synergy between M. jalaludinii and A. 
rhamnosivorans for phytate breakdown.
a: Growth curves of co-cultures (blue) of M. jalaludinii a nd A. rhamnosivorans and 
monocultures (pink) of M. jalaludinii in 10 mM, 20 mM, and 40 mM phytate during 24 h 
incubation. b: End metabolite production of the co-cultures and monocultures of cocultures 
(blue) of M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans and monocultures (pink) of M. jalaludinii 
in 10 mM, 20 mM, and 40 mM phytate after 24 h incubation. Data are presented as mean 
values +/- SD (n=3 biological replicates).
Extended Figure 4. 3-hydroxypropionate metabolism by A. rhamnosivorans.
A. rhamnosivorans was found to co-metabolize 3-hydroxypropionate but failed to use it as 
sole energy and carbon. Fermentation profiles are shown of A. rhamnosivorans incubated 
De V os et al. Page 22
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
in glucose (a); glucose and 3-hydroxypropionate (b); 3-hydroxypropionate (c) and myo-
inositol plus 3-hydroxypropionate (HP) (d) by Anaerostipes rhamnosivorans. All experiment 
were performed in biological duplicate. Data are presented as mean values (n=2 biological 
replicates for a, b, c) or mean values +/- SD (n=4 biological replicates for d).
Extended Figure 5. Transcriptome analysis reveals synergy study M. jalaludinii and A. 
rhamnosivorans.
Metabolite production and substrate consumption of phytate (a) and myo-inositol (b) by 
monocultures and co-cultures of M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans. Cell numbers of M. 
jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans quantified by qPCR in the coculture on phytate (c) and 
myo-inositol (d). e: Principal coordination plot of the transcriptional profiles obtained by 
RNAseq of M. jalaludinii when grown on phytate (green/purple) or myo-inositol (red/blue) 
in the presence (blue/purple) or absence (red/green) of A. rhamnosivorans (Table S2-7). 
Ordination was based on centered log transformed counts and Euclidean distance. The 
experiment was performed in biological triplicate. Data are presented as mean values +/- SD 
(n=3 biological replicates).
De V os et al. Page 23
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Extended Figure 6. Reconstruction of 3-hydroxypropionate conversion to propionate by A. 
rhamnosivorans.
3-hydroxypropionate is imported via a permease (AR1Y2_1114) and further converted to 
3-hydroxy propionyl-CoA, Acryloyl_CoA, propionyl-CoA and eventually propionate by 
an oxoacid CoA tranferase (AR1Y2_1115), a dehydratase (AR1Y2_1116), an acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase/electron transfer flavoprotein complex (AR1Y2_1112, 1113 and 1117). This 
acyl-CoA dehydrogenase/Etf complex is predicted to be involved in energy conservation via 
by coupling the electrochemical gradient generated via a membrane bound Rnf complex 
with ATP synthesis.
De V os et al. Page 24
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Extended Figure 7. Production of bacterial supernatant of the co-culture for epithelial barrier 
function test using a Caco-2 cell model.
The experiment was performed in YCFA medium supplemented with phytate. Around 
20 mM phytate was repeatedly added after adjusting the pH to neutral (~7). Bacterial 
supernatant was collected before and after substrate addition for 5 days. In the end of the 
growth, propionate, acetate and succinate were found as major end metabolites with nearly 
90 mM propionate. Red arrows indicate the time of phytate addition.
De V os et al. Page 25
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Extended Figure 8. Propionate and phytate-derived bacterial metabolites improved epithelial 
barrier integrity via activating tight junction genes.
a: 20mM propionate co-incubation increased TEER values as compared to the control. 
b: Increased activity of tight junction genes Claudin-1, Claudin-2 and E-cadherin upon 
propionate exposure. c: Increased barrier integrity when Caco-2 cells were incubated 
with 10 % bacterial supernatant from a coculture (M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans) 
compared to 10 % the medium control. d: Increased activity of tight junction genes 
Claudin-1 and E-cadherin upon bacterial supernatant exposure compared to the medium 
control. The fold change expression was normalized to the control used in c. Values in a 
and c are increases of TEER compared to the baseline (%). Data shown in b and d were 
normalized to the control of b. Data are presented as mean values +/- SD (n=4 biological 
replicates) and statistical analysis was performed by multiple Ttests (a,c) and two-way 
ANOV A (b, d). Only significantly different comparisons are shown with P values.
De V os et al. Page 26
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Extended Figure 9. Targeted metabolomic analysis of [13C 6]InsPs and [13C 6]inositol in mouse 
plasma.
Extracted counts of [13C6]InsP2, [13C6]InsP3, [13C6]InsP4, [13C6]InsP5 and [13C6]InsP6 in 
mouse plasma by CE-MS analysis are shown per treatment group. [18O12]InsP6 was used 
as reference in each measurement run. The limit of detection (LOD) was assessed via 
spiking with [18O12]InsP6 standard to TiO2 extracted plasma samples and calculation of a 
signal-to-noise above 3. The LOD value was 35nM in the extracted plasma matrix. Extracted 
Ion electropherograms depicting absence of individual [13C6]InsPs in a representative mouse 
of the phytate treatment group at 3 h (a) and 6 h (b); Phytate_A.rham_MJ treatment group at 
De V os et al. Page 27
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
3 h (c) and 6 h (d); phytate_MJ treatment group at 3 h (e) and 6 h (f). g, The measurement of 
[13C6]myo-inositol in the plasma samples by UHPLC-MS analysis indicated no [13C6]myo-
inositol was detectable. [12C6]myo-inositol was used as reference in each measurement run. 
The LOD of myo-inositol was 8 nM as previously reported66
Extended Figure 10. Enrichment of 13C-short chain fatty acids in mouse ceca upon bacterial oral 
challenge.
Relative abundance of one 13C (m1); two 13C (m2); three 13C (m3) and four 13C 
(m4) of 13C-propionate (a); 13C-butyrate (b) and 13C-acetate (c) in mouse cecum in 
De V os et al. Page 28
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
three treatment groups: Phytate (brown); Phytate_A.rham_MJ (blue) and phytate_MJ 
(green). Data are presented as mean values +/- SD (n=4 biological replicates for Phytate 
and Phytate_A.rham_MJ at 3h); (n=3 biological replicates for Phytate_A.rham_MJ and 
Phytate_MJ at 6h);(n= 11; 7; 10 biological replicates for natural abundances of 13C-
propionate; 13C-butyrate and 13C-acetate respectively) or as mean values of two data points 
for Phytate_MJ at 3h due to technical issues during derivatization.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgements
Authors thank assistance of Stefan Havik and Naomi Tramper in the mouse experiment, Nuria Farras Sole in 
cell work experiment, Meike Amma during synthesis of [13C6]inositol and [13C6]InsP6; Verena B. Eisenbeis 
for extraction of InsPs and Hanneke Borger for arranging stool sampling for in vitro phytate incubation. This 
work is supported by CVON In Control II (grant number 2018.27) (M.N); a personal Amsterdam UMC postdoc 
bridging grant and a personal ZONMW VENI grant 2022 [09150162210057] (T.P.N.B); a personal ZONMW 
VICI grant 2020 [09150182010020] (M.N) and the SIAM Gravitation Grant 024.002.002 (W.M.dV). H.J.J. and 
G.L. acknowledge funding from the V olkswagen Foundation (VW Momentum Grant 98604). The HELIUS study 
is conducted by the Amsterdam University Medical Centers, location AMC and the Public Health Service of 
Amsterdam. Both organizations provided core support for HELIUS. The HELIUS study is also funded by the Dutch 
Heart Foundation, the Netherlands Organization for Health Research and Development (ZonMw), the European 
Union (FP-7), and the European Fund for the Integration of non-EU immigrants (EIF). We are most grateful to the 
participants of the HELIUS study and the management team, research nurses, interviewers, research assistants and 
other staff who have taken part in gathering the data of this study.
Data Availability
Annotated genome of Mitsuokella jalaludinii DSM13811T (BioProject PRJNA223472) as 
Table S3. A draft genome of Mitsuokella jalaludinii H1-1 isolate has been deposited 
in NCBI genome database (BioProject: PRJNA1032471). Taxonomic assignment of 
the phytate microbial communities was performed using the silva (v132) as reference 
database (arb-silva.de). The phylogenetic tree of Mitsuokella ASVs was based on the 
living tree project (https://imedea.uib-csic.es/mmg/ltp/#Downloads). The raw reads from 
transcriptomic analyses have been deposited in European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) as 
PRJEB65314. The entire transcriptome is provided in Table S1-8. The sequencing data 
of phytate enrichments have been deposited in ENA as PRJEB65313. Helius dataset was 
deposited in European Genome-Phenome Archive (EGA) as EGAS00001002969 (https://
ega-archive.org/studies/EGAS00001002969). All raw NMR data are deposited in Figshare. 
Used databases are biological Magnetic Resonance Data bank (http://www.bmrb.wisc.edu/
metabolomics/metabolomics_standards); Pfam (http://pfam.xfam.org/), InterPro (https://
www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/), Brenda (https://www.brenda-enzymes.org/), Uniprot (https://
www.uniprot.org/).
References
1. Zmora N, Suez J, Elinav E. You are what you eat: diet, health and the gut microbiota. Nature 
Reviews Gastroenterology & Hepatology. 2019; 16 (1) 35–56. [PubMed: 30262901] 
2. Asnicar F, Berry SE, Valdes AM, Nguyen LH, Piccinno G, Drew DA, Leeming E, Gibson R, Le 
Roy C, Khatib HA, Francis L, et al. Microbiome connections with host metabolism and habitual 
De V os et al. Page 29
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
diet from 1,098 deeply phenotyped individuals. Nat Med. 2021; 27 (2) 321–332. DOI: 10.1038/
s41591-020-01183-8 [PubMed: 33432175] 
3. Schlemmer U, Frølich W, Prieto RM, Grases F. Phytate in foods and significance for humans: Food 
sources, intake, processing, bioavailability, protective role and analysis. Molecular Nutrition & Food 
Research. 2009; 53 (S2) S330–S375. [PubMed: 19774556] 
4. Amirabdollahian F, Ash R. An estimate of phytate intake and molar ratio of phytate to zinc in the 
diet of the people in the United Kingdom. Public Health Nutr. 2010; 13 (9) 1380–8. [PubMed: 
20409358] 
5. Hambidge KM, Miller LV , Westcott JE, Krebs NF. Dietary reference intakes for zinc may require 
adjustment for phytate intake based upon model predictions. J Nutr. 2008; 138 (12) 2363–6. DOI: 
10.3945/jn.108.093823 [PubMed: 19022958] 
6. Humer E, Schwarz C, Schedle K. Phytate in pig and poultry nutrition. Journal of Animal Physiology 
and Animal Nutrition. 2015; 99 (4) 605–625. [PubMed: 25405653] 
7. Satija A, Bhupathiraju SN, Spiegelman D, Chiuve SE, Manson JE, Willett W, Rexrode KM, Rimm 
EB, Hu FB. Healthful and Unhealthful Plant-Based Diets and the Risk of Coronary Heart Disease in 
U.S. Adults. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017; 70 (4) 411–422. DOI: 10.1016/j.jacc.2017.05.047 [PubMed: 
28728684] 
8. Kim H, Caulfield LE, Rebholz CM. Healthy Plant-Based Diets Are Associated with Lower Risk 
of All-Cause Mortality in US Adults. J Nutr. 2018; 148 (4) 624–631. DOI: 10.1093/jn/nxy019 
[PubMed: 29659968] 
9. Wu, S-e; Hashimoto-Hill, S; Woo, V; Eshleman, EM; Whitt, J; Engleman, L; Karns, R; Denson, 
LA; Haslam, DB; Alenghat, T. Microbiota-derived metabolite promotes HDAC3 activity in the gut. 
Nature. 2020; 586 (7827) 108–112. DOI: 10.1038/s41586-020-2604-2 [PubMed: 32731255] 
10. Sanchis P, Rivera R, Berga F, Fortuny R, Adrover M, Costa-Bauza A, Grases F, Masmiquel 
L. Phytate Decreases Formation of Advanced Glycation End-Products in Patients with Type 
II Diabetes: Randomized Crossover Trial. Scientific Reports. 2018; 8 (1) 9619 doi: 10.1038/
s41598-018-27853-9 [PubMed: 29941991] 
11. Lee S-H, Park H-J, Chun HK, Cho S-Y , Cho S-M, Lillehoj HS. Dietary phytic acid lowers the 
blood glucose level in diabetic KK mice. Nutrition Research. 2006; 26 (9) 474–479. 
12. Liu C, Chen C, Yang F, Li X, Cheng L, Song Y . Phytic acid improves intestinal mucosal barrier 
damage and reduces serum levels of proinflammatory cytokines in a 1,2-dimethylhydrazine-
induced rat colorectal cancer model. British Journal of Nutrition. 2018; 120 (2) 121–130. 
[PubMed: 29947321] 
13. Vucenik I, Shamsuddin AM. Protection against cancer by dietary IP6 and inositol. Nutr Cancer. 
2006; 55 (2) 109–25. [PubMed: 17044765] 
14. Letcher, Andrew J; Michael, J; Robin, F. Do mammals make all their own inositol 
hexakisphosphate?. Biochemical Journal. 2008; 416 (2) 263–270. DOI: 10.1042/BJ20081417 
[PubMed: 18684107] 
15. Qiu D, Wilson MS, Eisenbeis VB, Harmel RK, Riemer E, Haas TM, Wittwer C, Jork N, Gu C, 
Shears SB, Schaaf G, et al. Analysis of inositol phosphate metabolism by capillary electrophoresis 
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. Nature Communications. 2020; 11 (1) 6035 doi: 
10.1038/s41467-020-19928-x [PubMed: 33247133] 
16. Chatree S, Thongmaen N, Tantivejkul K, Sitticharoon C, Vucenik I. Role of Inositols and 
Inositol Phosphates in Energy Metabolism. Molecules. 2020; 25 (21) 5079. doi: 10.3390/
molecules25215079 [PubMed: 33139672] 
17. Azevedo C, Saiardi A. Eukaryotic Phosphate Homeostasis: The Inositol Pyrophosphate 
Perspective. Trends in Biochemical Sciences. 2017; 42 (3) 219–231. [PubMed: 27876550] 
18. Chakraborty A. The inositol pyrophosphate pathway in health and diseases. Biological Reviews. 
2018; 93 (2) 1203–1227. DOI: 10.1111/brv.12392 [PubMed: 29282838] 
19. Gu C, Liu J, Liu X, Zhang H, Luo J, Wang H, Locasale JW, Shears SB. Metabolic supervision 
by PPIP5K, an inositol pyrophosphate kinase/phosphatase, controls proliferation of the HCT116 
tumor cell line. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2021; 118 (10) doi: 10.1073/pnas.2020187118 
[PubMed: 33649228] 
De V os et al. Page 30
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
20. Minini M, Senni A, Unfer V , Bizzarri M. The Key Role of IP(6)K: A Novel Target for Anticancer 
Treatments?. Molecules. 2020; 25 (19) doi: 10.3390/molecules25194401 [PubMed: 32992691] 
21. Eiseman J, Lan J, Guo J, Joseph E, Vucenik I. Pharmacokinetics and tissue distribution of inositol 
hexaphosphate in C.B17 SCID mice bearing human breast cancer xenografts. Metabolism. 2011; 
60 (10) 1465–74. [PubMed: 21489580] 
22. Bui TPN, Mannerås-Holm L, Puschmann R, Wu H, Troise AD, Nijsse B, Boeren S, Bäckhed 
F, Fiedler D, deV os WM. Conversion of dietary inositol into propionate and acetate by 
commensal Anaerostipes associates with host health. Nat Commun. 2021; 12 (1) 4798 doi: 
10.1038/s41467-021-25081-w [PubMed: 34376656] 
23. Koh A, De Vadder F, Kovatcheva-Datchary P, Bäckhed F. From Dietary Fiber to Host Physiology: 
Short-Chain Fatty Acids as Key Bacterial Metabolites. Cell. 2016; 165 (6) 1332–1345. [PubMed: 
27259147] 
24. Fan Y , Pedersen O. Gut microbiota in human metabolic health and disease. Nature Reviews 
Microbiology. 2021; 19 (1) 55–71. [PubMed: 32887946] 
25. Haros M, Bielecka M, Sanz Y . Phytase activity as a novel metabolic feature in Bifidobacterium. 
FEMS Microbiology Letters. 2005; 247 (2) 231–239. [PubMed: 15935567] 
26. Haros M, Bielecka M, Honke J, Sanz Y . Myo-inositol hexakisphosphate degradation by 
Bifidobacterium infantis ATCC 15697. International Journal of Food Microbiology. 2007; 117 
(1) 76–84. [PubMed: 17462768] 
27. García-Mantrana I, Monedero V , Haros M. Reduction of Phytate in Soy Drink by Fermentation 
with Lactobacillus casei Expressing Phytases From Bifidobacteria. Plant Foods for Human 
Nutrition. 2015; 70 (3) 269–274. [PubMed: 26003176] 
28. Haros M, Carlsson NG, Almgren A, Larsson-Alminger M, Sandberg A-S, Andlid T. Phytate 
degradation by human gut isolated Bifidobacterium pseudocatenulatum ATCC27919 and its 
probiotic potential. International Journal of Food Microbiology. 2009; 135 (1) 7–14. [PubMed: 
19674804] 
29. Stentz R, Osborne S, Horn N, Li AW, Hautefort I, Bongaerts R, Rouyer M, Bailey P, Shears 
SB, Hemmings AM, Brearley CA, et al. A bacterial homolog of a eukaryotic inositol phosphate 
signaling enzyme mediates cross-kingdom dialog in the mammalian gut. Cell Rep. 2014; 6 (4) 
646–56. DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.01.021 [PubMed: 24529702] 
30. Steer TE, Gee JN, Johnson IT, Gibson GR. Biodiversity of human faecal bacteria isolated from 
phytic acid enriched chemostat fermenters. Current issues in intestinal microbiology. 2004; 5 (2) 
23–30. [PubMed: 15460064] 
31. Yanke LJ, Bae HD, Selinger LB, Cheng KJ. Phytase activity of anaerobic ruminal bacteria. 
Microbiology. 1998; 144 (6) 1565–1573. [PubMed: 9639927] 
32. D’Silva CG, Bae HD, Yanke LJ, Cheng KJ, Selinger LB. Localization of phytase in Selenomonas 
ruminantium and Mitsuokella multiacidus by transmission electron microscopy. Can J Microbiol. 
2000; 46 (4) 391–5. [PubMed: 10779878] 
33. Nguyen Trung M, Kieninger S, Fandi Z, Qiu D, Liu G, Mehendale NK, Saiardi A, Jessen H, 
Keller B, Fiedler D. Stable Isotopomers of myo-Inositol Uncover a Complex MINPP1-Dependent 
Inositol Phosphate Network. ACS Central Science. 2022; doi: 10.1021/acscentsci.2c01032 
[PubMed: 36589890] 
34. Deschasaux M, Bouter KE, Prodan A, Levin E, Groen AK, Herrema H, Tremaroli V , Bakker GJ, 
Attaye I, Pinto-Sietsma SJ, van Raalte DH, et al. Depicting the composition of gut microbiota 
in a population with varied ethnic origins but shared geography. Nature Medicine. 2018; 24 (10) 
1526–1531. [PubMed: 30150717] 
35. Snijder MB, Galenkamp H, Prins M, Derks EM, Peters RJG, Zwinderman AH, Stronks K. Cohort 
profile: the Healthy Life in an Urban Setting (HELIUS) study in Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
BMJ Open. 2017; 7 (12) e017873 doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-017873 [PubMed: 29247091] 
36. Moraïs S, Mizrahi I. Islands in the stream: from individual to communal fiber degradation in 
the rumen ecosystem. FEMS Microbiol Rev. 2019; 43 (4) 362–379. DOI: 10.1093/femsre/fuz007 
[PubMed: 31050730] 
37. Wu GD, Chen J, Hoffmann C, Bittinger K, Chen Y-Y , Keilbaugh SA, Bewtra M, Knights D, 
Walters W A, Knight R, Sinha R, et al. Linking Long-Term Dietary Patterns with Gut Microbial 
De V os et al. Page 31
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Enterotypes. Science. 2011; 334 (6052) 105–108. DOI: 10.1126/science.1208344 [PubMed: 
21885731] 
38. Jeffery IB, Claesson MJ, O’Toole PW, Shanahan F. Categorization of the gut microbiota: 
enterotypes or gradients?. Nature Reviews Microbiology. 2012; 10 (9) 591–592. [PubMed: 
23066529] 
39. Gacesa R, Kurilshikov A, Vich Vila A, Sinha T, Klaassen MAY , Bolte LA, Andreu-Sánchez S, 
Chen L, Collij V , Hu S, Dekens JAM, et al. Environmental factors shaping the gut microbiome in a 
Dutch population. Nature. 2022; 604 (7907) 732–739. [PubMed: 35418674] 
40. Lan GQ, Ho YW, Abdullah N. Mitsuokella jalaludinii sp. nov., from the rumens of cattle in 
Malaysia. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology. 2002; 52 (3) 713–
718. [PubMed: 12054230] 
41. Martín JF, Liras P. Molecular Mechanisms of Phosphate Sensing, Transport and Signalling in 
Streptomyces and Related Actinobacteria. International Journal of Molecular Sciences. 2021; 22 
(3) 1129. doi: 10.3390/ijms22031129 [PubMed: 33498785] 
42. Maher MJ, Herath AS, Udagedara SR, Dougan DA, Truscott KN. Crystal structure of bacterial 
succinate:quinone oxidoreductase flavoprotein SdhA in complex with its assembly factor SdhE. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2018; 115 (12) 2982–2987. DOI: 10.1073/
pnas.1800195115 [PubMed: 29514959] 
43. McNeil NI, Cummings JH, James WP. Short chain fatty acid absorption by the human large 
intestine. Gut. 1978; 19 (9) 819–22. DOI: 10.1136/gut.19.9.819 [PubMed: 30683] 
44. Dilworth LL, Omoruyi FO, Simon OR, Morrison EY , Asemota HN. The effect of phytic acid on 
the levels of blood glucose and some enzymes of carbohydrate and lipid metabolism. West Indian 
Med J. 2005; 54 (2) 102–6. [PubMed: 15999878] 
45. Okazaki Y , Katayama T. Dietary phytic acid modulates characteristics of the colonic luminal 
environment and reduces serum levels of proinflammatory cytokines in rats fed a high-fat diet. 
Nutr Res. 2014; 34 (12) 1085–91. [PubMed: 25444642] 
46. Hashimoto-Hill S, Colapietro L, Woo V , Antonacci S, Whitt J, Engleman L, Alenghat T. Dietary 
phytate primes epithelial antibacterial immunity in the intestine. Front Immunol. 2022; 13 952994 
doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2022.952994 [PubMed: 36341403] 
47. Dekkers KF, Sayols-Baixeras S, Baldanzi G, Nowak C, Hammar U, Nguyen D, Varotsis G, 
Brunkwall L, Nielsen N, Eklund AC, Bak Holm J, et al. An online atlas of human plasma 
metabolite signatures of gut microbiome composition. Nature Communications. 2022; 13 (1) 5370 
doi: 10.1038/s41467-022-33050-0 [PubMed: 36151114] 
48. Levine UY , Bearson SMD, Stanton TB. Mitsuokella jalaludinii inhibits growth of Salmonella 
enterica serovar Typhimurium. Veterinary Microbiology. 2012; 159 (1) 115–122. [PubMed: 
22503601] 
49. Liang N, Neužil-Bunešová V , Tejnecký V , Gänzle M, Schwab C. 3-Hydroxypropionic 
acid contributes to the antibacterial activity of glycerol metabolism by the food microbe 
Limosilactobacillus reuteri. Food Microbiology. 2021; 98 103720 [PubMed: 33875197] 
50. Thaiss CA, Levy M, Grosheva I, Zheng D, Soffer E, Blacher E, Braverman S, Tengeler AC, Barak 
O, Elazar M, Ben-Zeev R, et al. Hyperglycemia drives intestinal barrier dysfunction and risk for 
enteric infection. Science. 2018; 359 (6382) 1376–1383. [PubMed: 29519916] 
51. Harmel RK, Puschmann R, Nguyen Trung M, Saiardi A, Schmieder P, Fiedler D. Harnessing 13C-
labeled myo-inositol to interrogate inositol phosphate messengers by NMR. Chemical Science. 
2019; 10 (20) 5267–5274. DOI: 10.1039/c9sc00151d [PubMed: 31191882] 
52. Mobini R, Tremaroli V , Ståhlman M, Karlsson F, Levin M, Ljungberg M, Sohlin M, Bertéus 
Forslund H, Perkins R, Bäckhed F, Jansson P-A. Metabolic effects of Lactobacillus reuteri DSM 
17938 in people with type 2 diabetes: A randomized controlled trial. Diabetes, Obesity and 
Metabolism. 2017; 19 (4) 579–589. [PubMed: 28009106] 
53. Kozich JJ, Westcott SL, Baxter NT, Highlander SK, Schloss PD. Development of a Dual-Index 
Sequencing Strategy and Curation Pipeline for Analyzing Amplicon Sequence Data on the MiSeq 
Illumina Sequencing Platform. Applied and Environmental Microbiology. 2013; 79 (17) 5112–
5120. DOI: 10.1128/AEM.01043-13 [PubMed: 23793624] 
De V os et al. Page 32
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
54. Rognes T, Flouri T, Nichols B, Quince C, Mahé F. VSEARCH: a versatile open source tool for 
metagenomics. PeerJ. 2016; 4 e2584 doi: 10.7717/peerj.2584 [PubMed: 27781170] 
55. Callahan BJ, Wong J, Heiner C, Oh S, Theriot CM, Gulati AS, McGill SK, Dougherty MK. 
High-throughput amplicon sequencing of the full-length 16S rRNA gene with single-nucleotide 
resolution. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019; 47 (18) e103 doi: 10.1093/nar/gkz569 [PubMed: 31269198] 
56. Yilmaz P, Parfrey LW, Yarza P, Gerken J, Pruesse E, Quast C, Schweer T, Peplies J, Ludwig W, 
Glöckner FO. The SILV A and “All-species Living Tree Project (LTP)” taxonomic frameworks. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 2014; 42 (Database issue) D643–8. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt1209 [PubMed: 
24293649] 
57. Verhaar BJH, Collard D, Prodan A, Levels JHM, Zwinderman AH, Bäckhed F, V ogt L, Peters 
MJL, Muller M, Nieuwdorp M, van den Born BH. Associations between gut microbiota, faecal 
short-chain fatty acids, and blood pressure across ethnic groups: the HELIUS study. Eur Heart J. 
2020; 41 (44) 4259–4267. DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehaa704 [PubMed: 32869053] 
58. Stentz R, Osborne S, Horn N, Arthur WH, Hautefort I, Bongaerts R, Rouyer M, Bailey P, Stephen 
B, Andrew M, Brearley CA, et al. A Bacterial Homolog of a Eukaryotic Inositol Phosphate 
Signaling Enzyme Mediates Cross-kingdom Dialog in the Mammalian Gut. Cell Reports. 2014; 6 
(4) 646–656. [PubMed: 24529702] 
59. Zhou X, Baumann R, Gao X, Mendoza M, Singh S, Katz Sand I, Xia Z, Cox LM, Chitnis T, Yoon 
H, Moles L, et al. Gut microbiome of multiple sclerosis patients and paired household healthy 
controls reveal associations with disease risk and course. Cell. 2022; 185 (19) 3467–3486. e16 doi: 
10.1016/j.cell.2022.08.021 [PubMed: 36113426] 
60. Bui TPN, de V os WM, Plugge CM. Anaerostipes rhamnosivorans sp. nov., a human intestinal, 
butyrate-forming bacterium. International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology. 
2014; 64 (Pt 3) 787–793. [PubMed: 24215821] 
61. Yebra MJ, Zúñiga M, Beaufils S, Pérez-Martínez G, Deutscher J, Monedero V . Identification of a 
gene cluster enabling Lactobacillus casei BL23 to utilize myo-inositol. Applied and environmental 
microbiology. 2007; 73 (12) 3850–3858. DOI: 10.1128/AEM.00243-07 [PubMed: 17449687] 
62. Le Roy T, Moens de Hase E, Van Hul M, Paquot A, Pelicaen R, Régnier M, Depommier C, Druart 
C, Everard A, Maiter D, Delzenne NM, et al. <em>Dysosmobacter welbionis</em> is a newly 
isolated human commensal bacterium preventing diet-induced obesity and metabolic disorders in 
mice. Gut. 2021; gutjnl-2020-323778 doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-323778 [PubMed: 34108237] 
63. Wilson MSC, Bulley SJ, Pisani F, Irvine RF, Saiardi A. A novel method for the purification of 
inositol phosphates from biological samples reveals that no phytate is present in human plasma or 
urine. Open Biology. 2015; 5 (3) 150014 doi: 10.1098/rsob.150014 [PubMed: 25808508] 
64. Liu G, Riemer E, Schneider R, Cabuzu D, Bonny O, Wagner CA, Qiu D, Saiardi A, Strauss 
A, Lahaye T, Schaaf G, et al. The phytase RipBL1 enables the assignment of a specific inositol 
phosphate isomer as a structural component of human kidney stones. RSC Chemical Biology. 
2023; 4 (4) 300–309. DOI: 10.1039/d2cb00235c [PubMed: 37034402] 
65. Monnard I, Bénet T, Jenni R, Austin S, Silva-Zolezzi I, Godin JP. Plasma and urinary inositol 
isomer profiles measured by UHPLC-MS/MS reveal differences in scyllo-inositol levels between 
non-pregnant and pregnant women. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2020; 412 (28) 7871–7880. [PubMed: 
32886151] 
66. Qiu D, Eisenbeis VB, Saiardi A, Jessen HJ. Absolute Quantitation of Inositol Pyrophosphates 
by Capillary Electrophoresis Electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry. J Vis Exp. 2021; (174) 
[PubMed: 34459823] 
67. Rios-Morales M, van Trijp MPH, Rösch C, An R, Boer T, Gerding A, de Ruiter N, Koehorst 
M, Heiner-Fokkema MR, Schols HA, Reijngoud DJ, et al. A toolbox for the comprehensive 
analysis of small volume human intestinal samples that can be used with gastrointestinal sampling 
capsules. Scientific Reports. 2021; 11 (1) 8133 doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-86980-y [PubMed: 
33854074] 
68. Li C, Bai X, Liu X, Zhang Y , Liu L, Zhang L, Xu F, Yang Y , Liu M. Disruption of Epithelial 
Barrier of Caco-2 Cell Monolayers by Excretory Secretory Products of Trichinella spiralis Might 
Be Related to Serine Protease. Front Microbiol. 2021; 12 634185 doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2021.634185 
[PubMed: 33815318] 
De V os et al. Page 33
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 1. Fecal phytate metabolism and identification of phytate-degrading Mitsuokella spp.
a: 13C-NMR spectra of [13C6]InsP6 metabolism by fecal microbiome of donor A during a 
24 h incubation. Dashed lines connect NMR signals of identified metabolites and CO2. For 
3-hydroxypropionate, dotted lines are used for better visibility. The final metabolic products 
derived from [13C6]InsP6 are [13C2]acetate, [13C3]propionate, and [13C4]butyrate. [13C3]3-
hydroxypropionate accumulates transiently between 4.5 - 6.5 h. b: 13C-NMR spectra of 
[13C6]InsP6 metabolism by the fecal microbiome of donor B during up to 5 days incubation. 
The final metabolic products derived from [13C6]InsP6 are [13C2]acetate, and [13C4]butyrate. 
Structure of [13C6]InsP6 shown in the lower right. c: Microbial composition of fecal 
samples, the initial time points and end time points (5 days) of the third transfer of phytate 
enrichments from donor A and B (n=1 biological replicate per donor). Top 15 abundant 
taxonomic groups in these samples are shown in colours and the rest is shown as ‘other’ 
in white. d: Changes of relative abundance of Mitsuokella jalaludinii and Mitsuokella spp. 
during phytate incubation and phytate consumption (right vertical axis) in the third transfer 
of the fecal enrichment from donor A. e: Changes of relative abundance of Mitsuokella 
De V os et al. Page 34
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
jalaludinii and Mitsuokella spp. during phytate incubation and phytate consumption (right 
vertical axis) in the third transfer of the fecal enrichment from donor B.
De V os et al. Page 35
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 2. Phylogeny, ecology and distribution of Mitsuokella spp. in a human cohort study.
a: Phylogenetic tree showing the phylogenetic placement of thee prevalent Mitsuokella 
ASVs (ASV_08877, ASV_08889 and ASV_08967) in Selenomonadales cluster in an all-
species living tree. Based on the tree, ASV_08877 (green) and ASV_08889 (blue) are 
highly similar to M. multacida while ASV_08967 (red) is close to M. jalaludinii. b: Density 
plot of the relative abundance of 3 these different ASVs in 6039 participants of HELIUS 
cohort indicates that if present, Mitsuokella constitutes 0.01 to 10 % of the bacterial 
community. c: Principal coordinate analysis of microbiome composition of the HELIUS 
cohort. Arrows indicate weighted average scores of the three prevalent Mitsuokella ASVs 
which are strongly associated with Prevotella enterotype. d: Distribution of the 3 prevalent 
Mitsuokella ASVs in the 5 major ethnic groups including Dutch (n=1615), Ghanaian 
(n=614), Moroccan (n=830), Surinamese (n=2380) and Turkish (n=585), of the HELIUS 
cohort, with ASV_08967 (M. jalaludinii) as the most abundant ASV except the Ghanaian 
ethnicity group. e: Distribution Mitsuokella ASVs between females (n=3204) and males 
(n=2820).
De V os et al. Page 36
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 3. Elucidation of phytate degradation pathway in Mitsuokella jalaludinii DSM13811 T .
a: Faster growth of M. jalaludinii in 10 mM and 40 mM phytate as compared to growth 
in 10 mM and 40 mM myo-inositol (top), while similar metabolite production (bottom) 
was observed. Data are presented as mean values +/- SD (n=3 biological replicates for 
10 mM, 2 for 40 mM and 2 for metabolite measurements). b: 13C-NMR analysis shows 
rapid [13C6]phytate degradation with [13C6]Ins(2)P and [13C6]Inositol as intermediates 
and [13C3]3-hydroxypropionate, [13C3]lactate, [13C4]succinate, and [13C2]acetate as end 
metabolites. c: BIRD-{1H,13C}HMQC spectrum of the M. jalaludinii culture sample 
at 7.5 h. The region in which inositol polyphosphate signals are commonly found is 
shown. The mixture contains the starting material [13C6]InsP6 (purple arrows) but also 
the dephosphorylation products Ins(2)P (blue arrows) and myo-inositol (grey arrows). The 
residual solvent signal (HDO) appears at 4.8 ppm. Each detectable signal is annotated with 
the corresponding substance name and position of the inositol ring. Note that each of the 
detected substances exhibit four NMR signals due to the Cs symmetry of the six-membered 
inositol ring and therefore, positions C1 and C3, and positions C4 and C6 are magnetically 
equivalent. d: Log2(fold change) of differential expression of genes involved in phytate 
degradation; inositol and phosphate uptake and inositol metabolic genes comparing between 
phytate and inositol conditions (Table S2). Predicted functional groups of these genes are 
De V os et al. Page 37
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
indicated on the right. e: Reconstruction of the entire phytate degradation pathway based 
on genomic, transcriptomic and metabolomic analyses. The genes have been identified 
a genome M. jalaludinii DSM13811T from GenBank (BioProject PRJNA223472) and re-
annotating the genome in RAST (Table S3).
De V os et al. Page 38
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 4. Mechanistic insight into the synergy between M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans in 
phytate degradation.
a-b: Metabolite production and substrate consumption by monoculture of M. jalaludinii 
(a) and coculture of M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans (b) in phytate (n=2 biological 
replicates). Data are presented as mean values of 2 data points. c: 13C-NMR spectra of 
[13C6]InsP6 metabolism by coculture of M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans during a 48 
h incubation. Dashed lines connect NMR signals of identified metabolites and CO2. Dotted 
lines are used for 3-hydroxypropionate to provide better visibility. The final metabolic 
De V os et al. Page 39
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
products derived from [13C6]InsP6 are [13C2]acetate, [13C3]propionate, [13C3]lactate, 
[13C3]3-hydroxypropionate, [13C4]butyrate, and [13C4]succinate. [13C4]succinate is again 
formed as a mixture with partially or non-13C-labeled succinate. The same InsP 
intermediates can be observed between 2 - 7.5 h as in the monoculture (Fig. 4b). d: M. 
jalaludinii (MJ): Log2(fold change) of differential expression of genes involved in phytate 
degradation; inositol and phosphate uptake and inositol metabolic genes comparing between 
monoculture and coculture (Table S4-5). The functions of these genes are indicated on the 
right. e: A. rhamnosivorans: Log2(fold change) of differential expression of genes involved 
in inositol uptake, inositol metabolic genes, propionate production and 3-hydroxypropionate 
transport comparing between MA_I (coculture in myo-inositol) versus A_I (monoculture 
in myo-inositol); MA_P (coculture in phytate) versus A_I (monoculture in myo-inositol); 
MA_P (coculture in phytate) versus MA_I (coculture in myo-inositol) (Table S6-8). 
Predicted functional groups of these genes are indicated on the right. The transcriptomic 
analysis was performed in biological triplicates. f: Reconstruction of synergistic interaction 
between M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans in phyate. M. jalaludinii uses periplasmic 
phytase to dephosphorylate phytate rapidly to Ins(2)P and inositol, which can subsequently 
be taken up and used to produce succinate, acetate, lactate and 3-hydroxypropionate. The 
produced 3-hydroxypropionate is released into the medium and inhibits myo-inositol uptake 
by A. rhamnosivorans. A. rhamnosivorans, in turn, metabolizes 3-hydroxypropionate via 
a 3-hydroxypropionate scavenging pathway to produce propionate, conserving energy by 
coupling the electrochemical gradient generated via a membrane bound Rnf complex, with 
ATP synthesis.
De V os et al. Page 40
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
Figure 5. In vivo phytate conversion by M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans in mice.
a: Experimental design of in vivo microbial phytate conversion. Three groups of 8 mice 
were treated with either phytate (0.1mg/g body weight) alone, or phytate (0.1mg/g body 
weight) together with M. jalaludinii (10^9 cells per dose) or phytate (0.1mg/g body weight) 
with M. jalaludinii (MJ) and A. rhamnosivorans (A.rham) (10^9 cells per strain per dose) 
every second day for two weeks. After two weeks, a [13C6]InsP6 oral challenge of the 
same bacterial dosage were performed for the respective group. A group of four mice 
was killed after 3 h or 6 h. Cecum and plasma samples were collected for inositol 
phosphate extraction and measurement while colon samples were used for quantification 
of M. jalaludinii and A. rhamnosivorans via qPCR. Significant lower levels of cecal 
[13C6]InsP6 in microbial treatment groups compared to control groups at 3 h (b) and 
De V os et al. Page 41
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
6 h (c) after oral challenge. d,e, Relative abundance of Mitsuokella jalaludinii at 6 h 
(d) and A. rhamnosivorans at 6 h (e) in murine colon samples quantified via qPCR in 
three groups: phytate (purple); phytate_A.rham_MJ (blue) and phytate_MJ (orange). f-h, 
Quantification of three [13C6]InsPs species: InsP5[3OH] at 6 h (f), Ins(1,2,5,6)P4 at 6 h 
(g); InsP5[5OH] at 3 h (h) in the cecum samples by BIRD-{1H,13C}HMQC spectra at 6 h 
and 3 h after oral challenge. Relative abundance of A. rhamnosivorans (g) and Mitsuokella 
jalaludinii (h) in colon samples quantified via qPCR in three groups: phytate (purple); 
phytate_A.rham_MJ (blue) and phytate_MJ (orange). i: Postulated phytate degradation 
routes in mouse cecum. Black arrows indicate the route involved Mitsuokella jalaludinii 
and A. rhamnosivorans while grey arrows are routes by the mouse microbiome alone. Two 
arrows indicate conversion required more than one reaction. Data are presented as mean 
values +/- SEM (n=4 biological replicates) and statistical analysis was performed using 
one-way ANOV A. Only significantly different comparisons are shown with P values.
De V os et al. Page 42
Nat Microbiol. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 September 17.
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts
 Europe PMC Funders Author Manuscripts