Annals of Botany 132: 583–596, 2023
https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcad142, available online at www.academic.oup.com/aob
PART OF A SPECIAL ISSUE ON CAM AT THE CROSSROADS
Prospects and perspectives: inferring physiological and regulatory targets for 
CAM from molecular and modelling approaches
Methawi Chomthong and Howard Griffiths*
Department of Plant Sciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 3EA, UK
*For correspondence. Email hg230@cam.ac.uk
Received: 26 March 2023 Returned for revision: 26 August 2023 Editorial decision: 8 September 2023 Accepted: 21 September 2023
• Background and Scope This review summarizes recent advances in our understanding of Crassulacean Acid 
Metabolism (CAM) by integrating evolutionary, ecological, physiological, metabolic and molecular perspectives. 
A number of key control loops which moderate the expression of CAM phases, and their metabolic and molecular 
control, are explored. These include nocturnal stomatal opening, activation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase 
by a specific protein kinase, interactions with circadian clock control, as well as daytime decarboxylation and 
activation of Rubisco. The vacuolar storage and release of malic acid and the interplay between the supply and 
demand for carbohydrate reserves are also key metabolic control points.
• Future Opportunities We identify open questions and opportunities, with experimentation informed by 
top-down molecular modelling approaches allied with bottom-up mechanistic modelling systems. For example, 
mining transcriptomic datasets using high-speed systems approaches will help to identify targets for future genetic 
manipulation experiments to define the regulation of CAM (whether circadian or metabolic control). We empha-
size that inferences arising from computational approaches or advanced nuclear sequencing techniques can iden-
tify potential genes and transcription factors as regulatory targets. However, these outputs then require systematic 
evaluation, using genetic manipulation in key model organisms over a developmental progression, combining 
gene silencing and metabolic flux analysis and modelling to define functionality across the CAM day–night cycle. 
From an evolutionary perspective, the origins and function of CAM succulents and responses to water deficits are 
set against the mesophyll and hydraulic limitations imposed by cell and tissue succulence in contrasting morpho-
logical lineages. We highlight the interplay between traits across shoots (3D vein density, mesophyll conductance 
and cell shrinkage) and roots (xylem embolism and segmentation). Thus, molecular, biophysical and biochemical 
processes help to curtail water losses and exploit rapid rehydration during restorative rain events. In the face of a 
changing climate, we hope such approaches will stimulate opportunities for future research.
Key words: Transcriptome analysis, gene regulatory networks, hydraulic conductance, succulence, metabolic 
control, circadian systems.
INTRODUCTION
The enduring interest in Crassulacean Acid Metabolism (CAM) 
extends well beyond the characteristic cellular or tissue succu-
lence associated with the many striking leaf and stem succu-
lent lineages, found across contrasting semi-arid habitats (Fig. 
1). The co-ordinated evolution of traits has led to remarkable 
global diversity, with multiple independent origins of CAM, 
particularly in the last 5 million years, accounting for at least 6 
% of extant angiosperm species (Dodd et al., 2002; Borland et 
al., 2018; Edwards, 2019; Wai et al., 2019; Gilman et al., 2023; 
Sage et al., 2023). The appeal for researchers lies partly in this 
numerical and ecological diversity of CAM lifeforms, and op-
portunities for the integration of phylogeny, ecophysiology, 
biochemistry, molecular biology and integrative modelling 
(Osmond et al., 1982; Chomthong and Griffiths, 2020; Winter 
and Smith, 2022). Additionally, the complexity and physio-
logical plasticity of associated CAM phenotypic processes de-
mands attention across day and night (Fig. 1; Dodd et al., 2002; 
Borland et al., 2009; Edwards, 2019).
A range of CAM lifeforms are illustrated in Fig. 1, with ter -
restrial representatives spanning massive leaf and stem succu-
lents, including cacti, agave and euphorbia species (Fig. 1A) and 
more herbaceous succulents, such as many of the Crassulaceae 
(Fig. 1B). Over 60 independent origins of CAM (Gilman et al., 
2023, Sage et al., 2023) range across lycopods, ferns, gymno-
sperms and angiosperms, with this diversity represented here 
by the gnetophyte Welwitschia mirabilis (Fig. 1C). When rain-
fall is relatively predictable on an annual basis, allowing tissue 
rehydration and storage, some semi-desert habitats can be dom-
inated by CAM species, such as the Sonoran Desert Saguaro, 
the ‘Succulent Karoo’ in southern Africa or the Portulacaria 
afra (Didiereaceae) thicket in Eastern Cape, South Africa 
(shown in Fig. 1D). Many species in these habitats (including 
Portulacaria) are able to induce CAM in response to envir -
onmental stressors such as water deficits (Winter, 2019), and 
as notably identified by Klaus Winter in Mesembryanthemum 
crystallinum (Aizoaceae) following salinity stress (Winter and 
von Willert, 1972; Cushman, 2001; Winter and Holtum, 2007; 
Cushman et al., 2008).
© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Annals of Botany Company.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Chomthong & Griffiths — Inferring physiological and regulatory targets in CAM
584
A B D
C
E F G H
Phase
I
Stomata
Open
Net CO2 assimilation rate Stomata
Open
Stomata
Open
Stomata
ClosedPEPC activated
by PEPC kinase
1800 18000600
Time of day
PEPC
Rubisco
Rubisco
PEPCRubisco
Phase
II
Phase
III
Phase
IV
I
Fig. 1. Diversity in succulent CAM lifeforms and a typical gas exchange profile. Terrestrial CAM plants: (A) massive stem succulent convergence in cacti (left) 
and euphorbia (right) species, with agave (centre) (Jardin Majorelle, Marrakesh); (B) Echeveria elegans (Crassulaceae); (C) Welwitschia mirabilis (Gnetophyta) 
(both Cambridge Botanic Garden); (D) Valley Bushveld or Thicket, Eastern Cape, dominated by Portulacaria afra and Aloe spp. Epiphytic CAM plants: (E) 
Vanilla planifolia (Orchidaceae), a hemi-epiphytic vine; (F) Aechmea fendleri (Bromeliaceae), a threatened montane epiphyte (both Trinidad); (G) Tillandsia 
usneoides (Bromeliaceae), Spanish moss, with marked vegetative reduction (Cambridge Botanic Garden); (H) Clusia minor (Clusiaceae), a hemi-epiphyte – 
canopy roots with seeds and leaves (inset), Trinidad. (I) Net CO 2 assimilation highlighting defined phases of CAM (Osmond, 1978) and associated stomatal 
aperture status and carboxylation processes across the progression from night to day. All photographs taken by H.G.; diagram template provided by Rowan Sage.
Chomthong & Griffiths — Inferring physiological and regulatory targets in CAM
585
The diversity and potential biomass of CAM plants found as 
epiphytes in tropical forests was highlighted by Winter (1985), 
including the largest family of CAM plants (Orchidaceae: 
Silvera et al., 2009; Gilman et al., 2023), here illustrated by 
Vanilla planifolia (Fig. 1E). Another major neotropical family 
is the Bromeliaceae, with over 3000 terrestrial and epiphytic 
species, with around 40 % demonstrating CAM activity (Crayn 
et al., 2015), with the proportion of epiphytes with CAM 
increasing along a gradient of decreasing rainfall (Griffiths 
and Smith, 1983). The occurrence of CAM in higher altitude, 
tropical montane forests (Pierce et al., 2002) is exemplifed by 
Aechmea fendleri (Fig. 1F), potentially under threat of climate 
change (Males et al., 2023). The marked vegetative reduction 
of the bromeliad leaf rosette seen in Tillandsia usneoides (Fig. 
1G) has allowed this to become one of the most widespread of 
CAM plants, with a distribution ranging from Virginia, USA, 
to Argentina and tissues also providing a marker for water va-
pour inputs and exchange (Helliker, 2014). The final CAM life-
form represented in this brief survey are the aerial roots of the 
woody, hemi-epiphytic strangling fig, Clusia minor (Fig. 1H, 
with inset showing fruits), with the comparative analysis of the 
Clusiaceae continuing to provide insights into the origins of 
CAM and leaf functional traits (Leverett et al., 2023a, b).
The other key feature of CAM, also associated with these 
succulent traits, and visualized as a typical net CO 2 exchange 
profile (Fig. 1I), is the reduced transpirational water loss asso-
ciated with nocturnal stomatal opening, low stomatal densities 
and a steep diffusion gradient for CO2 uptake (Fig. 2). At night, 
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC), with a high affinity 
for substrate HCO 3
−, is activated by phosphorylation associ-
ated with a specific PEPC kinase expressed de novo (Fig. 2; 
Hartwell et al., 1996, 1999; Boxall et al., 2017) leading via 
the reduction of oxaloacetate to malate 2− synthesis, which is 
defined as Phase I of CAM (Fig. 1I; Osmond, 1978). The mech-
anism of malic acid accumulation is shown in Fig. 2, with trans-
port across the tonoplast into a large central vacuole coupled 
between transporter proteins and a combination of vacuolar 
ATPase and pyrophosphatase H + pumps (Lim et al., 2019; 
Winter and Smith, 2022). This leads to the stoichiometric accu-
mulation of 2H+:1mal2−:1CO2 (Fig. 2), allowing the magnitude 
of CO2 assimilation to be determined experimentally between 
dawn and dusk via the change in leaf-sap titratable acidity or 
enzymatic malate assays, as well as gas exchange profiles (Fig. 
1I; Osmond, 1978).
At dawn, there is often a transient burst of CO 2 assimilation 
known as Phase II, when PEPC is initially active (becoming 
sensitized to malate inhibition following dephosphorylation), 
and Rubisco is being activated in the light (Fig. 1I; Maxwell 
et al., 2002). During Phase III, net CO 2 uptake is reduced as 
stomata close (Fig. 1I), prompted by both circadian control and 
the increase in internal CO 2 generated during malate decarb-
oxylation (Fig. 2; Chomthong and Griffiths, 2020). Elevated 
CO2 concentrations occur within mesophyll tissues during 
Phase III (>1000 mmol mol −1: Fig. 2), and often result in CO 2 
retrodiffusion and leakage (Fig. 1I). The processes in Fig. 2 
illustrate chloroplast processes associated with decarboxyl-
ation by NADP-malic enzyme (NADP-ME) (with other vari-
ants also utilizing plastidic and mitochondrial elements: Lim 
storage
carbohydrate
Stomata
closed
Growth
(CH2O)n
CO2
Calvin-
Benson-
Bassham
Cycle
Gluco-
neogenesis
Glycolysis
vacuole
PEPC
(activated
PEPC kinase)
PPDK
PPDK-RP
ME
RUBISCO
MDH
CA
LIGHTDARK
Cytosol
Malic Acid Malate2–Malate2–
OAA
Stomata
open
PEP PEP
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
chloroplast
CO2 CO2
HCO3
–
[150–250]
µmol mol–1
[>1000]
µmol mol–1
[400]
µmol mol–1
2H+ 2H+
Fig. 2. Schematic showing key features of Crassulacean Acid Metabolism (CAM). Primary carbon fluxes across dark and light conditions in mesophyll cells, with 
associated carboxylation and decarboxylation enzymes indicated in blue. At night, CO 2 assimilation is mediated via cytosolic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase 
(PEPC, activated by phosphorylation via PEPC kinase) using carbon skeletons mobilized via glycolysis, leading to malate 2− synthesis, with malic acid accumu-
lating in the vacuole via an aluminium-activated malate transporter, ALMT) and vacuolar ATPase/pyrophosphatase H+ transport system. In the subsequent light 
period, malic acid efflux (likely through the tonoplast dicarboxylate transporter, tDT: J. Andrew C. Smith, personal communication) is followed by decarboxyl-
ation (here illustrated by the cytosolic NADP-ME pathway). High concentrations of CO 2 are generated internally and refixed by Rubisco in association with the 
Calvin–Benson–Bassham cycle, in chloroplasts. Carbon skeletons are recovered using gluconeogenesis, and carbohydrates are synthesized usually as chloroplastic 
starch/glucan (or vacuolar hexose in some species), and partitioned as reserves or exported for growth (Antony et al., 2008). Diagram represents the chloroplastic 
decarboxylation pathway (after Winter and Smith, 2022), informed by enzyme localizations shown by Winter et al. (1982) and  Lim et al. (2019). Some CAM 
systems utilize a cytosolic MDH and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase decarboxylation pathway to generate PEP; mitochondrial enzymes may also be asso-
ciated during primary carboxylation (particularly in terms of malate exchange) and decarboxylation (Dever et al., 2015; Winter and Smith, 2022). CA, carbonic 
anhydrase; [CH2O], sugars/carbohydrate; MDH, malate dehydrogenase; ME, malic enzyme; OAA, oxaloacetate; PPDK, pyruvate, Pi dikinase; PPDK RP, PPDK 
regulatory protein.
Chomthong & Griffiths — Inferring physiological and regulatory targets in CAM
586
et al., 2019; Winter and Smith, 2022). Under the elevated CO 2 
concentrations, Rubisco operates at a high operating efficiency, 
leading to suppressed oxygenase activity and photorespiration. 
Assimilation via the Calvin–Benson–Bassham cycle, together 
with regeneration of hexoses via plastidic pyruvate orthophos-
phate dikinase (PPDK) (Lim et al., 2019), allows carbohydrate 
reserves to be recharged and carbon export for growth (Fig. 2). 
During Phase IV , for well-watered plants, stomata may re-open 
and direct C3 carboxylation resumes (Osmond, 1978).
These physiological adaptations and the associated lower 
transpirational water loss at night translate into ecological ad-
vantages for the arid semi-desert habitats and tropical forest 
microclimates illustrated above (Fig. 1A–H; Kluge and Ting, 
1978; Osmond et al., 1982; Winter, 1985). The mechanistic 
basis to these adaptations has stimulated investigations of the 
underlying molecular regulation (Cushman and Bohnert, 1999; 
Hartwell et al., 1999, 2016; Cushman et al., 2008). The plas-
ticity in form and function associated with CAM phenotypes, 
and the associated physiology, ecology and molecular phyl-
ogeny continue to stimulate research approaches (Yang et al., 
2015; Hartwell et al., 2016; Edwards, 2019, 2023; Heyduk et 
al., 2019b, 2023; Winter, 2019; Leverett et al., 2023b; Sage et 
al., 2023).
The degree of succulence and hydration has been associ-
ated with the magnitude and length of the transient gas ex-
change phases (II, IV) which flank the nocturnal uptake (Phase 
I) and daytime decarboxylation (Phase III) (Fig. 1I; Griffiths 
et al., 2008; Owen and Griffiths, 2013; Owen et al., 2016; 
Males and Griffiths, 2018). The diversity in strong (obligate) 
CAM succulent morphologies ranges from the distinct rind 
of chlorenchyma and internal hydrenchyma found in the mas-
sive leaf and stem succulents (e.g. cacti, agave and euphorbia: 
Fig. 1A) to the homogeneous chlorenchyma found in the 
Crassulaceae (e.g. Echeveria: Fig. 1B, and Kalanchoë spp.) 
and the vegetative reduction seen in the strands of Tillandsia 
usneoides (Fig. 1G; Males and Griffiths, 2018; Chomthong and 
Griffiths, 2020). The phylogenetic distribution and independent 
origins of CAM in so many families (Edwards, 2019; Gilman 
et al., 2023) also leads to diversity in terms of the degree of 
CAM expression and induction in species ranging from annual 
and perennial herbs to the woody trees in the genus Clusia (Fig. 
1H; Borland and Griffiths, 1990; Borland et al., 1992; Haag-
kerwer et al., 1992; Dodd et al., 2002; Edwards, 2019; Leverett 
et al., 2023b) and Aloidendron (Grey et al., 2022). The de novo 
induction of CAM triggered by abiotic stress in species such as 
Mesembryanthumum crystallinum (Adams et al., 1998; Taybi 
and Cushman, 1999; Cushman, 2001; Winter and Holtum, 
2007) or in association with leaf development in Kalanchoë 
species (Hartwell et al., 2016) continues to provide molecular 
insights into the regulatory control of CAM.
From a popular perspective, the commercial dominance 
of pineapple (Ananas comosus) (Griffiths, 2023), as well the 
multiple economic uses of the Agavaceae, and huge interest 
horticulturally in the Orchidaceae, Cactaceae and Bromeliaceae, 
provide unique attractors. The focus of this review is to con-
sider opportunities for future research on CAM, in the context 
of possible environmental threats for their semi-arid habitats 
posed by increasing climatic extremes.
The fundamental physiological mechanisms which con-
trol the inverted cycle of stomatal opening, and many of the 
nocturnal CO 2 assimilation and daytime reassimilation pro-
cesses, still elude a precise molecular definition. The diffu-
sive constraints imposed by succulent cells and tissues, and 
hence low mesophyll conductances, are still debated regarding 
whether they are acting as cause or effect for the development 
of CAM (Leverett et al., 2023b; Heyduk et al., 2023). Whether 
all succulent plants demonstrate some degree of CAM activity 
is increasingly under discussion, as more detailed phylogenetic 
studies posit ever-earlier origins for the pathway (Heyduk et al., 
2019b, 2023; Gilman et al., 2023; Sage et al., 2023). Variations 
in leaf anatomy, whether enlarged chlorenchyma cells or 
chlorenchyma tissue with integrated or isolate d hydrenchyma, 
and origins of leaf venation, further complicate standardization 
(Ogburn and Edwards, 2013; Males and Griffiths, 2018). The 
capacity for storage of water within succulent tissues (e.g. leaf 
or stem) provides an ecological benefit for plants with limited, 
but regular water supplies, in both semi-arid desert environ-
ments and the epiphytic niches in tropical rainforests (Winter, 
1985). Major questions remain regarding the gradual metering 
of water from these tissues to support the low nocturnal rates of 
transpiration, and requirement for rapid recharge and rehydra-
tion when precipitation events occur (Griffiths, 2013).
The progressive development of leaf thickness and associated 
changes in venation during the evolution of CAM had implica-
tions for the supply and demand of key resources, namely CO2 
(mesophyll conductance in chlorenchyma) and H2O (hydraulic 
conductances in xylem and succulent tissues) (Griffiths, 2013; 
Ogburn and Edwards, 2013; Edwards, 2019). Building from this 
initial morphological tenet (Edwards, 2019), the central mo-
lecular and biochemical mechanisms which have been adapted 
or co-opted to allow the evolution and expression of CAM in 
so many lineages also now require a clearer definition. Whether 
there is a core temporal switch associated with a change in cir-
cadian expression, and a secondary response to physiological 
water stress, remain to be clarified at the molecular level for 
contrasting origins of CAM (Lim et al., 2019). However, the 
extent that expression of the CAM cycle can be modified by 
environmental conditions or metabolic feedback certainly sug-
gests that changes in circadian expression are closely related to 
CAM induction and expression (Borland and Griffiths, 1997; 
Borland et al., 1999; Dever et al., 2015; Hartwell et al., 2016; 
Boxall et al., 2017, 2020).
The aim of this review is to consider some of the latest ap-
proaches incorporating physiological and molecular measure-
ments, and their use in developing predictive models to explain 
CAM physiology, with a particular focus on hydraulic supply 
and demand. By developing a deeper quantitative understanding 
of the regulatory processes conferring CAM physiological 
plasticity, these more robust methods will allow the future op-
portunities for CAM research to be assessed, and allow predic-
tions of ecological resilience in the face of a changing climate. 
We will consider various physiological modules which define 
key regulatory loops of the CAM cycle leading to the well-
defined CAM phases (Osmond, 1978). These include stomatal 
opening at night, and activation of PEPC by a specific protein 
kinase at night, and interactions with circadian clock controls 
(Hartwell et al., 1996, 1999; Nimmo, 2000; Dodd et al., 2002), 
as well as decarboxylation and activation of Rubisco by day 
(Maxwell et al., 2002; Griffiths et al., 2007, 2008). The vacu-
olar storage and release of malic acid and the interplay between 
Chomthong & Griffiths — Inferring physiological and regulatory targets in CAM
587
the supply and demand for carbohydrate reserves which fuel 
the CAM cycle are also key metabolic control points (Antony 
et al., 2008; Borland et al., 2016; Ceusters et al., 2021). To ini-
tiate this review, we focus on recent data outputs which provide 
an opportunity to infer these core control mechanisms, and then 
summarize quantitative approaches which could help to iden-
tify likely physiological and genetic regulatory components 
conferring plasticity in expression of CAM phases across so 
many contrasting lineages.
Modern genomics data and genetic manipulation tools underpin 
future directions for CAM researchers
In pursuit of a molecular definition of the regulatory processes 
leading to the evolution of CAM, the recent detailed analysis of 
CAM genomes provides a lens through which we may focus on 
orthologues and transcriptional control elements of key CAM 
genes (Ming et al., 2015; Brilhaus et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2017; 
Wai et al., 2019; Heyduk et al., 2019a). Other studies taking 
a comparative ‘multi-omics’ approach provide additional in-
sights into regulatory relationships in different CAM lineages 
(Abraham et al., 2016; Chiang et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2016; 
Yin et al., 2018; Heyduk et al., 2019b). These studies have 
provided lists of candidate CAM-specific transcription factors 
(TFs) which could mediate CAM in obligate CAM species 
(Kalanchoe fedtschenkoi and Agave americana) (Moseley et 
al., 2018; Yin et al., 2018) and mediate the transition from C3 to 
CAM mode in facultative CAM species (Mesembryanthemum 
crystallinum and Talinum triangulare) (Brilhaus et al., 2016; 
Amin et al., 2019; Maleckova et al., 2019). Third, additional 
layers of control are also being explored at the level of less 
conventional post-transcriptional regulation via microRNAs 
(miRNAs) as well as long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs), which 
could function competitively with endogenous RNAs to alter the 
expression profile of key CAM pathway genes such as those for 
PEPC and PPDK (Yang et al., 2015; Wai et al., 2017; Bai et al., 
2019). Research into pineapple identified several CAM genes 
being potentially regulated by miRNA or lncRNA (Wai et al., 
2017; Bai et al., 2019). Transgenic manipulation experiments 
with RNA silencing approaches have been used to investigate 
the relationships between different genes in Kalanchoë species 
(Dever et al., 2015; Boxall et al., 2017, 2020). Finally, new 
molecular models are emerging, such as in the Portulacineae 
(Ferrari et al., 2021; Gilman et al., 2022; Edwards, 2023).
The comparative analysis of transcriptomes has identified 
genes which specifically alter expression patterns, whether 
seen as an inverted expression profile, shift in phase between 
C3 and CAM, or are responding to the CAM cycle (Yang et 
al., 2017; Moseley et al., 2018). These genes are thought to be 
those most likely to be synchronizing mesophyll processes. In 
addition to the comparison between C3 and CAM, the compara-
tive genomics approach can be adopted between different spe-
cies within the same family, with examples from orchids and 
pineapples (Ming et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2016). An analysis 
of orchid genomes suggested that transcriptional control of 
carboxylation [PPC and PPCK genes for, respectively, PEPC 
and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK)] and de-
carboxylation (PPDK) was coupled to the evolution of CAM in 
13 orchid species (Zhang et al., 2016). Second, transcriptomic 
analysis of two cultivated pineapple varieties and one wild pine-
apple relative showed that CAM-related genes demonstrated 
an inverse diel expression pattern in photosynthetic tissues as 
compared to non-chorophyllous tissue (Ming et al., 2015). With 
the available pineapple genome data, they also suggested that 
CAM evolved not by gene duplication but through the modified 
expression of existing C3 genes. They also associated the circa-
dian clock as a potential mechanism controlling CAM-specific 
gene expression, identifying putative cis-regulatory elements in 
key genes associated with those CAM genes that showed differ-
ential expression (Ming et al., 2015).
Insights for the origins of facultative CAM and expression 
of the C 4 pathway have arisen from analysis of the Portulaca 
amilis genome (Gilman et al., 2022; Edwards, 2023). Here, 
CAM has been found to be ancestral within the Portulacineae, 
and gene expression network analysis identified a co-expression 
module associated with genes for PEPC and starch metabolism, 
together with circadian regulatory motifs (consistent with Yang 
et al., 2017; Wai et al., 2019). Also, the expression of C 4 ac-
tivity has been derived from diurnal CAM elements (Gilman 
et al., 2022).
Recent advances in the molecular regulation of cellular 
metabolism
Carbohydrate and malate metabolism also show contrasting 
patterns between CAM and C3, since the inverse cycle of CAM 
requires carbohydrate reserves to accumulate to fuel the noc-
turnal CO2 fixation process (Osmond, 1978), with a different 
pathway for starch processing (Borland et al., 2016; Boxall 
et al., 2020). A comparison of C 3 (Arabidopsis) and CAM (K. 
fedtschenkoi) showed that carbohydrate processing was differ -
entially regulated in terms of the timing of expression (Yang 
et al., 2017). In addition to the changes in the timing of gene 
expression of genes associated with carbohydrate processing, 
network analysis also identified a specific role for trehalose-6-
phosphate synthase and an invertase, which could control the 
partitioning of carbohydrates both to fuel the CAM pathway 
and to export reserves for growth (Borland et al., 2016; Yang 
et al., 2017). In pineapple (which primarily uses soluble sugars 
and starch as carbohydrate currencies), putative orthologues of 
chloroplast and vacuolar hexose transporters show a pronounced 
diel pattern of expression (Antony et al., 2008; Borland et al., 
2016). In terms of malate accumulation, a specific channel 
(ALMT) seems to have been upregulated during the evolution 
of CAM in both pineapple and Talinum (Brilhaus et al., 2016; 
Wai and VanBuren, 2018). Finally, for Mesembryanthemum 
crystallinum during the induction of CAM, Cushman et al. 
(2008) identified increased transcripts of a chloroplast carbo-
hydrate transport gene associated with higher glucose-6-
phosphate:phosphate translocator (GPT2) activity.
A correlation between circadian and metabolic control as 
also been demonstrated for both carboxylation (PEPC) and de-
carboxylation (mitochondrial NAD-malic enzyme, NAD-ME), 
with transgenic plants displaying altered timing of circadian 
clock genes and disrupted metabolic cycling (Dever et al., 2015; 
Boxall et al., 2017, 2020). For the carboxylation pathway, the 
regulation of PEPC has been recently investigated using two 
recent RNA silencing approaches. When PEPCK1 was silenced 
Chomthong & Griffiths — Inferring physiological and regulatory targets in CAM
588
in K. fedtschenkoi, the phosphorylation of PPC at night was re-
duced, together with a 66 % reduction in CO 2 uptake at night, 
and the circadian rhythm of CO2 fixation associated with CAM 
collapsed to arrhythmia in the PPCK1 RNAi line (Boxall et al., 
2017). When PPC was silenced in K. laxiflora using RNA inter-
ference (RNAi) (Boxall et al., 2020) night-time CO 2 uptake 
ceased, and stomata reverted to daytime opening with all CO 2 
fixation in the light. There were pleiotropic effects on PPCK1 
transcripts, which were reduced at night but increased at the 
beginning of the light period, whereas expression levels of the 
other two detectable PPCK genes (PPCK2 and PPCK3) were 
increased at night and daytime, respectively (although they are 
not thought to participate in the CAM cycle). In addition, al-
though the transcript abundance of core circadian clock genes 
increased (such as Timing of Chlorophyll a/b binding protein, 
TOC1), gas exchange became arrhythmic under continuous 
light, temperature and humidity = LL conditions (stands for 
Light Light in day-night cycle) (Boxall et al., 2020).
Reducing the expression of genes associated with decarb-
oxylation (NAD-ME and PPDK) also led to the loss of dark 
CO2 fixation associated with CAM, with plants compensating 
with daytime assimilation (Dever et al., 2015). Again, there 
were knock-on effects on the expression of genes associated 
with the CAM cycle, including PPC, and those associated with 
carbohydrate metabolism including PPDK (in the NAD-ME 
mutant), as well as glucan water dikinase and GPT.
Initial transgenic manipulation approaches did not target 
carbohydrate use in CAM directly; the overall carbohy-
drate balance was affected when PPCK and the decarboxyl-
ation pathway were reduced (Dever et al., 2015; Boxall et 
al., 2017). Starch accumulation by day was reduced, thereby 
reducing carbon skeletons available at night for CO 2 assimi-
lation (Osmond, 1978), but the highest levels of sucrose were 
associated with transcripts for a circadian response-regulator 
(Boxall et al., 2017). This provided more evidence for the po-
tential connection between carbohydrate supply and circadian 
clock expression (Borland and Griffiths, 1997; Borland et al., 
1999; Boxall et al., 2017; Gilman et al., 2022). Subsequently 
more specific studies have developed RNAi lines, either for 
plastidic starch phosphorylase (PHS1: Ceusters et al., 2021) 
or phosphoglucomutase (PGM: Hurtado-Castano et al., 2023). 
These have consolidated insights into the biochemical and mo-
lecular regulation of CAM evolution, with a reversal to those in 
controlling starch partitioning in the C3 pathway (Boxall et al., 
2020). In transgenic CAM plants, transcripts for genes control-
ling the amylolytic pathway (C3) were upregulated as compared 
to the phosphorolytic pathway normally associated with starch 
storage during CAM (Borland et al., 2009, 2016; Ceusters et 
al., 2021). Also, starch degradation was not required to drive 
stomatal opening in the dark in the PGM mutant (Hurtado-
Castano et al., 2023).
Understanding temporal controls on the CAM pathway
The most complete explanation for temporal control is as-
sociated with PEPC, which is phosphorylated by a noctur -
nally expressed enzyme, PEPCK (Hartwell et al., 1999). The 
phosphorylated form of PEPC has lower sensitivity to malate 
inhibition, thus sustaining carboxylation at night. The regula-
tion of the decarboxylation pathway is, however, less clear in 
CAM species. In C 3 and C 4 species, the enzyme PPDK is ac-
tive in the dephosphorylated form whilst its phosphorylation 
and dephosphorylation reactions are catalysed by the same 
bi-functional enzyme, PPDK-regulatory protein (PPDK-RP) 
(Chastain et al., 2002; Om et al., 2022). This regulatory rela-
tionship between PPDK-RP and PPDK has not been verified 
in CAM species. The most direct evidence is from timeseries 
immunoblotting in K. fedtschenkoi which detected the 
dephosphorylated form of PPDK in the light (Dever et al., 2015), 
whereas in a CAM-deficient mutant of K. laxiflora (rPPC1-B 
line), PPDK remained phosphorylated and inactive and was 
not dephosphorylated in the light period (Boxall et al., 2020). 
This suggested that the phosphorylation/dephosphorylation re-
action may be partly responsible for the diurnal activation of 
PPDK in K. fedtschenkoi. Nonetheless, the conditions that fa-
cilitate the alternating function of PPDK-RP between kinase 
and phosphorylase are not known for CAM. In addition, there 
is another level of complexity due to the neofunctionalization 
of PPDK, whereby two-thirds of this protein is neofunctional in 
the cytosol, whereas the remaining third is in chloroplasts for K. 
fedtschenkoi (Kondo et al., 2000). This ratio also varies in other 
members of Crassulaceae (Kondo et al., 2000). It is evident that 
activities of different compartments of CAM must be highly 
orchestrated (Borland et al., 2016; Chomthong and Griffiths, 
2020; Ceusters et al., 2021).
We lack a detailed understanding of how the physiological 
expression of CAM is regulated directly in response to envir -
onmental and metabolic effectors, or may respond to prompts 
from circadian networks or other genetic regulators. For in-
stance, the timing of changes in stomatal conductance and ac-
tivation of carboxylation activities influence, respectively, the 
CO2 diffusive supply and demand. It is generally thought that 
the stomatal intercellular CO 2 (Ci)-sensing pathway responds 
to both the reduction in Ci at night and the increase during de-
carboxylation by day (Borland and Griffiths, 1997; Drennan 
and Nobel, 2000; Ceusters et al., 2008; von Caemmerer and 
Griffiths, 2009) although some additional circadian control at 
night was evident in PPC knockdown plants (Boxall et al., 
2020). The control of carbohydrate partitioning, with carbohy-
drate substrate supply associated with the magnitude of night-
time CO2 assimilation and malic acid accumulation, correlates 
with the previous day’s light intensity (Nobel, 1988; Borland et 
al., 2016, 2018). Genetic manipulation experiments have dem-
onstrated the complexity of these interactions, and how primary 
signals trigger upstream responses either due to metabolites or 
the circadian clock (Dever et al., 2015; Boxall et al., 2017, 
2020). One specific example relates to the knockdown of the 
gene coding for the decarboxylation enzyme NAD-ME. In the 
NAD-ME knockdown line, the phosphorylated form of PPDK 
was detected throughout a 24-h period, implying the constitu-
tive down-regulation of PPDK activity, metabolically down-
stream of NAD-ME activity (Dever et al., 2015).
The regulation of stomatal behaviour also brings an add-
itional level of complexity – whether due to contrasting re-
sponses to light intensity/quality following CAM induction, 
or developmental stages (Lee & Assmann, 1992; Tallman et 
al., 1997; Gotoh et al., 2019; Hurtado-Castano et al., 2023). 
On the one hand, the stomata of facultative CAM species 
(Mesembryanthemum crystallinum and Portulacaria afra) were 
reported to not respond to light once induced into the CAM 
Chomthong & Griffiths — Inferring physiological and regulatory targets in CAM
589
mode (Lee and Assmann, 1992; Tallman et al., 1997). On the 
other hand, obligate CAM species (K. daigremontiana and 
K. pinnata) still showed blue light-induced stomatal opening 
as commonly documented in C 3 species (Gotoh et al., 2019). 
These contradictory observations provide a focus on the inter -
play between light cues with the CAM pathway. The extent that 
an inverse cycle of guard cell PEPC activity and malate metab-
olism could contribute to stomatal solute balance and stomatal 
opening at night has not been resolved (Santelia and Lawson, 
2016; Males and Griffiths, 2017). Recent studies suggest a role 
for diurnal anion channel transcription in regulating stomatal 
opening at night (Lefoulon et al., 2020), and the absence of 
any role for guard cell starch accumulation (Hurtado-Castano 
et al., 2023). Additionally, increased transcripts associated with 
abscisic acid (ABA) synthesis and signalling before dawn sug-
gested a possible role in triggering daytime stomatal closure 
(Abraham et al., 2016), although the direct effect of ABA on 
the inverted timing of CAM stomatal behaviour remains elu-
sive (Holtum and Winter, 1982; Chu et al., 1990; Bastide et al., 
1993; Dai et al., 1994; Taybi et al., 1995; Taybi and Cushman, 
1999).
Integrating plant hydraulic pathways and cell succulence
In a recent review, Chomthong and Griffiths (2020) called for 
an additional focus on the co-evolution of tissue succulence and 
CAM hydraulic relationships to characterize the contrasting the-
ories defining cause or effect between water deficits and the de-
velopment of CAM (Edwards, 2019). There have been a number 
of recent studies which have addressed the interplay between 
cell succulence and responses to water deficits (Fradera-Soler 
et al., 2022a, b) and implications for the evolution of CAM 
in the genus Clusia (Leverett et al., 2023a, b). Specifically, 
the historical importance of cell wall plasticity for succulent 
cell water relations (Murphy and Smith, 1998) has now been 
given a metabolic basis, with mannans and cell wall folding 
(Ahl et al., 2019), and plasticizers helping to facilitate cell-
wall collapse during drought (Fradera-Soler et al., 2022a, b).  
These authors also identified convergent evolution in terms 
of contrasting cell-wall metabolic components in monocots 
(probable remobilisation of mannans) and the Caryophyllales 
(apoplastic pectin-rich mucilage) to facilitate cell-wall folding, 
hence conferring plasticity (Fradera-Soler et al., 2022a, b).
Another focus has been on the interplay between leaf ven-
ation density and leaf succulence (Heyduk, 2021; Jolly et 
al., 2021) and evolution of CAM (Leverett et al., 2023a, b). 
The requirements for succulent cells to increase hydraulic 
capacitance, as well as providing an appropriate volume for 
the storage of malic acid during CAM, have long been con-
sidered to represent possible drivers for the evolution of CAM 
(Edwards, 2019). Detailed analyses of succulent cell differ -
entiation (water storage vs. chlorenchyma) for C 3 and CAM 
species in the woody genus Clusia have suggested that the evo-
lution of CAM and hydraulic capacitance are independent traits 
(Leverett et al., 2023a, b) which was also supported using the 
mechanistic model of Hartzell et al. (2018, 2021). Increased 
3D vein density in more succulent (thicker) leaves has been as-
sociated with higher drought tolerance in C 3 Yuccas (Jolly et 
al., 2021) and also to support CAM in Clusia species (Leverett 
et al., 2023b), perhaps by improving hydraulic supply and re-
charge (Griffiths, 2013).
These studies have helped to develop the insights provided 
by Ogburn and Edwards (2013) on the contrasting mechanisms 
leading to 3D venation, whereby the development of succulent 
tissues is associated with vein placement throughout tissues and 
shifting from a planar, 2D, organization. First, it is important 
to recognize the difference between all-cell (homogeneous 
chlorenchyma) and storage succulents, with chlorenchyma 
confined to a photosynthetic rind surrounding larger leaves or 
stems (Males, 2017; Males and Griffiths, 2018; Chomthong 
and Griffiths, 2020), or interspersed hydrenchyma, between 
chlorenchyma, generally seen in the genus Clusia (Leverett 
et al., 2023a) and the Bromeliaceae (Males, 2017; Males and 
Griffiths, 2018). Second, succulent tissues increase hydraulic 
capacitance thereby contributing to avoidance of water deficits, 
and changes in venation which support the development of 
succulence provide an evolutionary advantage (Ogburn and 
Edwards, 2013; Edwards, 2019). Finally, we hope that re-
searchers will take up the challenge to test the hypothesis that 
co-ordination of overall root–shoot hydraulic conductance is 
more important for rapid recharge and rehydration of succu-
lent tissues, rather than the subsequent more gradual nocturnal 
metering of transpirational water loss during CAM (Griffiths, 
2013; Chomthong and Griffiths, 2020).
Thus, CAM is dependent on complementary mechanisms in 
succulent tissues which balance low stomatal and mesophyll 
conductances (constraining CO 2 uptake), and hydraulic con-
ductances (both within xylem and across mesophyll tissues) 
to optimize water uptake, storage and transpiration (Edwards, 
2019; Chomthong and Griffiths, 2020). These features con-
tribute to sustaining the high tissue water contents and leaf 
water potentials (Ψ) typically associated with CAM leaves or 
cladodes, with Ψ normally around −1 MPa. The extreme sen-
sitivity of CAM plant roots to water deficits is demonstrated by 
the observations that radial root shrinkage occurs around soil Ψ 
as low as −0.3 MPa, which helps to isolate terrestrially rooted 
CAM plants (Nobel, 1988; North et al., 2008). Physiological 
models need to account for the biophysical regulation of water 
flow from roots to shoots, and specifically the control exerted 
by aquaporins (Martre et al., 2002; Caldeira et al., 2014; Lu 
and Fricke, 2023) and interplay with hydraulic isolation and 
segmentation, needed to protect succulent shoot tissues (Nobel, 
1988; Martre et al., 2002; Males, 2017).
In terms of modelling these processes, some models do 
utilize resistances associated with the water potential gradient 
across the soil–plant–tissue continuum (Bartlett et al., 2014; 
Caldeira et al., 2014; Hartzell et al., 2018, 2021). However, 
these approaches do not incorporate the mechanistic plasti-
city associated with physiological processes during the onset 
of, and recovery from, drought. These include root shrinkage, 
cavitation and segmentation, and then the relative roles of 
aquaporins and plasmodesmata for re-establishing, and then 
maximizing, water flows across root and shoot tissues (Martre 
et al., 2002; North et al., 2008; Males, 2017). The sensitivity 
of the root–shoot junction has been identified by Males (2017) 
as another key developmental transition between the xylem 
of roots (primarily vessels) and shoots (tracheids and low-
diameter vessels), possibly helping to maximize root hydraulic 
Chomthong & Griffiths — Inferring physiological and regulatory targets in CAM
590
flows when water is available (Griffiths, 2013). We also require 
a much better molecular framework to define the genes associ-
ated with the cell enlargement, and vein differentiation during 
the development of succulent tissues (Heyduk, 2021; Heyduk 
et al 2023), and their integration with the processes described 
above during seedling establishment and growth, relative to 
water availability.
Molecular evolution of the CAM pathway
In terms of the evolution from C3 ancestral species, it has been 
hypothesized that key CAM genes were already present in the 
C3 system, but the regulatory components were rewired to result 
in the specific temporal characteristics of the CAM pathway 
(Cushman and Bohnert, 1999; Cushman et al., 2008; Ming et 
al., 2015). Analysis of the pineapple (An. comosus) genome 
showed that CAM in that species has evolved from re-wiring of 
existing C3 components through regulatory neofunctionalization 
of pre-existing genes (Ming et al., 2015), rather than by coding 
neofunctionalization (Wai et al., 2017; Abraham et al., 2016; 
Chiang et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2016; Yin et al., 2018; 
Brilhaus et al., 2016; Heyduk et al., 2019a, b). Whole-genome 
duplication and single-gene duplication are common features 
in plant genome evolution. After duplication events, there may 
be wholesale losses of duplicate genes, in a process known as 
fractionation (Panchy et al., 2016). Alternatively, the dupli-
cated genes that are retained within the genome can either par-
tition the original gene function (i.e. subfunctionalization) or 
develop novel functions (neofunctionalization). The two types 
of neofunctionalization are regulatory neofunctionalization and 
coding functionalization. Regulatory neofunctionalization is a 
result of expression divergence which allows the protein en-
coded from the duplicated gene to function in a different tem-
poral or spatial environment as compared to the protein encoded 
from the original gene. In contrast, coding neofunctionalization 
results in a novel protein function due to the gain-of-function 
mutation in the coding region of the duplicated gene (Hughes 
et al., 2014).
Key CAM genes are present in C 3 species, but do not func-
tion in the primary CO 2 fixation pathway as in CAM. For in-
stance, the roles of β-carbonic anhydrase (β-CA) in C 3 range 
across photosynthetic and non-photosynthetic tissues (Aubry 
et al., 2011) but despite changes in gene expression (Ming et 
al., 2015), there is no functional evidence that β-CA is crucial 
for catalysing the formation of HCO3
− for primary CO2 fixation 
in C4 or CAM (Lim et al., 2019). In C 3 species, the enzyme 
PEPC has a range of functions, including provision of carbon 
skeletons for the Krebs cycle and the ammonium assimilation 
pathway (Miyao and Fukayama, 2003; Masumoto et al., 2010), 
maintaining malate homeostasis, and regulating stomatal con-
ductance (Aubry et al., 2011). Thus additional analyses of 
transcriptional networks will help to identify specific gene 
neofunctionalization associated with CAM (Wai et al., 2015; 
Abraham et al., 2016; Chiang et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2016; 
Yin et al., 2018; Brilhaus et al., 2016; Heyduk et al., 2019a, b; 
Gilman et al., 2022).
To identify such rewiring of the gene network, duplication 
events followed by changes in the protein sequence and regula-
tory motifs provide evidence for the formation of novel regula-
tory relationships, which then dictate the distinct diel expression 
profiles of the CAM system. These genome rearrangements 
have been identified in multiple CAM species (Yang et al., 2017; 
Heyduk et al., 2019a). The presence of multiple paralogues of 
key CAM genes may have facilitated the neofunctionalization 
of the newly duplicated genes. For instance, there are five par -
alogous PEPC genes in the K. fedtschenkoi genome with a 
single copy being highly expressed specifically at night (Yang 
et al., 2017), as compared to four found in Arabidopsis thaliana 
and Vitis vinifera (unpublished phytozome search, https://
phytozome-next.jgi.doe.gov/). However, evidence regarding 
functional changes in the regulatory motif in the promoter 
region of this duplicated PEPC gene is still lacking. In a dif-
ferent CAM model species, pineapple, there has been a search 
for regulatory motifs in promoter regions of key CAM genes 
which include β-CA, PPC, PPCK, MDH, PEPCK and PPDK 
(Ming et al., 2015). This study in pineapple searched for five 
known circadian clock-related motif sequences: a morning ele-
ment, an evening element, CCA1-binding site, a G-box element 
and a TCP15-binding motif. They identified the presence of at 
least one of these five motifs for all of these genes of interest, 
with the exception of PPDK. However, care must be taken to 
infer functional associations purely from transcript abundance 
(Dever et al., 2015), and direct evidence for specific TFs and 
the conditions under which TF binding occurs has yet to be 
characterized functionally.
To address key questions for CAM, such as how enzymes and 
their related pathways are regulated to become active/inactive 
at the right time of the day–night cycle, we suggest that a com-
bination of systems biology approaches are required. First, we 
require additional developments in quantitative models which 
integrate the various CAM control loops, and need to develop 
reliable predictive outputs, which are testable against data from 
physiological and molecular manipulations. Second, we need to 
use bioinformatic tools for handling large-scale transcriptomic 
datasets, and the development of various computational tech-
niques to explore gene regulatory networks (GRNs) and TF ac-
tivation which controls the expression of CAM Phases.
Large-scale approaches
A recent review described recent advances in CAM mod-
elling and the possibilities for any newly available ‘-omics’ 
data to augment our understanding of CAM (Chomthong and 
Griffiths, 2020). Some of the mechanistic models are based on 
flux balance analysis (Orth et al., 2010; Shameer et al., 2018; 
Töpfer et al., 2020), oscillatory models (Blasius et al., 1998; 
Bartlett et al., 2014; Hartzell et al., 2018, 2021) or a system 
dynamics model (Owen and Griffiths, 2013, Chomthong, 2023) 
(for details see section below). Data outputs from the manipu-
lation of gene expression provide key inputs to validate the ac-
curacy of predictions arising from such models, in terms of the 
goodness of fit to associated changes in CAM phase expression 
and metabolic activity (Dever et al., 2015; Boxall et al., 2017, 
2020; Ceusters et al., 2021), particularly if validated by meta-
bolic flux balance analysis (Orth et al., 2010; Cheung et al., 
2014) augmented with 13C labelling (Ishihara et al., 2015). The 
advantage of a bottom-up approach is that it does not require 
prior knowledge about an entire regulatory network. In con-
trast, top-down approaches such as the construction of GRNs, 
protein–protein interaction networks and metabolic networks 
Chomthong & Griffiths — Inferring physiological and regulatory targets in CAM
591
require genome (proteome/metabolome)-wide input data 
(Emmert-Streib et al., 2014). The challenge of the top-down 
approach is to connect the complete information back to the 
classical mechanistic understanding of the CAM system and 
distinguish between causation and correlation.
The ultimate aim would be to unite top-down and bottom-up 
approaches to define a more structured identification of poten-
tial gene knockdown/knockout targets for transformation, and 
the development of a wider range of transformation systems, 
such as K. fedtschenkoi and K. laxiflora (Hartwell et al., 2016; 
Liu et al., 2019). The physiological responses of such manipu-
lated lines would allow the metabolic circadian, developmental 
and stress response control points to be identified, as well as 
improving the goodness of fit for re-parameterized models. In 
addition, models developed specifically for diverse modes of 
CAM expression could be used to explore the genetic and meta-
bolic basis for the transition from C 3 to CAM, and help to im-
prove phylogenetic and evolutionary insights into the origins of 
CAM (Edwards, 2019) or inform CAM biodesign for the future 
(Lim et al., 2019).
Large-scale physiological modelling
The higher water use efficiency associated with CAM spe-
cies has been the basis for modelling the use of plants such as 
Agave and Opuntia in marginal lands as an alternative form of 
biofuel (Borland et al., 2009; Owen et al., 2016). To this end, 
field-scale modelling has been developed to predict CAM prod-
uctivity in response to environmental fluctuations (Hartzell et 
al., 2021).
In parallel to the global-scale productivity modelling, pro-
gress on CAM metabolic modelling has been made con-
tinuously. Several modelling approaches address temporal 
orchestration and metabolite partitioning in CAM, which can 
be grouped into three categories. First, flux balance analysis has 
captured the complete metabolic network under stoichiometric 
constraints and optimization of the objective function (Orth et 
al., 2010; Shameer et al., 2018; Töpfer et al., 2020). Second, 
a category includes mechanistic models which incorporate 
simplified mathematical representations of the CAM circadian 
rhythm (Blasius et al., 1998; Bartlett et al., 2014; Hartzell et 
al., 2018). Third, a systems dynamic (SD) model represen-
tation of biochemical and physiological components of the 
CAM pathway has allowed the fine-tuning of key parameters 
(Owen and Griffiths, 2013). This latter approach has allowed 
the relative contribution to limitations such as stomatal sensi-
tivity, carboxylation processes and vacuolar storage to predict 
the impact of succulence on gas exchange profiles (Owen and 
Griffiths, 2013).
This SD model can be mathematically expressed in its fun-
damental form of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) to de-
velop more rigorous mathematical analyses. These equations 
take derivatives with respect to one independent variable. The 
term ‘ordinary’ distinguishes the approach from partial differ -
ential equations (PDEs), where the derivatives are taken with 
respect to multiple variables. Combining the SD model (Owen 
and Griffiths, 2013) with ODE approaches generates a model 
which can be parameterized and tested against experimental 
data (Chomthong, 2023). Thus, the emergence of genetic and 
physiological manipulation experiments can be integrated into 
these modelling tools to investigate the effect of perturbation 
on the system responses by comparing measured and pre-
dicted changes in expression of the canonical CAM pathway 
(Chomthong, 2023).
Large-scale molecular modelling
The genome sequencing and transcriptome sequencing of 
the K. fedtschenkoi 256-Mb genome (diploid 2n = 34 chromo-
somes) provided a detailed analysis of CAM in the Crassulaceae 
(Yang et al., 2017). After genome assembly, the 30 964 protein-
coding genes were predicted and annotated and they identified 
two distinct whole genome duplication events in K. fedtschenkoi 
based on analysis of the syntenic patterns. However, this is dif-
ferent from the scenario in the pineapple genome wherein the 
key CAM genes did not undergo duplication. Instead, the pine-
apple CAM genes are the same ancestral copies that are present 
in non-CAM grass species, but are more highly expressed in 
CAM tissue compared to non-photosynthetic tissues (Yang et 
al., 2017).
The transcriptome obtained by Yang et al. (2017) was used 
for gene co-expression analysis, cluster analysis and inferring 
the convergent evolution of key genes. A total of 25 gene 
co-expression modules were obtained from the weighted cor -
related network. Notably, the genes encoding β-CA, PPC2, 
PPCK, MDH and ALMT6 were clustered into the night-time 
module (although PPC2 does not functionally activate PEPC 
expression: Boxall et al., 2017), whereas PPDK-RP was clus-
tered into the daytime module (Yang et al., 2017). In addition 
to the gene co-expression module analysis, Yang et al. (2017) 
also performed cluster analysis. Clustering analysis returned 
11 clusters with a zinc-finger protein CONSTANS-like gene 
as a central hub for a cluster containing PEPC1 and PPCK2 
(although PPCK1 is involved in PPC phosphorylation in this 
species; Boxall et al., 2017). The evening-element binding 
REVEILLE TFs acted as hubs in a cluster of NADP-ME genes 
(Yang et al., 2017), although NAD-ME is the major decarb-
oxylase in this species (Dever et al., 2015).
The study by Yang et al. (2017) also attempted to identify 
the convergent evolution of CAM genes through the conver -
gent diel expression profiles and the convergent amino acid 
changes in the protein-coding sequences of CAM-associated 
genes. Initially, the convergent diel expression profiles were 
created by comparing the timeseries gene expression profiles 
of K. fedtschenkoi (eudicot CAM), An. comosus (pineapple, 
monocot CAM) and Ar. thaliana (eudicot C 3). The authors 
used three conditions to define the convergent diel expres-
sion profiles between these two CAM species. Based upon a 
timecourse analysis, this approach identified 54 genes with 
convergent diel expression profiles between K. fedtschenkoi 
and pineapple as opposed to the profiles of the C 3 plant. These 
54 genes include important genes with well-known functions 
such as phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase kinase 1 (PPCK1), 
phototropin 2 (PHOT2) and heat shock protein 70 (HSP70). In 
a parallel analysis, protein sequence convergence was studied 
for K. fedtschenkoi (Yang et al., 2017) but some of the genes 
they associated with carboxylation and decarboxylation may be 
redundant (Dever et al., 2015; Boxall et al., 2017). However, 
the extremely wide taxonomic divergence associated with this 
comparative analysis suggests that more targeted manipulation 
Chomthong & Griffiths — Inferring physiological and regulatory targets in CAM
592
of the K. fedtschenkoi genome (through specific gene silencing 
and associated transcriptome sampling) would provide a more 
focused approach today.
For a mechanistic understanding of gene regulation to be 
drawn from these newly available large-scale transcriptomic 
data requires GRN analysis. Such GRN approaches analyse 
highly complex interactions to infer transcriptional regulators 
and their respective target genes. The availability of the micro-
array and/or transcriptome data has opened up the way for the 
construction of GRNs by inference methods in various bio-
logical systems. The term inference indicates the nature of the 
resultant GRNs which are based on the interactions of genes 
calculated through the model structures rather than the direct 
evidence of transcriptional regulator binding to the promoter 
regions of the genes of interest. The GRN inference approach 
has been widely used in animal systems and subsequently has 
been adopted by the plant community (Emmert-Streib et al., 
2014). Co-expression network analysis suggested the number 
of potential transcriptional regulators of CAM could in theory 
be as high as 1509 candidate genes from Agave americana (Yin 
et al., 2018), although the actual number of potential regulators 
in the CAM system is likely to be lower. Hence, the GRN in-
ference approach has the potential to become a useful tool for 
addressing CAM questions, for example through using an al-
gorithm such as the dynamic GENIE3 (dynGENIE3), which 
has been developed specifically to handle timeseries datasets 
(Huynh-Thu and Geurts, 2018). With the genome size of K. 
fedtschenkoi, the total number of possible combinations of regu-
latory relationships within the genome would be 958 738 332 
interactions, which are impossible to calculate manually 
(Chomthong, 2023). With the dynamic GENIE3 algorithm, 
every combination of the regulatory relationships between po-
tential transcriptional regulators and their corresponding target 
genes are ranked by statistical scores. In principle, the ana-
lysis could identify TF expression associated with the circa-
dian clock, their CAM-associated gene and specific promoter 
sequence elements associated with that specific TF. Their paper 
identifies a number of TF targets within the promoter regions 
of key CAM genes. However, subsequent functional annotation 
and experimental manipulation is needed to identify the actual 
relationship between these predicted regulators and expression 
in CAM systems.
Advanced experimental approaches for identifying the 
transcriptional regulation of CAM
Despite predictive power of the GRN approach, it relies 
heavily on transcriptome data. To complement the GRN pre-
dictions from computational methods, experimental data that 
capture the chromatin accessibility state will be required. This 
type of data can be obtained from complementary approaches 
such as DNase I hypersensitive sites sequencing (DNaseI-seq), 
micrococcal nuclease digestion with deep sequencing (MNase-
seq), formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory elements 
(FAIRE-seq) and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP-seq). 
Alternatively, the assay for transposase-accessible chromatin 
with high-throughput sequencing (ATAC-seq) is the state of the 
art method with the fastest protocol yet requires the smallest 
number of pure nuclei compared to the other protocols previ-
ously mentioned (Tsompana and Buck, 2014). The ATAC-seq 
method relies on the highly active transposase enzyme Tn5 
to insert the sequencing primers preferentially into the phys-
ically accessible regions of chromatin strands. By sequencing 
the transposase-accessible regions with next-generation 
sequencing, the sequencing reads can be aligned back to the 
genome to indicate the open regions across the genome.
Such sequencing could identify open chromatin regions and 
potentially recover TF footprints, given sufficient sequencing 
depth. The information would complement predictions from 
GRN inference and verify the roles of candidate transcriptional 
regulators and the conditions under which the promoter regions 
of target genes are accessible. This would be important for 
advancing our understanding of the gene regulatory landscape 
of CAM in the near future.
The first step in the ATAC-seq protocol is to purify nuclei 
from the tissue samples. For CAM species, there is currently 
no protocol and one option would be to modify the transgenic 
protocol developed for the RNAi method (Dever et al., 2015) 
or the sucrose-gradient sedimentation method, in combination 
with a spectral flow cytometer in order to purify CAM nuclei 
for subsequent sequencing (Lu et al., 2017; Bajic et al., 2018). 
It is to be expected that the combination of GRNs and chro-
matin accessibility will advance understanding of the gene 
regulatory landscape of CAM in the near future.
Wither or whither for CAM: getting to the root of the problem
From a research perspective, it is clear that the field con-
tinues to advance dynamically, whether from a phylogenetic, 
ecological, physiological or molecular perspective, and that a 
wealth of younger researchers are continuing to develop novel 
insights and correlations. The challenge will be to integrate 
datasets operating at contrasting scales. The increasing avail-
ability of transcriptome data requires novel analytical systems 
to provide specific candidate regulatory targets, including TFs 
and their binding sites as effectors on multiple genes activating 
CAM processes, as well as developing methods for nuclei isola-
tion and sequencing (Chomthong, 2023). Key questions remain 
to be answered, and it is likely that the convergent evolution 
of CAM was not a unified journey for contrasting lineages 
(Edwards, 2019, 2023; Chomthong and Griffiths, 2020; Gilman 
et al., 2022, 2023; Sage et al., 2023). These conclusions are jus-
tified by contrasting succulent tissues, with the diverse degrees 
of integration of chlorenchyma and hydrenchma found across 
succulent herbs to massive leaf and stem succulents (Males and 
Griffiths, 2017). For trees in the genus Clusia, it seems that the 
requirement for succulent tissues to support the CAM cycle is to 
some extent independent of the hydraulic capacitance, although 
there are convergent requirements to increase vein density to 
service hydraulic supply and demand (Leverett et al., 2023b).
Ecologically, CAM plants are to some extent under threat of 
climatic extremes: the reliance on predictable seasonal rainfall 
has been recognized as a key factor regulating CAM diversity 
and survival (Borland et al., 2009; Griffiths, 2013). The im-
pact of increased climatic extremes (heat and drought) on CAM 
performance has recently been reviewed (Heyduk, 2022). Key 
questions have been raised regarding environmental interactions 
in a high CO2 world, including the extent that susceptibility or 
range expansion will differ across contrasting lineages, par -
ticularly for habitats ranging from semi-arid deserts to tropical 
Chomthong & Griffiths — Inferring physiological and regulatory targets in CAM
593
forest epiphytes (Heyduk, 2022; Males et al., 2023). A specific 
example includes a recent popular report that Opuntia and other 
succulents are invading south-facing slopes in the Swiss and 
French alps (https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2023/
feb/10/cacti-replacing-snow-on-swiss-mountainsides-due-to-
global-heating) because of reduced snow cover associated with 
global warming. Other examples include an invasive Kalanchoë 
species (Herrando-Morrraira et al., 2020) and responsiveness 
of CAM to drought and elevated CO 2 of CAM, relative to C 4 
(Yu et al., 2019), and the probable loss of CAM bromeliad epi-
phytes from montane tropical forests (Males et al., 2023). In 
general, it seems that opportunities for biofuel production asso-
ciated with CAM are likely to increase in what were thought to 
be temperate climes (Owen et al., 2016; Hartzell et al., 2021). 
Elsewhere there are the threats to CAM biodiversity through 
collection from the wild and resale of orchids, bromeliads and 
cacti (Goettsch et al., 2015).
Physiologically, understanding the balance between circa-
dian control (in regulating metabolism) and metabolic feedback 
(on clock timing of gene expression) regulation will continue to 
provide intriguing challenges for the CAM community, as high-
lighted above. We have also highlighted the ongoing discus-
sions regarding the co-evolution of succulent tissues and CAM 
(Edwards, 2019; Chomthong and Griffiths, 2020; Leverett et 
al., 2023b), but feel that key questions (the root of the issue, as 
it were) relate to the physiological and molecular processes as-
sociated with the hydraulic conductance of root systems, which 
confer drought avoidance found in succulent leaves and stems 
above ground (North et al., 2008; Griffiths, 2013). Finally, 
we note that the availability of molecular tools, through gene 
knockdown or silencing, are helping to dissect these regulatory 
processes (Dever et al., 2015; Boxall et al., 2017, 2020; Liu et 
al., 2019). Thus, large-scale molecular datasets that can be ana-
lysed using computational tools can be coupled with advanced 
mechanistic and process-based models to compare predicted 
outputs with actual changes in the physiological expression of 
CAM associated with molecular targets. These integrated ap-
proaches will provide many challenges for CAM researchers in 
the future, but their application will help to resolve many of the 
evolutionary and ecological questions regarding the origins and 
future potential for such fascinating plant communities.
FUNDING
MC was initially funded by a Scholarship from the The Institute 
for the Promotion of Teaching Science and Technology (IPST), 
a Thai State Agency. We are also grateful for financial sup-
port from the GCRF Collective Call: BBSRC BB/P027970/1 
(TIGR2ESS) programme.
LITERATURE CITED
Abraham PE, Yin H, Borland AM, et al. 2016. Transcript, protein and metab-
olite temporal dynamics in the CAM plant Agave. Nature Plants 2: 16178. 
doi:10.1038/nplants.2016.178.
Adams P, Nelson DE, Yamada S, et al. 1998. Growth and development of 
Mesembryanthemum crystallinum (Aizoaceae). The New Phytologist 138: 
171–190. doi:10.1046/j.1469-8137.1998.00111.x.
Ahl LI, Mravec J, Jørgensen B, Rudall PJ, Rønsted N, Grace OM. 2019. 
Dynamics of intracellular mannan and cell wall folding in the drought 
responses of succulent Aloe species. Plant Cell & Environment 42: 2458–
2471. doi:10.1111/pce.13560.
Amin AB, Rathnayake KN, Yim WC, et al. 2019. Crassulacean acid me-
tabolism abiotic stress-responsive transcription factors: A potential gen-
etic engineering approach for improving crop tolerance to abiotic stress. 
Frontiers in Plant Science 10: 129. doi:10.3389/fpls.2019.00129.
Antony E, Taybi T, Courbot M, Mugford ST, Smith JAC, Borland AM. 
2008. Cloning, localization and expression analysis of vacuolar sugar 
transporters in the CAM plant Ananas comosus (pineapple). Journal of 
Experimental Botany 59: 1895–1908. doi:10.1093/jxb/ern077.
Aubry S, Brown NJ, Hibberd JM. 2011. The role of proteins in C3 plants 
prior to their recruitment into the C4 pathway. Journal of Experimental 
Botany 62: 3049–3059. doi:10.1093/jxb/err012.
Bai Y, Dai X, Li Y, et al. 2019. Identification and characterization of pineapple 
leaf lncRNAs in crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) photosynthesis 
pathway. Scientific Reports 9: 6658.
Bajic M, Maher KA, Deal RB. 2018. Identification of open chromatin regions 
in plant genomes using ATAC-Seq. In: Methods in molecular biology. 
Totowa, NJ: Humana Press Inc., 183–201.
Bartlett MS, Vico G, Porporato A. 2014. Coupled carbon and water fluxes 
in CAM photosynthesis: modeling quantification of water use effi-
ciency and productivity. Plant and Soil 383: 111–138. doi:10.1007/
s11104-014-2064-2.
Bastide B, Sipes D, Hann J, Ting IP. 1993. Effect of severe water stress on 
aspects of crassulacean acid metabolism in Xerosicyos. Plant Physiology 
103: 1089–1096. doi:10.1104/pp.103.4.1089.
Blasius B, Beck F, Lüttge U. 1998. Oscillatory model of crassulacean acid 
metabolism: structural analysis and stability boundaries with a dis-
crete hysteresis switch. Plant, Cell & Environment 21: 775–784. 
doi:10.1046/j.1365-3040.1998.00312.x.
Borland AM, Griffiths H. 1990. The regulation of CAM and respiratory re-
cycling by water supply and light regime in the C3–CAM intermediate 
Sedum telephium. Functional Ecology 4: 33. doi:10.2307/2389649.
Borland AM, Griffiths H. 1997. A comparative study on the regulation of C3 
and C4 carboxylation processes in the constitutive crassulacean acid me-
tabolism (CAM) plant Kalanchoe daigremontiana and the C3–CAM inter-
mediate Clusia minor. Planta 201: 368–378. doi:10.1007/s004250050079.
Borland AM, Griffiths H, Hartwell J, Smith JAC. 2009. Exploiting the po-
tential of plants with crassulacean acid metabolism for bioenergy produc-
tion on marginal lands. Journal of Experimental Botany 60: 2879–2896. 
doi:10.1093/jxb/erp118.
Borland AM, Griffiths H, Maxwell C, Broadmeadow MSJ, Griffiths NM, 
Barnes JD. 1992. On the ecophysiology of the Clusiaceae in Trinidad: ex-
pression of CAM in Clusia minor L. during the transition from wet to dry 
season and characterization of three endemic species. The New Phytologist 
122: 349–357. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8137.1992.tb04240.x.
Borland AM, Guo H-B, Yang X, Cushman JC. 2016. Orchestration of carbo-
hydrate processing for crassulacean acid metabolism. Current Opinion in 
Plant Biology 31: 118–124. doi:10.1016/j.pbi.2016.04.001.
Borland AM, Hartwell J, Jenkins GI, Wilkins MB, Nimmo HG, 
Lüttge U. 1999. Metabolite control overrides circadian regulation of 
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase kinase and CO2 fixation in Crassulacean 
acid metabolism. Plant Physiology 121: 889–896.
Borland AM, Leverett A, Hurtado-Castano N, Hu R, Yang X. 2018. 
Functional anatomical traits of the photosynthetic organs of plants with 
Crassulacean acid metabolism. In: Adams WW III, Terashima I, eds. 
The leaf: a platform for performing photosynthesis, 1st edn. Cham: 
Springer, 281–305.
Boxall SF, Dever LV, Kneřová J , Gould PD, Hartwell J. 2017. 
Phosphorylation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase is essential for 
maximal and sustained dark CO 2 fixation and core circadian clock op-
eration in the obligate Crassulacean acid metabolism species Kalanchoë 
fedtschenkoi. The Plant Cell 29: 2519–2536. doi:10.1105/tpc.17.00301.
Boxall SF, Kadu N, Dever Lv, et al. 2020. Kalanchoë PPC1 is essential 
for Crassulacean acid metabolism and the regulation of core circadian 
clock and guard cell signaling genes. The Plant Cell 32: 1136–1160. 
doi:10.1105/tpc.19.00481.
Brilhaus D, Bräutigam A, Mettler-Altmann T, Winter K, Weber APM. 
2016. Reversible burst of transcriptional changes during induction of 
Crassulacean acid metabolism in Talinum triangulare. Plant Physiology 
170: 102–122. doi:10.1104/pp.15.01076.
von Caemmerer S, Griffiths H. 2009. Stomatal responses to CO 2 during a 
diel Crassulacean acid metabolism cycle in Kalanchoe daigremontiana 
Chomthong & Griffiths — Inferring physiological and regulatory targets in CAM
594
and Kalanchoe pinnata. Plant, Cell and Environment 32: 567–576. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-3040.2009.01951.x.
Caldeira CF, Jeanguenin L, Chaumont F, Tardieu F. 2014. Circadian 
rhythms of hydraulic conductance and growth are enhanced by drought 
and improve plant performance. Nature Communications 5: 1–9.
Ceusters N, Borland AM, Ceusters J. 2021. How to resolve the enigma of 
diurnal malate remobilisation from the vacuole in plants with crassulacean 
acid metabolism? The New Phytologist 229: 3116–3124. doi:10.1111/
nph.17070.
Ceusters J, Borland AM, Londers E, Verdoodt V, Godts C, de Proft MP. 
2008. Diel shifts in carboxylation pathway and metabolite dynamics in the 
CAM bromeliad Aechmea ‘Maya’ in response to elevated CO2. Annals of 
Botany 102: 389–397. doi:10.1093/aob/mcn105.
Chastain CJ, Fries JP, Vogel JA, et al. 2002. Pyruvate, orthophosphate 
dikinase in leaves and chloroplasts of C(3) plants undergoes light-/dark-
induced reversible phosphorylation. Plant Physiology 128: 1368–1378. 
doi:10.1104/pp.010806.
Cheung CYM, Poolman MG, Fell DA, Ratcliffe RG, Sweetlove LJ. 2014. A 
diel flux balance model captures interactions between light and dark me-
tabolism during day–night cycles in C3 and Crassulacean acid metabolism 
leaves. Plant Physiology 165: 917–929. doi:10.1104/pp.113.234468.
Chiang CP, Yim WC, Sun YH, et al. 2016. Identification of ice plant 
(Mesembryanthemum crystallinum L.) microRNAs using RNA-seq and 
their putative roles in high salinity responses in seedlings. Frontiers in 
Plant Science 7: 1143. doi:10.3389/fpls.2016.01143.
Chomthong M. 2023. Systems analysis of Crassulacean acid metabolism 
(CAM) physiology and molecular biology. PhD Thesis, University of 
Cambridge.
Chomthong M, Griffiths H. 2020. Model approaches to advance crassulacean 
acid metabolism system integration. The Plant Journal 101: 951–963. 
doi:10.1111/tpj.14691.
Chu C, Dai Z, Ku MSB, Edwards GE. 1990. Induction of crassulacean acid 
metabolism in the facultative halophyte Mesembryanthemum crystallinum 
by abscisic acid. Plant Physiology 93: 1253–1260. doi:10.1104/
pp.93.3.1253.
Crayn DM, Winter K, Schulte K, Smith JAC. 2015. Photosynthetic path-
ways in Bromeliaceae: phylogenetic and ecological significance of CAM 
and C3 based on carbon isotope ratios for 1893 species. Botanical Journal 
of the Linnean Society 178: 169–221. doi:10.1111/boj.12275.
Cushman JC. 2001. Crassulacean acid metabolism. A plastic photosynthetic 
adaptation to arid environments. Plant Physiology 127: 1439–1448.
Cushman JC, Bohnert HJ. 1999. Crassulacean acid metabolism: molecular 
genetics. Annual Review of Plant Physiology and Plant Molecular Biology 
50: 305–332. doi:10.1146/annurev.arplant.50.1.305.
Cushman JC, Tillett RL, Wood JA, Branco JM, Schlauch KA. 2008. 
Large-scale mRNA expression profiling in the common ice plant, 
Mesembryanthemum crystallinum, performing C3 photosynthesis and 
Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM). Journal of Experimental Botany 
59: 1875–1894. doi:10.1093/jxb/ern008.
Dai Z, Ku MSB, Zhang D, Edwards GE. 1994. Effects of growth regulators 
on the induction of Crassulacean acid metabolism in the facultative halo-
phyte Mesembryanthemum crystallinum L. Planta 192: 287–294.
Dever LV, Boxall SF, Kneřová J, Hartwell J. 2015. Transgenic perturbation 
of the decarboxylation phase of Crassulacean acid metabolism alters 
physiology and metabolism but has only a small effect on growth. Plant 
Physiology 167: 44–59. doi:10.1104/pp.114.251827.
Dodd AN, Borland AM, Haslam RP, Griffiths H, Maxwell K. 2002. 
Crassulacean acid metabolism: plastic, fantastic. Journal of Experimental 
Botany 53: 569–580. doi:10.1093/jexbot/53.369.569.
Drennan PM, Nobel PS. 2000. Responses of CAM species to increasing at-
mospheric CO 2 concentrations. Plant, Cell & Environment 23: 767–781.
Edwards EJ. 2019. Evolutionary trajectories, accessibility and other meta-
phors: the case of C4 and CAM photosynthesis. The New Phytologist 223: 
1742–1755. doi:10.1111/nph.15851.
Edwards EJ. 2023. Reconciling continuous and discrete models of C4 and 
CAM evolution. Annals of Botany, in press.
Emmert-Streib F, Dehmer M, Haibe-Kains B. 2014. Gene regulatory net-
works and their applications: understanding biological and medical prob-
lems in terms of networks. Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology 
2: 38. doi:10.3389/fcell.2014.00038.
Ferrari CR, Bittencourt PP, Nagumo YP, et al. 2021. Developing Portulaca 
oleracea as a model system for functional genomics analysis of C 4/CAM 
photosynthesis. Functional Plant Biology 48: 666–682. doi:10.1071/
FP20202.
Fradera-Soler M, Grace OM, Jørgensen B, Mravec J. 2022a. Elastic 
and collapsible: current understanding of cell walls in succulent plants. 
Journal of Experimental Botany 73: 2290–2307. doi:10.1093/jxb/erac054.
Fradera-Soler M, Leverett A, Mravec J, Jørgensen B, Borland AM, Grace 
OM. 2022b. Are cell wall traits a component of the succulent syndrome? 
Frontiers in Plant Science 13: 1043429. doi:10.3389/fpls.2022.1043429.
Gilman IS, Moreno-Villena JJ, Lewis ZR, Goolsby EW, Edwards EJ. 
2022. Gene co-expression reveals the modularity and integration of C4 
and CAM in Portulaca. Plant Physiology 189: 735–753. doi:10.1093/
plphys/kiac116.
Gilman IS, Smith JAC, Holtum J, Sage RF, Winter K, Edwards EJ. 2023. 
The CAM lineages of planet Earth. Annals of Botany 132: 627–654.
Goettsch B, Hilton-Taylor C, Cruz-Piñón G, et al. 2015. High proportion of 
cactus species threatened with extinction. Nature Plants 1: 1–7.
Gotoh E, Oiwamoto K, Inoue S-I, Shimazaki K-I, Doi M. 2019. Stomatal 
response to blue light in crassulacean acid metabolism plants Kalanchoe 
pinnata and Kalanchoe daigremontiana. Journal of Experimental Botany 
70: 1367–1374. doi:10.1093/jxb/ery450.
Grey K-A, Foden W, Midgeley GF. 2022. Bioclimatic controls of CO 2 as-
similation near range limits of the CAM succulent tree Aloidendron 
dichotomum. Journal of Experimental Botany 73: 7434–7449. doi:https://
doi.org/10.1093/jxb/erac343.
Griffiths H. 2013. Plant venation: from succulence to succulents. Current 
Biology 23: R340–R341. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2013.03.060.
Griffiths H. 2023. From wild pine to domesticated delicacy: metabolic and 
evolutionary diversity of the pineapple. In: Avery V, Calarescu M, eds. 
The pineapple from domestication to commodification: re-presenting a 
global fruit. Oxford: Oxford University Press, in press.
Griffiths H, Cousins AB, Badger MR, von Caemmerer S. 2007. 
Discrimination in the dark. Resolving the interplay between metabolic 
and physical constraints to phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase activity 
during the Crassulacean acid metabolism cycle. Plant Physiology 143: 
1055–1067. doi:10.1104/pp.106.088302.
Griffiths H, Robe WE, Girnus J, Maxwell K. 2008. Leaf succulence de-
termines the interplay between carboxylase systems and light use 
during Crassulacean acid metabolism in Kalanchoë species. Journal of 
Experimental Botany 59: 1851–1861. doi:10.1093/jxb/ern085.
Griffiths H, Smith JAC. 1983. Photosynthetic pathways in the Bromeliaceae 
of Trinidad: relations between life-forms, habitat preference and the oc-
currence of CAM. Oecologia 60: 176–184. doi:10.1007/BF00379519.
Haag-kerwer A, Franco AC, Luttge U. 1992. The effect of temperature and 
light on gas exchange and acid accumulation in the C 3 -CAM plant Clusia 
minor L. Journal of Experimental Botany 43: 345–352. doi:10.1093/
jxb/43.3.345.
Hartwell J, Dever LV, Boxall SF. 2016. Emerging model systems for func-
tional genomics analysis of Crassulacean acid metabolism. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology 31: 100–108. doi:10.1016/j.pbi.2016.03.019.
Hartwell J, Gill A, Nimmo GA, Wilkins MB, Jenkins GI, Nimmo HG. 
1999. Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase kinase is a novel protein kinase 
regulated at the level of expression. The Plant Journal 20: 333–342. 
doi:10.1046/j.1365-313x.1999.t01-1-00609.x.
Hartwell J, Smith LH, Wilkins MB, Jenkins GI, Nimmo HG. 1996. Higher 
plant phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase kinase is regulated at the level of 
translatable mRNA in response to light or a circadian rhythm. The Plant 
Journal 10: 1071–1078. doi:10.1046/j.1365-313x.1996.10061071.x.
Hartzell S, Bartlett MS, Inglese P, Consoli S, Yin J, Porporato A. 2021. 
Modelling nonlinear dynamics of Crassulacean acid metabolism product-
ivity and water use for global predictions. Plant, Cell & Environment 44: 
34–48. doi:10.1111/pce.13918.
Hartzell S, Bartlett MS, Porporato A. 2018. Unified representation of the C3, 
C4, and CAM photosynthetic pathways with the Photo3 model. Ecological 
Modelling 384: 173–187. doi:10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2018.06.012.
Helliker BR. 2014. Reconstructing the d 18O of atmospheric water vapour via 
the CAM epiphyte Tillandsia usneoides: seasonal controls on d18O in the 
field and large-scale reconstruction of d 18Oa. Plant, Cell & Environment 
37: 541–556.
Herrando-Moraira S, Vitales D, Nualart N, et al. 2020. Global distri-
bution patterns and niche modelling of the invasive Kalanchoe × 
houghtonii (Crassulaceae). Science Reports 10: 3143. doi:10.1038/
s41598-020-60079-2.
Chomthong & Griffiths — Inferring physiological and regulatory targets in CAM
595
Heyduk K. 2021. The genetic control of succulent leaf development. Current 
Opinion in Plant Biology 59: 101978. doi:10.1016/j.pbi.2020.11.003.
Heyduk K. 2022. Evolution of Crassulacean acid metabolism in response to 
the environment: past, present, and future. Plant Physiology 190: 19–30. 
doi:10.1093/plphys/kiac303.
Heyduk K, Hwang M, Albert V, et al. 2019a. Altered gene regulatory net-
works are associated with the transition from C3 to crassulacean acid me-
tabolism in Erycina (Oncidiinae: Orchidaceae). Frontiers in Plant Science 
9: 2000.
Heyduk K, McAssey EV, Field R, Leebens-Mack J. 2023. The Agavoideae: 
an emergent model clade for CAM evolutionary biology. Annals of Botany 
2023: mcad062. doi:https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcad062.
Heyduk K, Ray JN, Ayyampalayam S, et al. 2019b. Shared expression of 
crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) genes pre-dates the origin of CAM 
in the genus Yucca. Journal of Experimental Botany 70: 6597–6609. 
doi:10.1093/jxb/erz105.
Holtum JAM, Winter K. 1982. Activity of enzymes of carbon me-
tabolism during the induction of Crassulacean acid metabolism in 
Mesembryanthemum crystallinum L. Planta 155: 8–16. doi:10.1007/
BF00402925.
Hughes TE, Langdale JA, Kelly S. 2014. The impact of widespread regu-
latory neofunctionalization on homeolog gene evolution following 
whole-genome duplication in maize. Genome Research 24: 1348–1355. 
doi:10.1101/gr.172684.114.
Hurtado-Castano N, Atkins E, Barbes J, et al. 2023. The starch-deficient 
plastidic PHOSPHOGLUCOMUTASE mutant of the constitutive 
crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) species Kalanchoë fedtschenkoi im-
pacts diel regulation and timing of stomatal CO2 responsiveness. Annals of 
Botany: mcad017. doi:https://doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcad017.
Huynh-Thu V A, Geurts P. 2018. dynGENIE3: dynamical GENIE3 for the 
inference of gene networks from time series expression data. Scientific 
Reports 8: 1–12.
Ishihara H, Obata T, Sulpice R, Fernie AR, Stitt M. 2015. Quantifying pro-
tein synthesis and degradation in Arabidopsis by dynamic 13CO2 labeling 
and analysis of enrichment in individual amino acids in their free pools 
and in protein. Plant Physiology 168: 74–93. doi:10.1104/pp.15.00209.
Jolly AR, Zailaa J, Farah U, et al. 2021. Leaf venation and morphology help 
explain physiological variation in Yucca brevifolia and Hesperoyucca 
whipplei across microhabitats in the Mojave Desert, CA. Frontiers in 
Plant Science 11: 2170.
Kluge M, Ting IP. 1978. Crassulacean acid metabolism: analysis of an eco-
logical adaptation. Berlin: Springer.
Kondo A, Nose A, Yuasa H, Ueno O. 2000. Species variation in the intracel-
lular localization of pyruvate, Pi dikinase in leaves of crassulacean-acid-
metabolism plants: an immunogold electron-microscope study. Planta 
210: 611–621. doi:10.1007/s004250050051.
Lee DM, Assmann SM. 1992. Stomatal responses to light in the facultative 
Crassulacean acid metabolism species, Portulacaria afra. Physiologia 
Plantarum 85: 35–42. doi:10.1034/j.1399-3054.1992.850106.x.
Lefoulon C, Susanna F, Boxall SF, Hartwell J, Blatt MR. 2020. Crassulacean 
acid metabolism guard cell anion channel activity follows transcript abun-
dance and is suppressed by apoplastic malate. New Phytologist 227: 1847–
1857. doi:10.1111/nph.16640.
Leverett A, Ferguson K, Winter K, Borland AM. 2023a. Leaf vein density 
correlates with crassulacean acid metabolism, but not hydraulic capaci-
tance, in the genus Clusia. Annals of Botany: mcad035. doi:10.1093/aob/
mcad035.
Leverett A, Hartzell S, Winter K, et al. 2023b. Dissecting succulence: 
Crassulacean acid metabolism and hydraulic capacitance are independent 
adaptations in Clusia leaves. Plant Cell and Environment 46: 1472–1488. 
doi:10.1111/pce.14539.
Lim SD, Lee S, Choi WG, Yim WC, Cushman JC. 2019. Laying the foun-
dation for crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) biodesign: Expression of 
the C4 metabolism cycle genes of CAM in Arabidopsis. Frontiers in Plant 
Science 10: 101. doi:10.3389/fpls.2019.00101.
Liu D, Chen M, Mendoza B, et al. 2019. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated targeted 
mutagenesis for functional genomics research of crassulacean acid 
metabolism plants. Journal of Experimental Botany 70: 6621–6629. 
doi:10.1093/jxb/erz415.
Lu Y, Fricke W. 2023. Changes in root hydraulic conductivity in wheat 
(Triticum aestivum L.) in response to salt stress and day/night can 
best be explained through altered activity of aquaporins. Plant, Cell & 
Environment 46: 747–763. doi:10.1111/pce.14535.
Lu Z, Hofmeister BT, Vollmers C, DuBois RM, Schmitz RJ. 2017. 
Combining ATAC-seq with nuclei sorting for discovery of cis-regulatory 
regions in plant genomes. Nucleic Acids Research 45: e41–e41. 
doi:10.1093/nar/gkw1179.
Maleckova E, Brilhaus D, Wrobel TJ, Weber APM. 2019. Transcript and 
metabolite changes during the early phase of abscisic acid-mediated in-
duction of crassulacean acid metabolism in Talinum triangulare. Journal 
of Experimental Botany 70: 6581–6596. doi:10.1093/jxb/erz189.
Males J. 2017. Secrets of succulence. Journal of Experimental Botany 68: 
2121–2134. doi:10.1093/jxb/erx096.
Males J, Baksh-Comeau Y, Jaggernauth D, Ballah S, Paltoo S, Griffiths H. 
2023. Epiphytic CAM Bromeliads indicate vulnerability of tropical forest 
communities to climate change. Annals of Botany 132: 699–716.
Males J, Griffiths H. 2017. Stomatal biology of CAM plants. Plant Physiology 
174: 550–560. doi:10.1104/pp.17.00114.
Males J, Griffiths H. 2018. Economic and hydraulic divergences underpin 
ecological differentiation in the Bromeliaceae. Plant, Cell & Environment 
41: 64–78. doi:10.1111/pce.12954.
Martre P, Morillon R, Barrieu F, North GB, Nobel PS, Chrispeels MJ. 
2002. Plasma membrane aquaporins play a significant role during re-
covery from water deficit. Plant Physiology 130: 2101–2110. doi:10.1104/
pp.009019.
Masumoto C, Miyazawa SI, Ohkawa H, et al. 2010. Phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxylase intrinsically located in the chloroplast of rice plays a crucial 
role in ammonium assimilation. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America 107: 5226–5231. doi:10.1073/
pnas.0913127107.
Maxwell K, Griffiths H, Helliker B, et al. 2002. Regulation of Rubisco ac-
tivity in crassulacean acid metabolism plants: better late than never. 
Functional Plant Biology 29: 689–696. doi:10.1071/PP01212.
Ming R, VanBuren R, Wai CM, et al. 2015. The pineapple genome and the 
evolution of CAM photosynthesis. Nature Genetics 12: 1435–1442.
Miyao M, Fukayama H. 2003. Metabolic consequences of overproduction of 
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase in C3 plants. Archives of Biochemistry 
and Biophysics 414: 197–203. doi:10.1016/s0003-9861(03)00117-6.
Moseley RC, Mewalal R, Motta F, Tuskan GA, Haase S, Yang X. 2018. 
Conservation and diversification of circadian rhythmicity between a 
model crassulacean acid metabolism plant Kalanchoë fedtschenkoi and a 
model C3 photosynthesis plant Arabidopsis thaliana. Frontiers in Plant 
Science 9: 1757.
Murphy R, Smith JAC. 1998. Determination of cell water-relation param-
eters using the pressure probe: extended theory and practice of the 
pressure-clamp technique. Plant, Cell and Environment 21: 637–657. 
doi:10.1046/j.1365-3040.1998.00316.x.
Nimmo HG. 2000. The regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase 
in CAM plants. Trends in Plant Science 5: 75–80. doi:10.1016/
s1360-1385(99)01543-5.
Nobel PS. 1988. Environmental biology of agaves and cacti. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
North GB, Brinton EK, Garrett TY. 2008. Contractile roots in succulent mono-
cots: convergence, divergence and adaptation to limited rainfall. Plant, Cell 
& Environment 31: 1179–1189. doi:10.1111/j.1365-3040.2008.01832.x.
Ogburn RM, Edwards EJ. 2013. Repeated origin of three-dimensional leaf 
venation releases constraints on the evolution of succulence in plants. 
Current Biology 23: 722–726. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2013.03.029.
Om K, Arias NN, Jambor CC, et al. 2022. Pyruvate, phosphate dikinase 
regulatory protein impacts light response of C4 photosynthesis in Setaria 
viridis. Plant Physiology 190: 1117–1133. doi:10.1093/plphys/kiac333.
Orth JD, Thiele I, Palsson BO. 2010. What is flux balance analysis? Nature 
Biotechnology 28: 245–248. doi:10.1038/nbt.1614.
Osmond CB. 1978. Crassulacean acid metabolism: a curiosity in context. 
Annual Review of Plant Physiology 29: 379–414. doi:10.1146/annurev.
pp.29.060178.002115.
Osmond CB, Winter K, Ziegler H. 1982. Functional significance of dif-
ferent pathways of CO 2 fixation in photosynthesis. In: Lange OL, 
Nobel PS, Osmond CB, Ziegler H, eds. Physiological plant ecology II. 
Encyclopedia of plant physiology, Vol. 12/ B. Berlin: Springer, 479–547.
Owen NA, Choncubhair ON, Males J, et al. 2016. Eddy covariance cap-
tures four-phase crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) gas exchange sig-
nature in Agave. Plant, Cell & Environment 39: 295–309. doi:10.1111/
pce.12610.
Owen NA, Griffiths H. 2013. A system dynamics model integrating physi-
ology and biochemical regulation predicts extent of crassulacean acid 
Chomthong & Griffiths — Inferring physiological and regulatory targets in CAM
596
metabolism (CAM) phases. The New Phytologist 200: 1116–1131. 
doi:10.1111/nph.12461.
Panchy N, Lehti-Shiu M, Shiu SH. 2016. Evolution of gene duplication in 
plants. Plant Physiology 171: 2294–2316. doi:10.1104/pp.16.00523.
Pierce S, Winter K, Griffiths H. 2002. The role of CAM in high rain-
fall cloudforests: an in situ comparison of photosynthetic pathways in 
Bromeliaceae. Plant Cell and Environment 25: 1181–1189.
Sage RF, Gilman IS, Smith JAC, Silvera K, Edwards EJ. 2023. Atmospheric 
CO2 decline and the timing of CAM plant evolution. Annals of Botany 
132: 753–770,
Santelia D, Lawson T. 2016. Rethinking guard cell metabolism. Plant 
Physiology 172: 1371–1392. doi:10.1104/pp.16.00767.
Shameer S, Baghalian K, Cheung CYM, Ratcliffe RG, Sweetlove LJ. 2018. 
Computational analysis of the productivity potential of CAM. Nature 
Plants 4: 165–171. doi:10.1038/s41477-018-0112-2.
Silvera K, Santiago LS, Cushman JC, Winter K. 2009. Crassulacean acid me-
tabolism and epiphytism linked to adaptive radiation in the Orchidaceae. 
Plant Physiology 149: 1838–1847. doi:10.1104/pp.108.132555.
Tallman G, Zhu J, Mawson BT, et al. 1997. Induction of CAM in 
Mesembryanthemum crystallinum abolishes the stomatal response to blue 
light and light-dependent zeaxanthin formation in guard cell chloroplasts. 
Plant and Cell Physiology 38: 236–242. doi:10.1093/oxfordjournals.pcp.
a029158.
Taybi T, Cushman JC. 1999. Signaling events leading to Crassulacean acid 
metabolism induction in the common ice plant. Plant Physiology 121: 
545–556. doi:10.1104/pp.121.2.545.
Taybi T, Sotta B, Gehrig H, Güçlü S, Kluge M, Brulfert J. 1995. Differential 
effects of abscisic acid on phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase and CAM 
operation in Kalanchoë blossfeldiana. Botanica Acta 108: 240–246. 
doi:10.1111/j.1438-8677.1995.tb00856.x.
Töpfer N, Braam T, Shameer S, Ratcliffe RG, Sweetlove LJ. 2020. 
Alternative Crassulacean acid metabolism modes provide environment-
specific water-saving benefits in a leaf metabolic model. The Plant Cell 
32: 3689–3705. doi:10.1105/tpc.20.00132.
Tsompana M, Buck MJ. 2014. Chromatin accessibility: a window into the 
genome. Epigenetics & Chromatin 7: 33. doi:10.1186/1756-8935-7-33.
Wai CM, VanBuren R. 2018. Circadian regulation of pineapple CAM photo-
synthesis. Cham: Springer.
Wai CM, VanBuren R, Zhang J, et al. 2017. Temporal and spatial 
transcriptomic and microRNA dynamics of CAM photosynthesis in pine-
apple. The Plant Journal 92: 19–30. doi:10.1111/tpj.13630.
Wai CM, Weise SE, Ozersky P, Mockler TC, Michael TP, VanBuren R. 
2019. Time of day and network reprogramming during drought induced 
CAM photosynthesis in Sedum album. PLoS Genetics 15: e1008209. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1008209.
Winter K. 1985. Crassulacean acid metabolism. In: Barber J, Baker NR, eds. 
Photosynthetic mechanisms and the environment. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 
329–387.
Winter K. 2019. Ecophysiology of constitutive and facultative CAM photo-
synthesis. Journal of Experimental Botany 70: 6495–6508. doi:10.1093/
jxb/erz002.
Winter K, Foster JG, Edwards GE, Holtum JAM. 1982. Intracellular lo-
calization of enzymes of carbon metabolism in Mesembryanthemum 
crystailinum exhibiting C3 photosynthetic characteristics or performing 
Crassulacean Acid Metabolism. Plant Physiology 69: 300–307.
Winter K, Holtum JAM. 2007. Environment or development? Lifetime net 
CO2 exchange and control of the expression of Crassulacean acid me-
tabolism in Mesembryanthemum crystallinum. Plant Physiology 143: 
98–107. doi:10.1104/pp.106.088922.
Winter K, Smith JAC. 2022. CAM photosynthesis: the acid test. The New 
Phytologist 233: 599–609. doi:10.1111/nph.17790.
Winter K, von Willert DJ. 1972. NaCl-induzierter Crassulaceen 
säurestoffwechsel bei Mesembryanthemum crystallinum. Zeitschrift für 
Pflanzenphysiologie 67: 166–170. doi:10.1016/s0044-328x(72)80131-4.
Yang X, Cushman JC, Borland AM, et al. 2015. A roadmap for research 
on crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) to enhance sustainable food and 
bioenergy production in a hotter, drier world. The New Phytologist 207: 
491–504. doi:10.1111/nph.13393.
Yang X, Hu R, Yin H, et al. 2017. The Kalanchoë genome provides in-
sights into convergent evolution and building blocks of crassulacean 
acid metabolism. Nature Communications 8: 1899. doi:10.1038/
s41467-017-01491-7.
Yin H, Guo H-B, Weston DJ, et al. 2018. Diel rewiring and positive selec-
tion of ancient plant proteins enabled evolution of CAM photosynthesis in 
Agave. BMC Genomics 19: 588. doi:10.1186/s12864-018-4964-7.
Yu, K, D’Odorico P, Collins SL, et al. 2019. The competitive advantage of a 
constitutive CAM species over a C4 grass species under drought and CO 2 
enrichment. Ecosphere 10: e02721. doi:10.1002/ecs2.2721.
Zhang L, Chen F, Zhang G-Q, et al. 2016. Origin and mechanism of 
crassulacean acid metabolism in orchids as implied by comparative 
transcriptomics and genomics of the carbon fixation pathway. The Plant 
Journal 86: 175–185. doi:10.1111/tpj.13159.