Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Metabolic and transcriptomic
reprogramming during contact inhibition-
induced quiescence is mediated by YAP-
dependent and YAP-independent
mechanisms
Soeun Kang 1, Maciek R. Antoniewicz2 &N i s s i mH a y1,3
Metabolic rewiring during the proliferation-to-quiescence transition is poorly
understood. Here, using a model of contact inhibition-induced quiescence, we
conducted
13C-metabolicﬂux analysis in proliferating (P) and quiescent (Q)
mouse embryonicﬁbroblasts (MEFs) to investigate this process. Q cells exhibit
reduced glycolysis but increased TCA cycleﬂux and mitochondrial respiration.
Reduced glycolyticﬂux in Q cells correlates with reduced glycolytic enzyme
expression mediated by yes-associated protein (YAP) inhibition. The increased
TCA cycle activity and respiration in Q cells is mediated by induced mito-
chondrial pyruvate carrier (MPC) expression, rendering them vulnerable to
MPC inhibition. The malate-to-pyruvateﬂux, which generates NADPH, is
markedly reduced by modulating malic enzyme 1 (ME1) dimerization in Q cells.
Conversely, the malate dehydrogenase 1(MDH1)-mediated oxaloacetate-to-
malate ﬂux is reversed and elevated in Q cells, driven by high mitochondrial-
derived malate levels, reduced cytosolic oxaloacetate, elevated MDH1 levels,
and a high cytoplasmic NAD
+/NADH ratio. Transcriptomic analysis revealed
large number of genes are induced in Q cells, many of which are associated
with the extracellular matrix (ECM),while YAP-dependent and cell cycle-
related genes are repressed. The results suggest that high TCA cycleﬂux and
respiration in Q cells are required to generate ATP and amino acids to maintain
de-novo ECM protein synthesis and secretion.
Glucose, a major nutrient of most mammalian cells, is metabolized in
glycolysis, the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP), the hexosamine
pathway, and subsequently in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle. Glyco-
lysis converts glucose into precursor metabolites for amino acid and
fatty acid synthesis and generates adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH). In glycolysis, 2 ATP and 2
NAD
+ are consumed, with the production of 4 ATP, 2 NADH, and 2
pyruvates per molecule of glucose. As glycolysis requires NAD+,t h e
recycling of NADH back into NAD+ is pivotal for optimum glycolyticﬂux1.
The PPP utilizes glucose for the production of nicotinamide adenine
Received: 6 October 2023
Accepted: 25 July 2024
Check for updates
1Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.2Chemical Engineering
Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.3Research and Development Section, Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
e-mail: nhay@uic.edu
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) and ribose 5-phosphate (R5P), which
are required for redox homeostasis and fatty acid and nucleotide
synthesis, respectively
2. Pyruvate is further oxidized in the TCA cycle and
generates additional NADH andﬂavin adenine dinucleotide (FADH2),
w h i c hi nt u r ng e n e r a t em o r eA T Pi nt h ee l e c t r o nt r a n s p o r tc h a i n( E T C )i n
mitochondria. Mitochondrial NADH is oxidized upon donating its elec-
trons to complex I (NADH: ubiquinone oxidoreductase) of the ETC, and
mitochondrial NAD
+ is generated3.A sb o t hg l y c o l y s i sa n dt h eT C Ac y c l e
are oxidative pathways, the oxidized form, NAD+,s e r v e sa sac o f a c t o rf o r
enzymes involved in these pathways, and NADH is produced4. Then,
NADH produced by the TCA cycle links it to cellular energy generation,
carrying electrons to the ETC on the inner mitochondrial membrane
5.A s
t h eT C Ac y c l ea n dE T Cr e q u i r eN A D+ and NADH, respectively, an optimal
NAD+/NADH ratio is needed for efﬁcient mitochondrial metabolism.
Fibroblasts, the most common cell types in mammalian con-
nective tissue, proliferate in the embryonic state, but with age, they
arrest in the G1 phase of the cell cycle6. Therefore, healthyﬁbroblasts in
normal tissue are mostly in a quiescent state, representing a reversible
exit from the cell cycle, and they can re‐enter the cell cycle upon
special circumstances such as wounding
7,8.T os u p p l e m e n tA T Pa n d
building blocks for macromolecule synthesis during the transition to
the proliferative state, proliferating cells undergo metabolic repro-
gramming, such as shifting their metabolism to more anabolic path-
ways with an increased nutrient uptake and glycolysis
9–11.It was
previously reported that contact-inhibited quiescent humanﬁbro-
blasts have reduced glycolysis but are still metabolically active12.
However, how the metabolicﬂux is reprogrammed and regulated in
quiescent cells is not fully understood. Therefore, we conducted
quantitative metabolomics and
13C-metabolicﬂux analysis (13C-MFA)13
to characterize the metabolic differences and transcriptomic analysis
between proliferating (P) and quiescent (Q) mouse embryonicﬁbro-
blasts (MEFs). We observed changes in glucose consumption, glyco-
lysis, the TCA cycle, malic enzyme 1 (ME1)-mediatedﬂux, and malate
dehydrogenase 1 (MDH1)-mediatedﬂux during the transition from a
proliferative to a quiescent state. The decrease in glycolyticﬂuxes in Q
cells is mediated by the suppression of yes-associated protein (YAP)
activity, which is regulated by E-cadherin-mediated cell‒cell interac-
tions. Transcriptomic analysis conﬁrmed that YAP target genes are
downregulated in Q cells and restored by E-cadherin deletion. In
contrast, the TCA cycle and mitochondrial metabolism are markedly
elevated in Q cells, and pyruvate is diverted to the mitochondria
instead of to lactate production. The diversion of pyruvate to the
mitochondria is mediated by elevated expression of mitochondrial
pyruvate carriers (MPC1 and MPC2), and reduced NAD
+ demand. ME1-
mediated ﬂux is markedly reduced in Q cells by modulating ME1
dimerization. The MDH1-mediatedﬂux is reversed and elevated in Q
cells, which is likely mediated by the high level of mitochondrial-
derived malate, reduced cytosolic oxaloacetate, high level of MDH1,
and relatively high cytoplasmic NAD
+/NADH ratio. Theﬂux analysis was
done mainly in MEFs, but we found similar trends such as reduced
glycolysis and increased OXPHOS in other mouse and humanﬁbro-
blasts as well as in epithelial cells. We used contact inhibition in the
presence of growth factors to induce quiescence. However, when
quiescence was induced by serum deprivation, which is governed by
the lack of growth factors both glycolysis and OXPHOS were reduced.
Finally, many genes are induced in Q cells, including genes asso-
ciated with the extracellular matrix (ECM). Thus, Q cells display mas-
sive reprogramming both metabolically and transcriptionally. The
elevated TCA cycleﬂux and respiration in Q cells could be required to
maintain ECM protein synthesis and secretion, which demands high
ATP and amino acids generated by mitochondria, and particularly
proline, which is enriched in the collagen family of proteins
14.A st h e
main roles ofﬁbroblasts is to produce the ECM, this underscores the
necessity for active mitochondrial metabolism to effectively support
their essential cellular functions.
Results
Glycolyticﬂux is decreased, while TCA cycleﬂux and respiration
are markedly increased in quiescent cells
To determine the metabolic changes occurring during the transition
from a proliferative to a quiescent state, we generated MEFs immor-
talized with dominant-negative p53 as previously described15,16.T h e
cells were analyzed while actively proliferating (2 days after plating)
and when they were quiescent (contact-inhibited for 6 days, 11 days
after plating) (Fig. 1a). In Q cells, the levels of p27
Kip1, a cyclin-
dependent kinase inhibitor, were signiﬁcantly increased, and con-
comitantly, the cell cycle distribution was mostly in G1 phase with
signiﬁcantly reduced S phase and G2/M phase (Fig. 1a, b). Tran-
scriptomic analysis in P versus Q cells surprisingly showed that more
genes were upregulated in Q cells; among 13,022 signiﬁcantly differ-
entially expressed genes, 7131 genes were upregulated, and 5891 genes
were downregulated in Q cells (Supplementary Data 1). The heatmap,
using stricterﬁltering criteria (q <0 . 0 1 a n d l o g F C<−2 or logFC > 2),
shows that out of 3319 genes, 2478 were upregulated and 841 were
downregulated in Q cells. Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was
used to understand the pathways that were differentially regulated in P
versus Q cells. Speciﬁcally, Q cells in comparison to P cells showed
signiﬁcantly downregulated gene sets associated with the cell cycle
checkpoint (Supplementary Fig. 1b–d). These results show that P cells
and Q cells have distinct gene expression proﬁles.
As expected, P cells exhibited higher glycolytic activity than Q
cells, as conﬁrmed by the extracellular acidiﬁcation rate (ECAR)
(Fig. 1c, d). To quantify metabolicﬂuxes in both P and Q cells, we
employed
13C-metabolic ﬂux analysis (13C-MFA)13,17–20 with a parallel
labeling strategy using two isotopic tracers, namely, [1,2-13C2]-glu-
cose and [U-13C] glutamine, as previously described21. Theﬂux ana-
lysis (Fig. 1e, Supplementary Fig. 2a, b, and Supplementary
Data 2 and 3) showed that glucose uptake was modestly reduced,
and glycolysis was reduced by approximately 2-fold in Q cells.
Consistent with theﬂux analysis, [1,2-
13C2]-glucose tracing experi-
ments showed a signiﬁcantly lower abundance of (M + 2) glycolytic
metabolites, such as G6P, DHAP, pyruvate, and lactate, in Q cells
than in P cells (Supplementary Fig. 2c, d). Although glycolyticﬂux
was reduced in Q cells, no change in PPPﬂux was observed (Fig.1e),
which was also reﬂected by measuring the ratio of DHAP (M + 1)
derived from the PPP versus DHAP (M + 2) derived from glycolysis
with [1,2-
13C2]-glucose tracing (Fig.1f).
The ﬂux of pyruvate to lactate was markedly decreased in Q cells
(Fig. 1e and Supplementary Fig. 2b), which was also reﬂected by a
4-fold decrease in lactate excretion (Fig.1d). Instead, there was a dra-
matic increase in pyruvate transport to the mitochondria (Fig.1ea n d
Supplementary Fig. 3a). Consequently, there was a dramatic increase
in all TCA cycle reactions in Q cells (Fig.1e and Supplementary Fig. 3a).
Interestingly, the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA was markedly
increased in Q cells, but the conversion of pyruvate to oxaloacetate is
increased even more reaching to about 15-fold higher than in P cells
(Fig. 1e). Consistent with highﬂux of TCA cycle, the mitochondrial
membrane potential (ΔΨ
m) and basal respiration measured by the
oxygen consumption rate (OCR) were higher in Q cells than in P cells
(Fig. 1g–j). The higher respiration is likely not due to an increase in the
number of mitochondria, but we found that mitochondria are more
elongated in Q cells (Supplementary Fig. 3b, c), which could indicate
fused and more active mitochondria
22–24.T h i sﬁnding suggests that Q
cells produce ATP preferentially from mitochondrial respiration.
Finally, theﬂux of malate to pyruvate in mitochondria catalyzed by
malic enzyme 2 (ME2) and the transport of malate from mitochondria
to the cytosol are substantially induced in Q cells. Additionally, in Q
cells, cytoplasmic malate is not converted to pyruvate catalyzed by
ME1, generating NADPH, but rather, is converted to oxaloacetate
(OAC), which is in turn converted to phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) which
concomitantly generate more pyruvate (Fig.1e).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 2
As the glycolytic ﬂux rate is controlled by glycolytic enzyme
expression25, the expression levels of glycolytic enzymes in P versus
Q cells were assessed (Fig.1k). The expression of most enzymes in
glycolysis was signiﬁcantly downregulated in Q cells compared
with P cells. In particular, hexokinase 2 (HK2), phosphofructokinase
1 (PFK1), and pyruvate kinase M1-2 (PKM1-2), the rate-limiting
enzymes of glycolysis, were signiﬁcantly downregulated, although
p27
Kip1 levels were signiﬁcantly increased in Q cells at both the
protein and mRNA levels (Fig. 1k and Supplementary Fig. 2e).
GSEA also showed that the expression of gene sets associated
with glycolysis was signiﬁcantly reduced in Q cells (Supplementary
Fig. 2f, g).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 3
The expression of mitochondrial pyruvate carriers 1 and 2 (MPC1
and MPC2), the mitochondrial gatekeepers for pyruvate26,I D H 2 ,t h e
rate-limiting enzyme of the TCA cycle, and some TCA cycle enzymes
(DLST, SDHA, and fumarase) were upregulated in Q cells compared
with P cells (Fig.1l and Supplementary Fig. 3d). The marked increase in
MPCs and TCA cycle enzymes together with the reduced expression of
LDHA (Fig. 1k, l) could explain the dramatic increase in pyruvate
translocation to mitochondria and the enhanced TCA cycleﬂux in Q
cells. Upon MPC inhibition, both basal respiration and ATP production
from the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) are signi ﬁcantly
decreased in both P and Q cells (Fig.1m). Overexpression of MPC1/2 in
proliferating cells is sufﬁcient to increase OXPHOS (Supplementary
Fig. 3e, f). Thus, it appears that high MPC expression is the driver of
increased OXPHOS. Interestingly, the survival of Q cells is dependent
on MPC expression, as they are much more vulnerable to prolonged
MPC inhibition than are P cells (Fig.1n). Similar changes in the levels of
metabolic enzymes and MPCs were also observed in Q primary MEFs,
NIH3T3 cells, and human skinﬁbroblasts BJ cells (Supplementary
Fig. 4a, b). Lastly, ECAR was reduced, and OCR was elevated in Q
primary MEFs, NIH3T3, and BJ cells (Supplementary Fig. 4c, d). These
results suggest that attenuated glycolysis and induced mitochondrial
metabolism and respiration are common phenomena in quiescent
ﬁbroblasts. Interestingly, elevated MPC levels and OXPHOS and
reduced glycolysis were also observed in Q Chinese hamster ovary
(CHO) cells (Supplementary Fig. 4e–h), and the same was recently
reported in Q neural stem cells
24.
E-Cadherin and yes-associated protein (YAP) regulate glycolysis
during the transition from a proliferative to a quiescent state
Cell‒cell interactions lead to cellular quiescence by contact
inhibition27,28. Surprisingly, we found that E-cadherin (E-Cad) is
induced when the cells reach conﬂuence with a concomitant decrease
in the expression of the rate-limiting glycolytic enzymes, HK2 and
PKM2 (Fig. 2a). Interestingly, the induced expression of E-Cad to a
different extent after quiescence was observed in independently iso-
lated primary MEFs and immortalized MEFs by either dominant-
negative p53 or SV40 large T cells (Supplementary Fig. 5a, b). There-
fore, we hypothesized that cell‒cell interactions through E-Cad could
control intracellular glucose metabolism during the transition from a
proliferative to a quiescent state. To determine whether E-Cad plays a
role in metabolic programming, we deleted E-Cad and found that
E-Cad deletion restored the ECAR in Q cells (Fig.2b). In addition, the
deletion of E-Cad restored the expression of HK2, PKM1, and PKM2 in
Q cells, although p27
Kip1 levels were maintained at both the protein and
mRNA levels (Fig.2c and Supplementary Fig. 5c).13C-MFA showed that
glycolysis was rescued in Q E-Cad KO cells (Fig.2d ) .T h i sr e s c u ei sa l s o
reﬂected by a signiﬁcantly higher abundance of (M + 2) pyruvate and
lactate after [1,2-13C2]-glucose tracing in Q E-Cad KO cells (Fig.2e, f).
However, theﬂux of pyruvate transport to the mitochondria and the
TCA cycle ﬂux remained higher in Q E-Cad KO cells and was even
higher than that in control Q cells (Supplementary Fig. 5d). Con-
sistently, the OCR measurements showed that basal respiration was
even higher in Q E-Cad KO cells than in control Q cells (Supplementary
Fig. 5e). This result suggests that Q E-Cad KO cells are more energetic
and produce ATP from both glycolysis and mitochondrial respiration.
These results also suggest that E-Cad mediates the reduced glycolysis
by inhibiting glycolytic enzyme expression in Q cells but not the
increase in the TCA cycle and OXPHOS.
E-Cad was reported to drive contact inhibition and inhibition of
cell proliferation via the Hippo-dependent signaling pathway and the
inhibition of yes-associated protein (YAP) activity
29,30.T h eH i p p o
pathway negatively regulates the nuclear localization and activity of
the transcriptional coactivator yes-associated protein (YAP)
31. P cells
showed an increase in nuclear YAP localization and the expression of
connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), a direct YAP target gene,
whereas Q cells showed less total YAP intensity, probably due to
degradation of cytosolic YAP along with signiﬁcantly reduced CTGF
expression (Supplementary Fig. 5f–h). YAP transcriptional activity,
measured by 8XGTIIC (TEAD luciferase reporter)
32, was also sig-
niﬁcantly decreased in Q cells compared with P cells (Supplementary
Fig. 5i). A similar YAP translocation pattern was observed in P versus Q
primary MEFs (Supplementary Fig. 5j). Transcriptomic analysis con-
sistently showed that the transcription of YAP target genes was
markedly reduced in Q cells (Fig.3a). Interestingly, in Q E-Cad KO cells,
the nuclear localization of YAP was signiﬁcantly enhanced (Fig.3b, c),
and concomitant YAP transcriptional activity as well as the mRNA
levels of YAP target genes were restored (Fig.3d and Supplementary
Fig. 6a). Interestingly, Q E-Cad KO cells were arrested in the G
1 cell cycle
phase (Supplementary Fig. 6b). Thus, although YAP activity was
restored, Q E-Cad KO cells maintained their quiescent characteristics.
Given that YAP is more transcriptionally active in P cells and can induce
glycolytic enzyme expression
33,34, we hypothesized that cell ‒cell
interactions through E-Cad control intracellular glucose metabolism
by regulating YAP activity.
Fig. 1 | Glycolyticﬂux is decreased, while TCA cycleﬂux and respiration are
markedly increased in quiescent cells. aGrowth curve and immunoblots with
protein quantiﬁcation of p27Kip1 in MEFs. Proliferating cells (P): 2 days after culture;
quiescent cells (Q): contact-inhibited for 6 days (11 days after plating). Values are
the mean ± SEM of four independent experiments.P values by unpaired two-tailed
student’s t-test are indicated. Representative immunoblot is shown.
b Representative histogram of the DNA content of P and Q MEFs after PI staining.
The histogram is representative of three independent experiments. G1, S, and G2-M
phases are indicated.c, d Extracellular acidiﬁcation rate (ECAR) and individual
glycolysis parameters of P and Q MEFs. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM of
three biologically independent samples.P value by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-
test is indicated. Glc glucose, Oligo oligomycin, 2DG 2-deoxyglucose.e Metabolic
ﬂux maps for P and Q MEF cells. Theﬂux maps were determined using
13C-MFA of
multiple datasets at isotopic steady state as described in Methods.f Relative PPP/
glycolysis represented by the ratio of intracellular 1x13CD H A P( M+1 )o v e r2 x13C
DHAP (M + 2) after 25 mM [1,2-13C2]-glucose labeling for 24 h. Means ± SEMs (n =3 )
are shown. ****P < 0.0001 using unpaired two-tailedt-test. g, h Mitochondrial
membrane potential (ΔΨm), as reﬂected by the TMREﬂuorescence, of P and Q
MEFs. The meanﬂuorescence intensity (MFI) was calculated based on four inde-
pendent experiments. Values are the mean ± SEM (n = 4). ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1u s i n g
unpaired two-tailedt-test. i, j Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) and individual
parameters for basal respiration of P and Q MEFs. Values are the mean ± SEM of six
biologically independent experiments. ****P < 0.0001 using unpaired two-tailedt-
test. ****P < 0.0001 using unpaired two-tailed t-test. Oligo oligomycin, FCCP Car-
bonyl cyanide 4-(triﬂuoromethoxy) phenylhydrazone, R/A rotenone, and antimycin
A. k Immunoblots and protein quantiﬁcation of glycolytic enzymes in P and Q MEFs.
Representative immunoblots of four independent experiments are shown. HK
hexokinase, PFK1 phosphofructokinase 1, ALDOA aldolase A, PKM pyruvate kinase
M, LDHA lactate dehydrogenase A. Values are the mean ± SEM of 3–4 biologically
independent experiments.P values by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test are
indicated except for ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 .l Immunoblots and protein quantiﬁcation of
mitochondrial pyruvate carriers and TCA cycle enzymes in P and Q MEFs. Vinculin
was monitored as a loading control. Each immunoblot is representative of three
independent experiments. MPC1-2 mitochondrial pyruvate carrier 1-2, IDH2 iso-
citrate dehydrogenase 2, DLST dihydrolipoamide S-succinyltransferase, SDHA
succinate dehydrogenase, MDH2 malate dehydrogenase 2. Values are the mean ±
SEM of 3–4 biologically independent experiments.P values by unpaired two-tailed
student’s t-test are indicated except for ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1a n dn sP = 0.1795.m Basal
respiration and ATP production from OXPHOS measured by OCR of P and Q MEFs
cultured in vehicle or 100μM UK5099 for 24 h. Values are the mean ± SEM of 5–6
biologically independent experiments.P value by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-
test is indicated except for ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 .n The cell death rate (%) determined with
Hoechst-PI staining for P and Q MEFs cultured in vehicle or 100μMU K 5 0 9 9f o r
72 h. Values are the mean ± SEM of four biologically independent experiments; ns
P =0 . 2 9 2 4 ,* * * *P < 0.0001 using unpaired two-tailedt-test.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 4
To determine whether YAP is responsible for metabolic repro-
gramming in Q cells, we knocked out TEAD, which is required for YAP
and the PDZ-binding domain (TAZ) to interact with DNA. The 8XGTIIC
(TEAD luciferase reporter) activity was signiﬁcantly reduced in TEAD
KO cells compared with sgTead1 (-) (wild-type) cells in the P state, and
the activity was even lower in both conditions in the Q state (Fig.3e).
ECAR was reduced in P cells after TEAD KO (Fig.3f) with a concomitant
decrease in the expression of the rate-limiting enzymes of glycolysis,
namely, HK2, PFK1, and PKM2, at the protein and mRNA levels (Fig.3g
and Supplementary Fig. 6c). p27
Kip1 levels were not affected in both P
and Q cells by TEAD KO (Fig.3g).
To further investigate the effect of YAP, YAP knockout MEFs were
generated, followed by the exogenous expression of YAP wild-type
(WT) or a constitutively active YAP mutant (5SA)35 (Supplementary Fig.
7a). As all possible inhibitory phosphorylation sites are mutated in YAP
5SA, it is constitutively localized to the nucleus in both P and Q cells
(Supplementary Fig. 7b, c). YAP transcriptional activity was sig-
niﬁcantly reduced in Q WT cells compared with P WT cells, but its
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 5
activity was even higher in both P 5SA cells and Q 5SA cells (Fig.4a).
The mRNA levels of YAP target genes were also restored in Q 5SA cells
(Supplementary Fig. 7d). The measurement of ECAR showed that gly-
colysis was reduced in Q WT cells but markedly increased in Q 5SA cells
(Fig. 4b, c). In addition, the expression of glycolytic enzymes was
restored in Q 5SA cells at both the protein and mRNA levels (Fig.4da n d
Supplementary Fig. 7e). We conﬁrmed that Q 5SA cells were arrested in
the G
1 cell cycle phase with elevated p27Kip1 levels and BrDU-PI staining
(Fig. 4d and Supplementary Fig. 7e, f). Q 5SA cells had enhanced glu-
cose uptake and lactate excretion levels that were higher than the
levels of P 5SA cells (Fig.4e and Supplementary Data 3).
13C-MFA
revealed that while the glycolyticﬂux was reduced in Q WT compared
with P WT cells, it was markedly induced in Q 5SA compared with P 5SA
cells (Fig.4f, g and Supplementary Data 2).
Interestingly, theﬂux to the PPP was silenced in Q 5SA cells, but
the malate-to-pyruvateﬂux was increased almost 3-fold, probably to
compensate for the reduced production of NADPH by the PPP (Fig.4f).
TCA cycleﬂuxes, which were markedly induced in Q WT cells, were
further enhanced in Q 5SA cells (Fig.4f and Supplementary Fig. 7g).
Consistently, the basal respiration measured by the OCR was much
higher in Q 5SA cells than in P cells (Supplementary Fig. 7h). These
results are similar to the results obtained after the knockout of E-Cad in
Q cells (Supplementary Fig. 5d, e). MPC1 and MPC2, as well as TCA
c y c l ee n z y m e( I D H 2a n dS D H A )l e v e l s ,w e r em a i n t a i n e da th i g hl e v e l si n
the Q state in all E-Cad KO, TEAD KO, and YAP 5SA cells (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 7i–k). Taken together, these results strongly indicate that in P
cells, YAP elevates glycolysis by maintaining glycolytic enzyme
expression, but in Q cells, YAP activity is attenuated, at least in part, by
E-Cad and thus inhibits glycolytic enzyme expression and reduces
glycolysis. However, theﬂux of pyruvate to mitochondria, the TCA
cycle ﬂux, and mitochondrial respiration remained elevated as well as
the reversed MDH1ﬂux in Q cells regardless of YAP activity.
The NAD+/NADH ratio is elevated in quiescent cells compared
with proliferating cells largely because of elevated complex I
activity
We found that the whole-cell NAD+/NADH ratio and cytosolic NAD+/
NADH ratio were higher and that mitochondrial NADH was lower in Q
c e l l st h a ni nPc e l l s( F i g .5a–c). In addition to the high level of malate
derived from mitochondria, the high cytosolic NAD
+/NADH ratio in Q
cells could also contribute to the reversal of the MDH1ﬂux (from
malate to oxaloacetate), as the reversal reaction could be driven by the
relatively high level of NAD
+,36. Immunoblotting analysis showed that
the MDH1 protein level was elevated in Q cells (Fig.5d), which is con-
sistent with the signiﬁcantly higher absoluteﬂux rate of malate to
oxaloacetate (Fig.1e). Given that aerobic glycolysis reﬂects increased
cell demand for NAD+,37,t h eh i g h e rc y t o s o l i cN A D+/NADH ratio in Q
cells could be explained, at least in part, by the lower demand for NAD+
in Q cells compared to highly glycolytic P cells. Indeed, increasing
NAD
+ in the cytosol by stable expression of cytoLbNOX elevated gly-
colysis only in P cells (Fig.5e, f). However, an increase in mitochondrial
NAD+ by mitoLbNOX expression did not affect glycolysis in either P or
Q cells. Surprisingly, we found that glycerol 3-phosphate dehy-
drogenase 1 (GPD1), which converts DHAP to glycerol 3-phosphate
(G3P), was markedly elevated in Q cells (Supplementary Fig. 8a). Since
GPD1 converts DHAP to G3P in areaction that generates NAD
+,i t sh i g h
expression in Q cells could also contribute to the higher cytosolic
NAD
+/NADH ratio.
Given that Q cells have higher mitochondrial membrane potential
(ΔΨm) and basal respiration than those of P cells (Fig.1g–j), we hypo-
thesized that complex I activity could also be higher in Q cells and may
have contributed to the increase in both the mitochondrial and whole-
cell NAD
+/NADH ratios. To determine that, we pharmacologically
inhibited complex I. As expected, basal respiration was signiﬁcantly
attenuated following complex I inhibition (Fig.5g). Inhibition of
complex I with either rotenone or metformin signiﬁcantly decreased
the whole-cell NAD+/NADH ratio (Fig. 5h, Supplementary Fig. 8b).
Complex I inhibition also signiﬁcantly increased mitochondrial NADH
and markedly decreased the mitochondrial membrane potential
(ΔΨ
m) (Supplementary Fig. 8c–e). Taken together, these results sug-
gest that hyperactive complex I in Q cells contributes to the higher
whole-cell NAD
+/NADH ratio in Q cells. Interestingly, in contrast to the
whole-cell NAD+/NADH ratio, the cytosolic NAD+/NADH ratio was
slightly elevated in P cells and was only slightly reduced in Q cells after
complex I inhibition (Fig.5i). This response is probably to support the
elevated glycolysis after the inhibition of complex I in both P and Q
cells (Fig.5j). Indeed, glucose consumption was signiﬁcantly increased
even in Q cells by complex I inhibition (Supplementary Fig. 8f). A
[U-
13C] glucose tracing experiment revealed that the conversion of
pyruvate to lactate by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was signiﬁcantly
enhanced by complex I inhibition in Q cells (Fig.5k, l). Instead, the
fractional enrichment of citrate (M + 2) was signiﬁcantly reduced
(Fig.5m). Given that LDH generates cytosolic NAD+ as a byproduct and
pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) consumes mitochondrial NAD +
(Fig. 5k), these results suggest that when mitochondrial NAD+ demand
is increased by complex I inhibition, pyruvate is shunted to lactate
instead of being metabolized in mitochondria.
ME1 ﬂux is suppressed in quiescent cells, whereas malate
dehydrogenase 1 (MDH1)ﬂux is reversed and elevated and
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 1 (PCK1)ﬂux is elevated
Interestingly, the ME1-mediatedﬂux was diminished in Q cells (0 nmol/
106 cells/h; from malate (Mal.c) to pyruvate (Pyr.c)), while it was active
in P cells (31.6 nmol/106 cells/h) (Fig. 1e ) .T h er e d u c t i o ni nM E 1 -
mediatedﬂux cannot be explained by the reduced expression of ME1,
as its expression level was similar in P and Q cells (Fig.6a). The dis-
crepancy between enzyme expression levels and metabolicﬂux by ME1
led us to assess whether there is any posttranslational modiﬁcation
regulating ME1 activity. As was previously reported, ACAT1-mediated
K337 acetylation leads to ME1 dimerization and activation, and SIRT6-
mediated K337 deacetylation leads to ME1 monomerization and
deactivation (Fig.6b)
38. Therefore, to assess the multimerization of
Fig. 2 | E-Cadherin and YAP regulate glycolysis during the transition from a
proliferative to a quiescent state. aImmunoblots and protein quantiﬁcation of E-
cadherin, hexokinase 2 (HK2), and pyruvate kinase M2 (PKM2) in MEFs from Day 1
to Day 13. Each immunoblot is representative of three independent experiments.
Values are the mean ± SEM of 3–4 biologically independent experiments.P values
by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test are indicated except for ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 .
b Glycolytic function monitored by the extracellular acidiﬁcation rate (ECAR) in
control or E-cadherin KO MEFs in the P and Q states. Means ± SEMs (n =4 –7) are
shown. ns (P E-cad KOP =0 . 0 5 9 3 ,QE - c a dK OP = 0.7064), ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1u s i n g
unpaired two-tailedt-test.c Immunoblots and protein quantiﬁcation of E-cadherin,
HK2, PKM1-2, and p27
kip1 in control or E-cadherin KO MEFs in the P and Q states.
Each immunoblot is representative of 3–4 independent. Means ± SEMs of 3-4
experiments are shown. ns (E-cadP = 0.5084, HK2P = 0.0807, PKM1P =0 . 2 0 8 9 ,
PKM2 P = 0.1437, P p27Kip1 P =0 . 2 5 8 1 ,Qp 2 7Kip1 P = 0.6608), ****P < 0.0001 using
unpaired two-tailedt-test. d Comparison of key intracellular glycolyticﬂuxes
(estimatedﬂux ± SD) in control or E-cadherin KO MEFs in the P and Q states. Allﬂux
ﬁts passed the chi-square goodness-of-ﬁtt e s t .P values by unpaired two-tailed
student’s t-test are indicated except for ns (Glc→ G6P P = 0.8439, F6P↔ FBP
P =0 . 7 3 5 3 ,F B P↔ DHAP P = 0.7353, GAP↔ 3PG P = 0.7151, 3PG↔ PEP P = 0.7151, PEP
↔ Pyr P = 0.1662).e, f Relative abundance of intracellular 2x13C (M + 2) glycolytic
metabolites (pyruvate and lactate) in control or E-cadherin KO MEFs in the P and Q
states after 25 mM [1,2-13C2]-glucose labeling for 24 h. The area under the curve
(AUC) was normalized to the levels of protein and internal standard. Means ± SEMs
(n =3 )a r es h o w n .P values by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test are indicated
except for ns (PyruvateP = 0.1875, LactateP = 0.1875).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 6
Fig. 3 | TEAD deletion attenuates YAP transcriptional activity and glycolysis in
Pc e l l s .aHeatmap showing the expression of YAP target genes in P and Q MEFs as
determined by RNA sequencing. Data represent values from three independent
experiments, and Z-scored log2-fold change values are color-coded as indicated.
b, c Localization analysis of YAP (green) in control or E-cadherin KO MEFs in the Q
state by immunoﬂuorescence. Hoechst 33342 (blue) was used to show the nuclei,
and the scale bar size represents 10μm. Each experiment included observation of at
least 10 randomly selectedﬁelds (400× magniﬁcation). The quantiﬁed percentages
(%) of nuclear (red) and cytosolic (green) YAP are indicated, and the data represent
the mean ± SEM. The statistical signiﬁcance of the differences was determined by
two-way ANOVA;P <0 . 0 0 0 1 .d Luciferase assays with the 8 × GTIIC-Lux reporter in
control or E-cadherin KO MEFs in the P and Q states. Data are normalized to sgCdh1
(-) P cells (wild-type) and are presented as the mean ± SEM (n =3 –5). P values by
unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test are indicated except for ns (P E-cad KO
P = 0.9571, Q E-cad KOP = 0.0713).e Luciferase assays with the 8 × GTIIC-Lux
reporter in control or TEAD1 KO MEFs in the P and Q states. Data are normalized to
sgTead1 (-) P cells (wild-type) and are presented as the mean ± SEM ofn = 5 biolo-
gically independent samples. ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 ,n sP = 0.1242 using unpaired two-
tailed t-test. f Glycolytic function monitored by extracellular acidiﬁcation rate
(ECAR) in control or TEAD1 KO MEFs in the P and Q states. Data are presented as the
mean ± SEM ofn ≥ 9 biologically independent samples. ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 ,n s
P = 0.0744 using unpaired two-tailedt-test. g Immunoblots and protein quantiﬁ-
cation of TEAD1, glycolytic enzymes, and p27
kip1 in control or TEAD1 KO MEFs in the
P and Q states. Each immunoblot is a representative of four biologically indepen-
dent experiments. Values are the mean ± SEM of 3–4 biologically independent
experiments.P values by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test are indicated except
for ****P < 0.0001 and ns (PFK1P = 0.4610, PKM2P = 0.1934, P p27
kip1 P = 0.1074, Q
p27kip1 P = 0.7180). HK hexokinase, PFK1 phosphofructokinase 1, PKM2 pyruvate
kinase M2. Values are the mean ± SEM of 3–4 biologically independent
experiments.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 7
ME1, we treated both P and Q cells with bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate
(BS3), a water-soluble compound that has previously been used in the
cross-linking of proteins39. Interestingly, treatment with BS3 resulted in
the cross-linking of dimers in P cells but not in Q cells (Fig.6c).
We recapitulated these results by expressing Flag-tagged and
Myc-tagged ME1 followed by coimmunoprecipitation (Co-IP) with anti-
Flag antibodies, which showed impaired dimerization with Myc-tagged
ME1 in Q cells (Fig.6d). The reduced dimerization of ME1 in Q cells is
associated with increased binding of ME1 to SIRT6 and decreased
binding to ACAT1 (Fig.6d). In addition, acetylation of ME1, likely
mediated by ACAT1, was higher in P cells than in Q cells (Fig.6e). These
data suggest that induced SIRT6-mediated deacetylation and reduced
ACAT1-mediated acetylation result in decreased ME1 dimerization and
activity in Q cells (Fig.6f). The reaction catalyzed by ME1, which also
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 8
generates NADPH, might be suppressed in Q cells because they may
not require high NADPH levels, and NADPH generated by the PPP in
these cells might be sufﬁcient. Indeed, both cytosolic NADPH and
NADP
+ levels measured by the iNap1 sensor40 were signiﬁcantly lower
in Q cells than in P cells, and the cytosolic NADP+/NADPH ratio was
higher in Q cells (Supplementary Fig. 9a–c). Interestingly, although the
glycolyticﬂuxes were reduced in Q cells, the PPPﬂux was not reduced.
Since the major source of NADPH in Q cells is the PPP, it could explain
previous results showing that Q cells are sensitive to the inhibition of
the PPP
12.
The 13C-MFA also revealed that P cells and Q cells have an opposite
direction of net malate dehydrogenase 1 (MDH1)-mediatedﬂux, which
is typically considered reversible36; while P cells have a downwardﬂux
from oxaloacetate to malate (OAC.c→ Mal.c, 24.4 nmol/106 cells/h), Q
cells have a signiﬁcantly upregulated upwardﬂux from malate to
oxaloacetate (Mal.c→ OAC.c, 86.6 nmol/106 cells/h) (Figs.1ea n d6g, h
and Supplementary Data 2). As indicated above, this could be
explained by the high levels of malate derived from mitochondria
(Mal.m → Mal.c), by the relatively high level of cytosolic NAD
+,a n db y
the upregulated MDH1 expression in Q cells (Figs.1e, 5b, 6aa n dS u p -
plementary Fig. 9d). In addition, the relatively low levels of cytosolic
OAC (OAC.c) derived from mitochondria in Q cells compared to P cells
(Fig. 1e and Supplementary Fig. 9e) could also contribute to the
upward ﬂux from malate to oxaloacetate (Mal.c→ OAC.c) in Q cells.
Indeed, the major source of OAC.c in P cells was cytosolic citrate
(Cit.c), the majority of which seemed to be derived from mitochondria
(Cit.m) (Fig.1e and Supplementary Fig. 9f). However, in Q cells, OAC.c
was mainly produced from cytosolic malate (Mal.c) by enhanced MDH1
ﬂux (Fig.6g–h); in contrast, OAC.c derived from Cit.c was suppressed
p r o b a b l yc a u s e db yt h ed i m i n i s h e dﬂux from Cit.m to Cit.c (Fig.1ea n d
Supplementary Fig. 9f).
The phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 1 (PCK1)-mediatedﬂux
was signiﬁcantly increased in Q cells (104 nmol/10
6 cells/h; from OAC.c
to phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP.c)) compared with P cells (7.4 nmol/106
cells/h) (Figs.1ea n d6g ,h ) .T h i si sm e d i a t e db yt h eh i g hl e v e lo fO A C . c
generated by MDH1 and by the induced expression of PCK1 (Fig.6a).
Consequently, PEP.c is produced at high levels, independent of gly-
colysis, to generate sufﬁcient pyruvate that is shuttled to mitochon-
dria. Collectively, these results suggest that, through the upregulation
of MDH1 (reversed) and PCK1ﬂuxes, Q cells recycle malate derived
from the TCA cycle (Mal.m) and regenerate pyruvate in cytosol (Pyr.c).
This process additionally facilitates the TCA cycle and mitochondrial
respiration.
Quiescent cells suppress the malate-aspartate shuttle (MAS),
whereas proliferating cells are dependent on it for cell
proliferation
To maintain a high cytosolic NAD+/NADH ratio necessary for sustained
active glycolysis, highly glycolytic cells employ several strategies.
Firstly, these cells activate lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), utilizing
NADH to catalyze the reduction of pyruvate to lactate, thereby
replenishing the NAD
+ pool41. Alternatively, NADH electrons in the
cytosol can be transferred to the mitochondria via the malate-
aspartate shuttle (MAS) and the glycerol 3-phosphate shuttle (G3PS).
These shuttles rely on speciﬁcc y t o s o l i ce n z y m e s ,n a m e l ym a l a t e
dehydrogenase 1 (MDH1) and glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase 1
(GPD1), respectively
42,43.
Since glycolytic activity was decreased, the reaction catalyzed by
MDH1 is reversed, and the major source of cytosolic malate (Mal.c) is
exported from mitochondria (Mal.m) in Q cells (Figs.1c–ea n d6ga n d
Supplementary Fig. 9d), we expected that the MAS may not play a role
in regulating the NAD
+/NADH ratio in Q cells. Indeed, Q cells show
reduced expression of SLC25A11 (also known as oxoglutarate carrier,
OGC) and SLC25A13 (aspartate-glutamate carrier, AGC), which are
transporters involved in the MAS (Fig.7a, b). Consistently, when we
treated cells with the MAS inhibitor aminooxyacetic acid (AOA)
44 or
deleted SLC25A11, we found that it signiﬁcantly reduced the cytosolic
NAD+/NADH ratio and mitochondrial NADH only in P cells (Fig.7c–e
and Supplementary Fig. 10a). These results show that P cells are more
dependent on the MAS than are Q cells for NAD
+/NADH homeostasis.
Interestingly, MAS inhibition signiﬁcantly slowed the proliferation
of P cells (Fig.7f). As MAS inhibition reduced glycolysis in both P and Q
cells (Supplementary Fig. 10b), we hypothesized that the delayed cell
growth by MAS inhibition was due to the reduced cytosolic NAD+/
NADH ratio, which can slow glycolysis. Therefore, we supplemented
the cells with cell-permeable pyruvate to upregulate cytosolic NAD
+ by
LDH-mediated ﬂux (from pyruvate to lactate). Indeed, pyruvate sup-
plementation rescued the proliferation, cytosolic NAD+/NADH ratio,
and glycolysis (Fig.7f–i). These data suggest that satisfying cytosolic
NAD+ demand is critical for optimal levels of glycolysis and proper cell
growth in P cells.
Transcriptomic reprogramming in the transition from a pro-
liferative to a quiescent state
The transcriptomic analysis showed that Q cells were transcriptionally
active, and surprisingly, large number of genes were elevated; among
13,022 signiﬁcantly differentially expressed genes, 7131 genes were
upregulated, and 5891 genes were downregulated in Q cells (Supple-
mentary Data 1). The heatmap, using stricterﬁltering criteria (q 2),
shows that out of 3319 genes, 2478 were upregulated and 841 were
downregulated in Q cells (Supplementary Fig. 1a). From a total of 1251
Reactome pathway database gene sets considered, 28 were upregu-
lated and 240 were downregulated in Q/P (FDR≤ 0.05). The top 30
down- and 28 upregulated gene sets by signiﬁcance are shown (Sup-
plementary Fig. 1b). Upregulated gene sets were related to extra-
cellular matrix (ECM) formation and interactions (Supplementary
Fig. 1b). Speciﬁcally, gene sets associated with collagen biosynthesis
and modifying enzymes, collagen trimerization, ECM proteoglycans,
keratin sulfate biosynthesis and molecules associated with elastic
ﬁbers were signiﬁcantly upregulated in Q cells. On the other hand,
Fig. 4 | Constitutively active YAP (YAP 5SA) expression rescues YAP tran-
scriptional activity and glycolysis in Q cells. aLuciferase assays with the 8×GTIIC-
Lux reporter in WT and 5SA cells in the P and Q states. Data are normalized to WT P
cells and are presented as the mean ± SEM of 4–5 biologically independent samples.
P values by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test are indicated except for
****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 .b, c The extracellular acidiﬁcation rate (ECAR) and individual gly-
colysis parameters in WT and 5SA cells in the P and Q states. Data are presented as
the mean ± SEM of 3–4 biologically independent samples.P values by unpaired two-
tailed student’s t-test are indicated. Glc glucose, Oligo oligomycin, 2DG
2-deoxyglucose.d Immunoblots and protein quantiﬁcation of glycolytic enzymes
and p27
kip1 in WT and 5SA cells in the P and Q states. Vinculin was monitored as a
loading control. Representative immunoblots of four independent experiments are
shown. Values are the mean ± SEM of 3-4 biologically independent experiments.P
values by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test are indicated except for ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1
and ns (PFK1P = 0.0667, ALDOAP = 0.1451, P p27kip1 P =0 . 7 9 4 0 ,Qp 2 7kip1
P = 0.9048). HK hexokinase, PFK1 phosphofructokinase 1, PKM pyruvate kinase M,
ALDOA aldolase A, LDHA lactate dehydrogenase A.e Comparison of the quantiﬁed
key extracellular metabolicﬂuxes (estimatedﬂux ± SD) in WT and 5SA cells in the P
and Q states. Theﬂux rates of glucose uptake and lactate excretion are plotted.P
values by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test are indicated in theﬁgure except for
****P <0 . 0 0 0 1a n dn sP values (Glucose Cons. Q WTP = 0.3440, Lactate Pro P 5SA
P =0 . 0 5 5 7 )f Metabolicﬂux maps of WT and 5SA cells in the P and Q states. Theﬂux
maps were determined using13C-MFA of multiple datasets at isotopic steady state
as described in Methods.g Comparison of key intracellular glycolyticﬂuxes (esti-
matedﬂux ± SD) in WT and 5SA cells in the P and Q states. Allﬂux ﬁts passed the chi-
square goodness-of-ﬁtt e s t .P values by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test are
indicated except for nsP =0 . 5 7 4 2 .
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 9
downregulated gene sets included those associated with cell cycle
checkpoints, M phase, DNA replication and repair and S phase (Sup-
plementary Fig. 1b). Among the genes that were suppressed at the
mRNA level in Q cells are YAP target genes (Fig.3a), G2Mc h e c k p o i n t -
related genes (Supplementary Fig. 1b–d), and glycolysis-related genes
(Supplementary Fig. 2f, g). Interestingly, some genes are regulated by
posttranscriptional mechanisms. For example, GPD1, which is mark-
edly upregulated at the protein level in Q cells (Supplementary Fig. 8a),
did not appear to be upregulated at the mRNA level (Supplementary
Data 1). SLC25A11, which is downregulated at the protein level in Q cells
(Fig. 7a), did not appear to be downregulated at the mRNA level
(Supplementary Data 1).
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 10
Active mitochondrial metabolismsupports extracellular matrix
(ECM) biosynthesis in quiescent cells
To understand whether the metabolic changes we observed are
required for quiescence, we revisited the transcriptomic analysis
encompassing the entire gene expression spectrum. As previously
highlighted, GSEA identiﬁed ECM formation and interactions as sig-
niﬁcantly enriched pathways in Q cells (Supplementary Fig. 1b).De-
novo mRNA translation and secretion of ECM proteins requires ATP,
which is generated by the marked increase of OXPHOS in quiescent
cells. In addition to ATP production, the TCA cycle generates essential
metabolites for macromolecule synthesis
45, with amino acid metabo-
lism particularly reliant on mitochondrial enzymes46. The expression of
genes associated with the collagen family, a key ECM component47,a r e
markedly upregulated in Q cells compared with P cells (Fig.8a–ca n d
Supplementary Data 1). We conﬁrm the induction of collagen genes at
the protein levels as well (Fig.8d). Collagen family proteins are highly
enriched in proline, which is exclusively generated by mitochondria
from glutamate
14. It was previously shown that proline is required for
collagen synthesis inﬁbroblasts48–50. Indeed, we found that Q cells
exhibit elevatedﬂux of proline synthesis (Fig.8e, and Supplementary
Data 2 and 3). Finally, pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase (P5CS) and
pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase 1 (PYCR1), the key mitochondrial
enzymes responsible for proline biosynthesis, are signiﬁcantly induced
in Q cells, with PYCR1 being more robustly induced (Fig.8f, g). The
inhibition of MPCs or complex I which decrease OXPHOS and ATP
production (Figs. 1ma n d5g) reduced the expression of collagen
proteins (Fig.8h, i), which is consistent with previous results showing
that mitochondrial activity is required for the generation of proline to
synthesize collagens
50.T h e s eﬁndings collectively suggest that the
augmented TCA cycle and OXPHOS in Q cells serve not only to elevate
ATP production but also contribute to enhanced amino acid synthesis,
thereby fortifying the production of ECM. Of note, as the main roles of
ﬁbroblasts is to produce and maintain turnover of the ECM, this
underscores the necessity for sustained robust mitochondrial meta-
bolism to effectively support these essential cellular functions.
Discussion
The metabolic and transcriptomic reprogramming that occurs during
the transition of cells from a proliferative to a quiescent state has not
been thoroughly studied previously. Here, our
13C-metabolic ﬂux
analysis (13C-MFA) and transcriptomic analysis in MEFs provided evi-
dence that Q cells are metabolically more active at the mitochondrial
level than P cells and that they are also transcriptionally active. Our
metabolicﬂux analysis showed that glycolyticﬂuxes are decreased but
that the PPP is maintained in Q cells. We showed that the decrease in
the glycolyticﬂux in Q cells is culminated in a decrease in lactate
excretion. The decrease in lactate excretion is much more pronounced
than the decrease in glycolyticﬂuxes because pyruvate is shunted to
the TCA cycle instead of to lactate production. The decrease in gly-
colysis is associated with a decrease in glycolytic enzyme expression.
These decreases in glycolytic enzyme expression and the glycolytic
ﬂux rate are largely dependent on YAP activity, which is diminished in
Q cells. We showed that YAP activity is reduced in Q cells because of
increased E-Cad expression. However, ECM proteins such as collagen,
which are also induced in Q cells, could also in principle inhibit YAP
activity
51. We also showed that the expression of constitutively active
YAP (YAP 5SA) dramatically increased glycolysis in Q cells.
Surprisingly, we found that theﬂux of the TCA cycle and OXPHOS
were markedly increased in Q cells in a YAP-independent manner. In Q
cells, pyruvate is shunted to the TCA cycle instead of to lactate pro-
duction, which is associated with reduced LDH expression and a
marked increase in the expression of the mitochondrial pyruvate
transporters MPC1 and MPC2. Indeed, Q cells are speciﬁcally vulner-
able to prolonged inhibition of MPC1 and MPC2, as this inhibition-
induced cell death of Q cells but not of P cells. Thus, Q cells are
metabolically active while not dividing but generate ATP primarily
through the increase in OXPHOS. Mechanistically, pyruvate is shunted
to the mitochondria instead of to lactate in Q cells because of induced
MPCs expression and reduced demand for cytosolic NAD
+. Interest-
ingly, it was recently reported that in quiescent neural stem/progenitor
cells, MPCs expression is induced as well as mitochondrial
metabolism
24. Thus, the increases in MPC levels and mitochondrial
metabolism are not limited to quiescent MEFs and might be a common
feature of quiescent cells. It should be noted that we analyzed Q cells
after contact inhibition in the presence of growth factors. However,
quiescence can also be acquired when cells are deprived of growth
factors. When we deprived MEFs of growth factors, we found that both
glycolysis, as measured by ECAR, and OXPHOS, as measured by OCR
were decreased (Supplementary Fig. 11). This suggests that growth
factors might be required for contact-inhibited Q cells to elevate the
TCA cycle and OXPHOS.
The oxidative PPP appears to be the primary source of cytosolic
NADPH in Q cells because ME1, which generates cytosolic NADPH by
converting malate to pyruvate, is not active in these cells. This is
Fig. 5 | The NAD+/NADH ratio is elevated in Q cells compared with P cells
because of elevated complex I activity. aWhole-cell NAD+/NADH ratio of P and Q
MEFs. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM of 6 biologically independent samples.
****P < 0.0001 using unpaired two-tailedt-test. b Cytosolic NAD
+/NADH ratio of P
and Q MEFs measured by the pMOS023: Peredox NADH/NAD+ sensor (cytosolic)
using ﬂow cytometry. The mean MFI was calculated based on 4 biologically inde-
pendent experiments. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM. ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1u s i n g
unpaired two-tailedt-test. c The relative abundance of mitochondrial NADH in P
and Q MEFs measured by the pC1-mitoRexYFP sensor usingﬂow cytometry. The
mean MFI was calculated based on 4 biologically independent experiments. Data
are presented as the mean ± SEM. ****P < 0.0001 using unpaired two-tailedt-test.
d Immunoblots and protein quantiﬁcation of MDH1 and MDH2 in P and Q MEFs.
Values are the mean ± SEM of 4 biologically independent experiments.
****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 ,n sP = 0.3892 using unpaired two-tailedt-test. e The whole-cell
NAD
+/NADH ratio in either empty vector (EV), cytosolic (Cyto) or mitochondrial
(Mito) LbNOX-expressing P or Q MEFs. Representative immunoblots conﬁrm Flag-
tagged LbNOX expression. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM of 4-6 indepen-
dent experiments.P value by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test is indicated except
for ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 .f Glycolysis measured by the extracellular acidiﬁcation rate
(ECAR) in EV-, CytoLbNOX-, and MitoLbNOX-expressing cells in P and Q MEFs. Data
are presented as the mean ± SEM of 3–4 biologically independent samples.P value
by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test is indicated except for ns (P MitoLbNOX
P = 0.5999, Q CytoLbNOXP = 0.3209, Q MitoLbNOXP = 0.5020).g Basal respiration
measured by oxygen consumption rate (OCR) of P and Q MEFs cultured in vehicle
or 0.2μM rotenone for 24 h. Values are the mean ± SEM of 4–5i n d e p e n d e n t
experiments. ****p < 0.0001 using unpaired two-tailedt-test.h The whole-cell NAD+/
NADH ratio in P or Q MEFs cultured in vehicle or 0.2μM rotenone for 24 h. Data are
presented as the mean ± SEM of 4 biologically independent samples. ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1
using unpaired two-tailedt-test. i The cytosolic NAD+/NADH ratio in P or Q MEFs
cultured in vehicle or 0.2μM rotenone for 24 h. Data are presented as the mean ±
SEM of 6 biologically independent samples. ****P < 0.0001 using unpaired two-
tailedt-test.j Glycolysis measured by the extracellular acidiﬁcation rate (ECAR) of P
and Q MEFs cultured in vehicle or 0.2μM rotenone for 24 h. Data are presented as
the mean ± SEM of 6–8 biologically independent samples. ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1u s i n g
unpaired two-tailedt-test. k Simpliﬁed schematic of the13C labeling patterns of
metabolites in glycolysis and the TCA cycle with [U-13C] glucose tracing (Created
with Biorender.com released under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International license). Redﬁlls indicate
13C-labeled
carbons. The mitochondrial pyruvate carrier (MPC) and Complex I are depicted on
the mitochondrial membrane.l Relative ratio of (M + 3) lactate and pyruvate after
25 mM [U-13C] glucose labeling in Q MEFs cultured with vehicle or 0.2μMr o t e n o n e
for 24 h. Means ± SEMs (n =3 )a r es h o w n .P value by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-
test is indicated.m Relative abundance of intracellular (M + 2) citrate after 25 mM
[U-13C] glucose labeling in Q MEFs cultured with vehicle or 0.2μM rotenone for
24 h. Means ± SEMs (n = 3) are shown.P value by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test
is indicated.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 11
consistent with previous results showing that Q cells are dependent on
the PPP for their survival12. Mechanistically, this phenomenon could be
mediated by deacetylation of ME1 by SIRT6 and monomerization. Since
NAD+ is an essential cofactor for sirtuins52, a relatively high cytosolic
NAD+/NADH ratio might have contributed to the high SIRT6 activity in Q
cells. Another intriguing observation is that the conversion of malate to
oxaloacetate catalyzed by MDH1 is markedly increased in Q cells, sug-
gesting that the MAS is not operating or is working in reverse in Q cells.
Consistently, we found that the expression levels of the mitochondrial
transporter SLC25A11, which transports malate from the cytosol to the
mitochondria, and SLC25A13, which transports aspartate from the
mitochondria to the cytosol, were decreased in Q cells.
Intriguingly,
13C-metabolic ﬂux analysis revealed that the major
source of cytosolic oxaloacetate (OAC.c) is different between P and Q
cells. In P cells, OAC.c is mainly produced from cytosolic citrate (Cit.c).
However, in Q cells, OAC.c is mainly derived from cytosolic malate
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 12
(Mal.c) exported from mitochondria (Mal.m) and converted to OAC.c
by MDH1. This notion is supported by the high cytosolic NAD+/NADH
ratio in Q cells, as relatively high NAD+ levels can drive MDH1 to convert
Mal.c to OAC.c. In P cells, the import of malate into mitochondria
from the cytosol was active (Mal.c→ Mal.m), which is mediated by the
active MAS to support the high cytosolic NAD
+ demand. However, as
Q cells have reduced cytosolic NAD+ demand and MAS activity, the
ﬂux rate of malate exported from the mitochondria to the cytosol
(Mal.m → Mal.c) is higher than theﬂux rate of malate import into
mitochondria (Mal.c → Mal.m). Much more malate production in
mitochondria from the active TCA cycle may also have contributed to
this ﬂux in Q cells.
Importantly, the deletion of E-Cad or expression of 5SA mutant of
YAP did not inhibit quiescence. Both E-Cad deletion and the expression
of YAP 5SA elevate glycolyticﬂuxes. However, they also further elevate
the TCA cycle and OXPHOS. Therefore, we speculate that the meta-
bolic hallmark of quiescent cells is a high ratio of OXPHOS to glycolysis
and a reversed MDH1-mediatedﬂux.
Transcriptomic reprogramming in Q cells is partially mediated
by YAP. In agreement with previous results with human skin
ﬁbroblasts
12, we observed a dramatic induction of ECM-associated
genes in Q cells. It is highly possible that many of the mRNA changes
in Q cells are due to changes in mRNA stability, as was previously
shown in human skin ﬁbroblasts53. We also observed some dis-
crepancy between the changes in protein expression levels and the
changes in mRNA levels, suggesting that some of the changes in
protein expression in Q cells occur at the translational or protein
stability level. The inhibition of MPC or inhibition of complex I by
rotenone, which inhibits OXPHOS reduced the expression of col-
lagens. Therefore, we propose that high TCA cycleﬂux and OXPHOS
in quiescent cells are required to maintainde-novo ECM protein
synthesis by generating ATP and amino acids, especially proline,
which is enriched in collagen family proteins. The secretion of ECM
proteins is also a process that demands ATP. In summary, ourﬁnd-
ings underscore the metabolically and transcriptionally active nat-
ure of quiescentﬁbroblasts, despite their non-proliferative status,
and illuminate the occurrence of speciﬁc metabolic reprogramming
events. Physiologically, it remains to be determined if contact-
inhibited ﬁbroblasts in the body or quiescent cancer-associated
ﬁbroblasts undergo similar reprogramming process.
Methods
List of plasmids, antibodies, reagents, cell lines, and primers used can
be found in Supplementary Table 1.
Cell culture
Mouse embryonicﬁbroblasts (MEFs) were isolated and immortalized
as previously described15,16 and were cultured in DMEM (Corning)
containing 10% FBS (Gemini) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (Corning).
NIH 3T3 cells, BJ cells, and Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells were
obtained from the American Type Culture Collection and were grown
according to recommendations. Cells were routinely checked for
mycoplasma contamination with an in-house PCR method. Cells were
not used for more than 10 passages.
Proliferating cells (P) and quiescent cells (Q)
The cells were analyzed while actively proliferating (2 days after plat-
ing) and when they were quiescent (contact-inhibited for 6 days,
11 days after plating) for MEFs, primary MEFs, NIH 3T3, BJ, and Chinese
hamster ovary (CHO) cells. Cell culture medium was changed every
other day for both proliferating and quiescent states. All assays were
done 24 h after changing medium unless it is indicated.
Cloning
Each sgRNA sequence was inserted into the lentiCRISPR v2 vector-Blast
(Addgene plasmid #83480) or lentiCRISPR v2 vector-Hygro (Addgene
plasmid # 98291) according to the recommended protocol on
Addgene’s webpage. sgRNAs were designed on CRISPOR.tefor.net or
were taken from previously published works. For transfection of sgRNA
plasmids in MEFs, 3 × 10
5 cells were plated in 6-well plates one day before
transfection using 3µg of each sgRNA plasmid. After 24 h of transfection,
selection was carried out with blasticidin (10µg/ml) or hygromycin
(200µg/ml). An untransduced negative control plate was used to
determine when selection was performed. The cDNA for human YAP WT
(pBABEpuro-Flag-YAP2, Addgene plasmid #27472) and the con-
stitutively active mutant YAP 5SA (pCMV-ﬂag YAP2 5SA, Addgene plas-
mid #27371) were cloned into the pBABE Hygro vector using Gibson
Assembly according to the manufacturer’sp r o t o c o l( N E B ) .
Lentivirus and retrovirus production, transduction, and anti-
biotic selection
For lentivirus production, each lentiviral plasmid was cotransfected
with 9µg of Virapower packing mix in 293FT cells on poly-L-lysine
(Sigma)-coated 10-cm plates using Lipofectamine 2000 as described in
a protocol on the Addgene website. Lentivirus infection was per-
formed overnight in the presence of polybrene, and selection was
carried out with blasticidin (10µg/ml) or hygromycin (200µg/ml). An
untransduced negative control plate was used to determine when
selection was performed.
For retrovirus production, Phoenix-AMPHO cells were trans-
fected at 70–80% conﬂuency on a 10-cm plate. Twelve micrograms
of pBabe plasmid with 6µg of VSVG was packaged in 60µl of Lipo-
fectamine 2000 in 3 ml of optiMEM with 10 ml of complete medium.
16 h after transfection, the medium was aspirated, and 10 ml of
complete medium was added. 48 h later, the medium was collected,
centrifuged, and ﬁltered through a 0.45-μm ﬁlter (Millipore). Ret-
rovirus infection was performed during 48 h of proliferation, and
selection was carried out with hygromycin (200 µg/ml). An
untransduced negative control plate was used to determine when
selection was performed.
Fig. 6 | ME1 dimerization and ME1-mediatedﬂux are suppressed, whereas the
ﬂuxes through MDH1 and PCK1 are elevated in Q cells. aImmunoblots and
protein quantiﬁcation of ME1, MDH1, and PCK1 in P and Q MEFs. Vinculin was used
as a loading control. Values are the mean ± SEM of 4 biologically independent
experiments. nsP = 0.1412, ****P < 0.0001 using unpaired two-tailedt-test. ME1
malic enzyme 1, MDH1 malate dehydrogenase 1, PCK1 phosphoenolpyruvate car-
boxykinase 1.b Schematic of ME1 acetylation by ACAT1 and deacetylation by SIRT6.
c BS
3 cross-linking assay in P and Q MEFs. After the addition of BS3, shifted bands
that indicated protein–protein cross-linking could be seen; the shifted bands are
marked with an asterisk. Representative data from six independent experiments
are presented.d Coimmunoprecipitation (Co-IP) assay shows that ME1 dimeriza-
tion is enhanced in P cells. Both Flag-tagged ME1 and Myc-tagged ME1 were
e x p r e s s e di nM E F s ,a n dt h ee x t r a c t sw e r es u b j e c t e dt oC o - I Pw i t ha na n t i - F l a gt a g
antibody. Both immunoprecipitates with Flag (IP-Flag) and whole-cell lysates (WCL)
were analyzed by Western blotting and protein quantiﬁcation with means ± SEMs
(n =3 –4) are shown.P value by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test is indicated in
the ﬁgure except for ****P < 0.0001 and ns (SIRTP = 0.4538, Myc-ME1P =0 .3 8 5 1 ,
Flag-ME1 P =0 . 3 7 8 0 ) .e Co-IP assay shows that ME1 acetylation is enhanced in P
cells. Extracts were subjected to Co-IP with the anti-ME1 antibody. Both immuno-
precipitates with endogenous ME1 (IP-ME1) and whole-cell lysates (WCL) were
analyzed by Western blotting and protein quantiﬁcation with means ± SEMs
(n =3 –4) are shown. ****P < 0.0001 and ns (SIRTP = 0.9095, ME1P =0 . 8 6 8 4 )u s i n g
unpaired two-tailedt-test.f Schematic of ME1 acetylation and dimerization in P and
QM E F s .g Comparison of the quantiﬁed ME1-, MDH1-, and PCK1-mediatedﬂuxes
(estimatedﬂux ± SD) in P and Q MEFs. P cells are shown in black bars, and Q cells are
shown in gray bars. Allﬂux ﬁts passed the chi-square goodness-of-ﬁtt e s t .P values
by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test are indicated except for ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 .
h Schematic of ME1-, MDH1- and PCK1-mediatedﬂuxes in P and Q MEFs.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 13
RNA sequencing
A total of 3.0 × 105 cells were plated onto 6-well plates. After reaching
proper growth states (P and Q), the cells were then rapidly washed two
times in ice-cold PBS, and total RNA was isolated following the Direct-
zol RNA Microprep Kit (ZYMO RESEARCH) manufacturer’sm a n u a l .
General quality-control metrics for next-generation sequencing data
were obtained using FastQC. Sequencing trimming was performed
using cutadapt
54. Reads were aligned to the reference genome in a
splice-aware manner using STAR55, and apparent PCR duplicates were
checked or removed with Picard. Reads were aligned to the reference
genome using BWA MEM (arXiv:1303.3997). Afterward, the abundance
of genomic features was quantiﬁed as raw counts based on read
alignments using featureCounts
56. The gene annotation database was
Ensembl annotations for mouse genome v.mm39 (GRCm39).
Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA)
To gain insight into the transcriptional difference between P and Q
cells, the GSEA tool was used to analyze the association between the P
and Q proﬁles. In our study, the genomic expression proﬁles of 49,638
features (genes) were preranked using the log fold change as a ranking
metric. A GSEA using the classic algorithm and the Reactome database
was run with 3000 permutations.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 14
Proliferation rates
Cells were plated in replicate 6-well plates in 3 mL at an initial seeding
density of 3.0 × 104 cells per well. Cells were permitted to settle over-
night. The number of cells seeded for each cell line allowed for
exponential growth over the course of the assay. The following day,
one 6-well plate of each condition was counted to determine the initial
number of cells at the time of treatment. After 2 days of culture,ﬁnal
cell counts were measured. The cells were counted using a mixed
solution of propidium iodide (PI) and Hoechst 33342 (Hoechst) with a
ﬁnal concentration of 2µg/mL PI and 10µg/ml Hoechst for 30 min at
37 °C. Plates were then imaged on a Celigo Image Cytometer (Nex-
celcom Bioscience), and the number of PI-positive cells was divided by
the total number of cells (Hoechst positive) to show the percentage of
dead cells (% Dead). The following formula was used to calculate the
proliferation rate: Doublings per day = [log
2(ﬁnal day 2 cell count/
initial day 0 cell count)]/2 days.
Cell density and growth curve
The average cell density in a population was measured by a Celigo
Image Cytometer (Nexcelcom Bioscience). Con ﬂuence (%) was
monitored every 24 h for 13 days in a low using‘conﬂuence’ appli-
cation with a hardware autofocus system. The mean ± SEM (n =3 )o f
conﬂuence (%) of each population was plotted versus time (day) as a
growth curve.
Cell viability
Cells were plated on 12-well plates and allowed to grow until the P and
Q states were reached. After reaching proper growth states (P and Q),
the medium was aspirated and replenished with the indicated con-
centration of vehicle or UK5099. After 72 h, a mixed solution of pro-
pidium iodide (PI) and Hoechst 33342 (Hoechst) was added for aﬁnal
concentration of 2µg/mL PI and 10µg/ml Hoechst for 30 min at 37 °C.
Plates were then imaged on a Celigo Image Cytometer (Nexcelcom
Bioscience), and the number of PI-positive cells was divided by the
total number of cells (Hoechst positive) to show the percentage of
dead cells (% Dead).
Extracellular acidiﬁcation rate (ECAR) and oxygen consumption
rate (OCR)
The extracellular acidiﬁcation rate (ECAR) and oxygen consumption
rate (OCR) were measured using an Agilent Seahorse XFe96 Analyzer
using standard methods. Brieﬂy, cells were plated at 1.5 × 103 cells per
well in Seahorse Bioscience 96-well plates. After settling, the cells were
washed three times and incubated in Seahorse XF base medium (Agi-
lent, 102353-100) pH adjusted to 7.4 with the indicated treatment. The
assay medium for ECAR measurements contained glutamine (4 mM;
Sigma), and the following compounds were injected: glucose (10 mM;
Sigma‒Aldrich), oligomycin A (2µM), and 2DG (100 mM; Sigma‒
Aldrich). This allowed for calculation of the glycolytic rate, glycolytic
capacity, and glycolytic reserve. The basal ECAR was measured prior to
the addition of glucose. The assay medium for OCR measurements
contained glucose (25 mM; Sigma) and glutamine (4 mM; Sigma). The
following inhibitors were injected for the OCR: oligomycin A (2µM;
Cayman Chemical, Ann Arbor, MI, USA), carbonyl cyanide 4-(tri-
ﬂuoromethoxy) phenylhydrazone (FCCP) (2µM; Sigma‒Aldrich), anti-
mycin A (1µM; Sigma‒Aldrich) and rotenone (1µM; Sigma‒Aldrich).
This method allowed for the calculation of the OCR-linked ATP pro-
duction, maximal respiratory capacity, and spare respiratory capacity.
Basal respiration was measured prior to the addition of oligomycin A.
Measurement of glucose consumption
Medium was collected from cells cultured in vehicle or 0.2µMr o t e -
none for 24 h. The glucose concentrations were measured on a YSI-
2700 Biochemistry Analyzer (Yellow Springs Instruments) as described
previously
57, and the rate of glucose consumption from the media was
normalized to the cell counts.
Metabolite measurement by GC-MS
For metabolite measurement by isotope labeling, 3.0 × 105 cells were
plated onto 6-well plates. After reaching proper growth states (P and
Q), isotope labeling experiments were performed for 24 h with either
25 mM [1,2-
13C] glucose (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), 25 mM
[U-13C] glucose, or 4 mM [U-13C] glutamine, and extra plates were
included for cell counts. At the time of collection, the plates were
washed twice with 1 mL of (9 g/L) NaCl. Then, the cells were incubated
with 600 μL of mixed solvent (water:methanol:acetonitrile = 1:1:1)
containing 2μL of 2 mg/mL Norvaline (Sigma–Aldrich) dissolved in
distilled water as an internal standard and then scraped down with cell
scrapers. The solution was shaken at 500 ×g for 30 min and cen-
trifuged at 16,000 ×g for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant (280μL) was
transferred to a clean tube and lyophilized under nitrogen gas. For the
analysis of DHAP, pyruvate, lactate and citrate, the lyophilized samples
were derivatized with 15µL of 2 wt% methoxyamine hydrochloride
(Thermo Fisher) for 60 min at 42 °C. Next, 35µLo fN - m e t h y l - N - ( t e r t -
butyldimethylsilyl)-triﬂuoroacetamide (MTBSTFA) + 1% tert-
butyldimetheylchlorosilane (t-BDMCS) (Sigma–Aldrich) was added,
and the samples were incubated for 70 min at 75 °C. For the analysis of
G6P, the lyophilized samples were derivatized with 20µLo f2 w t %
methoxyamine hydrochloride (Thermo Fisher) for 60 min at 42 °C.
Next, 20µL of N-methyl-N-(trimethylsilyl)triﬂuoroacetamide (MSTFA)
(Sigma–Aldrich) was added, and the samples were incubated for
30 min at 37 °C. The derivatized samples were then centrifuged at
Fig. 7 | Quiescent cells suppress the malate-aspartate shuttle (MAS), whereas
proliferating cells are dependent on it for cell proliferation. aImmunoblots and
protein quantiﬁcation of SLC25A11 and SLC25A13 in P and Q MEFs. Vinculin was
monitored as a loading control. Representative immunoblot is shown. Values are
the mean ± SEM of 4 biologically independent experiments.P values by unpaired
two-tailed student’s t-test are indicated.b The schematic of malate-aspartate
shuttle (MAS) (created with Biorender.com released under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International license). MDH malate
dehydrogenase, GOT glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase, SLC25A11 solute carrier
family 25 member 11.c The cytosolic NAD
+/NADH ratio of P and Q MEFs cultured in
vehicle or 2 mM AOA for 24 h measured by the pMOS023: Peredox NADH/NAD+
sensor (cytosolic) usingﬂow cytometry. Values are the mean ± SEM of 6 biologically
independent experiments. ****P < 0.0001 and nsP = 0.4623 using unpaired two-
tailed t-test. d Immunoblot and protein quantiﬁcation of SLC25A11 in MEFs.α-
Tubulin was monitored as a loading control. Each immunoblot is representative of
6 biologically independent experiments. Values are the mean ± SEM of 6 biologi-
cally independent experiments; ****P < 0.0001 using unpaired two-tailedt-test.
e The cytosolic NAD
+/NADH ratio of P and Q MEFs with or without SLC25A11
deletion. The ratios are measured by the pMOS023: Peredox NADH/NAD+sensor
(cytosolic) usingﬂow cytometry. Values are the mean ± SEM of 4 biologically
independent experiments. ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 ,n sP = 0.2711 using unpaired two-tailedt-
test. f Proliferation rates of P MEF cells cultured in vehicle or 2 mM AOA or
AOA + 4 mM methyl pyruvate for 24 h. The relative ratio of doublings per day is
presented as the mean ± SEM of 4 biologically independent samples. ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 ,
ns P = 0.0605 using unpaired two-tailedt-test. g The cytosolic NAD+/NADH ratio of
P cells cultured in vehicle or 2 mM AOA or AOA + 4 mM methyl pyruvate for 24 h.
Data are presented as the mean ± SEM of 4 biologically independent samples.P
value by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test is indicated except for ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 .
h Glycolysis measured by the extracellular acidiﬁcation rate (ECAR) in P cells cul-
tured in vehicle or 2 mM AOA or AOA + 4 mM methyl pyruvate for 24 h. Data are
presented as the mean ± SEM of 5 biologically independent samples.P values by
unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test are indicated except for nsP = 0.4414.i The
cytosolic NAD+/NADH ratio of P MEFs with or without SLC25A11 deletion and cul-
tured in vehicle or 4 mM methyl pyruvate for 24 h. Data are presented as the
mean ± SEM of 4 biologically independent samples. ****P < 0.0001 using unpaired
two-tailedt-test.
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 15
16,000 ×g for 5 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant (1μL) was subjected
to GC‒MS measurement.
GC‒MS analysis was performed using an Agilent 7890B GC
equipped with a DB-5ms column (30 m × 0.25-mm inner diameter;ﬁlm
thickness, 0.25μm; Agilent J&W Scientiﬁc). The front inlet temperature
was 280 °C, and the heliumﬂow was maintained at 1.428 mL/min. For
DHAP, pyruvate, lactate, and citrate analysis, the column temperature
was held at 60 °C for 1 min followed by 1 min of run time, with an
increase of 10 °C/min to 320 °C and holding for 1 min followed by a
postrun of 320 °C for 9 min. For the analysis of G6P, the initial rate was
held at 60 °C for 1 min followed by 1 min of run time, with an increase
of 10 °C/min to 325 °C and holding for 10 min followed by a postrun of
60 °C for 1 min
58,59. The peak area of each quantiﬁed ion was calculated
and corrected for natural isotope abundances by following the
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 16
procedure reported by Fernandez et al.60 and then normalized by the
peak area of norvaline as an internal standard and cell counts.
13C-Metabolicﬂux analysis (13C-MFA)
3.0 × 105 cells were plated onto 6-well plates. After reaching proper
growth states (P and Q), isotope parallel labeling experiments were
performed for 0, 6, 18, and 24 h timepoints with either 25 mM [1,2-
13C]
glucose (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories), or 4 mM [U-13C] glutamine
(Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). Extra plates were included for cell
counts for all time points, including the starting point. For each of the
labeled plates, 200µL of sample media was collected for extracellular
metabolites. For intracellular metabolites, plates were washed twice
with 1 mL of (9 g/L) NaCl. Then, the cells were incubated with 1.5 mL of
ice-cold methanol for 5 min, scraped down with cell scrapers, and
transferred into glass centrifuge tubes (Kimble Chase). Next, 1.5 mL of
chloroform was added to the tubes and vortexed at high speed for 10 s.
Then, 1.5 mL of HPLC grade water was added, and the tubes were
vortexed at high speed for 1 min, capped, and stored at 4 °C overnight.
The next day, the samples were centrifuged at 650 ×g for 20 min at
4 °C. Then, 3 mL of the aqueous phase was transferred to two 1.5-mL
centrifuge tubes, dried completely under nitrogen gas at 37 °C, and
stored at−80 °C. Finally, 1.5 mL of the organic phase was transferred to
new glass centrifuge tubes and stored at−80 °C. Samples were then
subjected to GC/MS analysis.
Determination of external rates for13C-MFA
To quantify concentrations of metabolites in spent media, samples were
collected at 0, 6, 18, and 24 h and mixed with an internal standard
solution containing
13C-labeled metabolites with a known concentration.
The samples were then derivatized using MOX-TBDMS and analyzed by
GC-MS as described before61. Metabolite uptake and secretion rates were
then calculated as described by Antoniewicz62, using equations 4 and 5 in
this reference for proliferating and quiescent cells, respectively.
Measurement of isotopic labeling for13C-MFA
For GC-MS analysis of isotopic labeling of intracellular metabolites,
dried cell extracts were derivatized using the MOX-TBDMS derivati-
zation method as described by Oates and Antoniewicz
61. The identity
of the measured metabolites was veriﬁed using pure analytical stan-
d a r d sa sd e s c r i b e db yL o n ga n dA n t o n i e w i c z13. For GC-MS analysis of
isotopic labeling of ribose from RNA, the protocol described by Long
et al.
63 was used. In all cases, GC-MS analysis was performed on an
Agilent 7890 A GC system equipped with a HP-5MS capillary column
(30 m, 0.25 mm i.d., 0.25μm-phase thickness; Agilent J&W Scientiﬁc),
connected to an Agilent 5977B Mass Spectrometer operating under
ionization by electron impact (EI) at 70 eV. Heliumﬂow was maintained
at 1 mL/min. The source temperature was maintained at 230 °C, the MS
quad temperature at 150 °C, the interface temperature at 280 °C, and
the inlet temperature at 280 °C. Mass spectra were recorded in single
ion monitoring (SIM) mode with 4 ms dwell time on each ion. Mass
isotopomer distributions were obtained by integration of ion
chromatograms
64 and corrected for natural isotope abundances60.
Intracellular metabolicﬂuxes were determined byﬁtting extra-
cellular uptake and secretion rates (glucose, glutamine, lactate, ala-
nine, pyruvate, glutamate, and proline) and the measured mass
isotopomer distributions of intracellular metabolites (pyruvate, lac-
tate, alanine, malate, aspartate,α-ketoglutarate, glutamine, citrate,
glycerol 3-phosphate, phosphoenolpyruvate, 3-phosphoglycerate, and
ribose from RNA) to a compartmentalized metabolic network model
using the Metran software
13. The model contains three distinct meta-
bolic compartments: extracellular, cytosol, and mitochondrion. The
metabolites pyruvate, acetyl-CoA, citrate,α-ketoglutarate, malate,
oxaloacetate, alanine, glutamate, and aspartate are metabolically
active in both the cytosol and mitochondrion. During the extraction
process, intracellular pools of metabolites are homogenized. As such,
the measured isotopic labeling of these metabolites reﬂects the mix-
ture of distinct metabolic pools. In the
13C-MFA model, we included
mixing reactions to account for the mixing of mitochondrial and
cytosolic metabolite pools during extraction
65. The model also
accounts for dilution of intracellular metabolites due to incorporation
of unlabeled CO
2 and inﬂux of unlabeled metabolites from the medium
such as glutamate, aspartate, and pyruvate.
For 13C-MFA, data from four parallel labeling experiments for each
condition, two biological replicates using [1,2-13C] glucose as tracer and
two biological replicates using [U-13C] glutamine as tracer (samples
collected 24 h after tracer addition), wereﬁtted simultaneously to the
network model to estimate intracellularﬂuxes. To ensure that the
global best solution was identiﬁed, ﬂux estimation was repeated at
least 50 times starting with random initial values. At convergence, a
chi-square test was applied to test the goodness-of-ﬁt, and accurate
95% conﬁdence intervals were calculated by determining the sensi-
tivity of the sum of squared residuals toﬂux parameter variations
66.
Coimmunoprecipitation (Co-IP) and immunoblotting
For coimmunoprecipitation (Co-IP), cells grown in 6-well plates were
lysed in RIPA lysis buffer (Cell Signaling) with a protease inhibitor mini
tablet (Thermo Fisher), and a phosphatase inhibitor mini tablet
(Thermo Fisher, 1 tablet per 10 ml of lysis buffer). Solubilized proteins
were collected by centrifugation and quantiﬁed using protein assay
reagent (Bio-Rad). Protein extracts were incubated with each primary
antibody with rotation overnight and then were added to protein A/G
agarose beads (Santa Cruz, sc-2003) for an additional 1 h. The immu-
noprecipitates were washed three times with RIPA buffer and then
resuspended in sample buffer for immunoblotting.
Fig. 8 | Active mitochondrial metabolism supports ECM biosynthesis in
quiescent cells. aHeatmap of the 38 genes encoding collagen between P and Q
MEFs as determined by RNA sequencing. Data represent values from three inde-
pendent experiments, and Z-scored log2-fold change values are color-coded as
indicated.b Relative mRNA expression of collagen genes quantiﬁed by RNA
sequencing in P and Q MEFs. Means ± SEMs (n =3 )a r es h o w n .P value by unpaired
two-tailed student’s t-test is indicated except for ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 .c Relative mRNA
expression of collagen genes quantiﬁed by RT-qPCR in P and Q MEFs. Means ± SEMs
(n =3 )a r es h o w n .P value by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test is indicated except
for ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 .d Immunoblots and protein quantiﬁcation of Collagen Iα1
(COL1A1), Collagen IIα1 (COL2A1), Collagen IIIα1 (COL3A1), and Collagen XXIIIα1
(COL23A1) in P and Q MEFs. Representative immunoblots are shown. Values are the
mean ± SEM of 3 biologically independent experiments.P value by unpaired two-
tailed student’s t-test is indicated except for ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 .e Comparison of the
quantiﬁed intracellular metabolicﬂuxes (estimatedﬂux ± SD) of Proline synthesis
(Gln → Glu and Glu→ Pro) in P and Q MEFs. Allﬂux ﬁts passed the chi-square
goodness-of-ﬁtt e s t .P values by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test are indicated.
f Relative mRNA expression of pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase 1 (PYCR1) quan-
tiﬁed by RNA sequencing in P and Q MEFs. Means ± SEMs (n =3 )a r es h o w n .* * * *
P < 0.0001 using unpaired two-tailedt-test. g Immunoblots and protein quanti
ﬁ-
cation of P5CS and PYCR1 in P and Q MEFs. Representative immunoblots are shown.
Values are the mean ± SEM of 3–4 biologically independent experiments.P values
by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test are indicated.h Immunoblots and protein
quantiﬁcation of Collagen Iα1 (COL1A1), Collagen IIα1 (COL2A1), Collagen IIIα1
(COL3A1), Collagen XIVα1 (COL14A1), and Collagen XXIIIα1 (COL23A1) in Q MEFs
cultured in vehicle or 100μM UK5099 for 24 h. Representative immunoblots are
shown. Values are the mean ± SEM of 4 biologically independent experiments.P
value by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test is indicated except for ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 .
i Immunoblots and protein quantiﬁcation of Collagen Iα1 (COL1A1), Collagen IIα1
(COL2A1), Collagen IIIα1 (COL3A1), Collagen XIVα1 (COL14A1), and Collagen XXIIIα1
(COL23A1) in Q MEFs cultured in vehicle or 0.2μM rotenone for 24 h. Repre-
sentative immunoblots are shown. Values are the mean ± SEM of 3 or 4 biologically
independent experiments.P value by unpaired two-tailed student’s t-test is indi-
cated except for ****P <0 . 0 0 0 1 .
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 17
For immunoblotting, protein extracts were prepared in lysis buf-
fer as described previously67. Solubilized proteins were collected by
centrifugation and quantiﬁed using protein assay reagent (Bio-Rad).
Samples containing equal amounts of protein were resolved by elec-
trophoresis on a 6–15% gel, and the proteins were transferred to
polyvinylidene diﬂuoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore). Primary
antibody incubation was performed in 2.5% milk or 2.5% BSA in TBS-T,
and secondary antibody incubation was performed in 2.5% milk.
Standard enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) was used, and an Azure
or LI-COR machine was used to image the blots. ImageStudio software
(Licor) was used to quantify the bands on the blots.
RT‒qPCR
RNA was isolated with a GeneJET RNA Puriﬁcation Kit (Thermo Fisher
K0732) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. cDNA was synthe-
sized with an iScript cDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad 1708891), and RT‒
qPCR was performed with Bio-Rad iQ SYBR Green Supermix (Bio-Rad
1708882) according to the manufacturer’s protocol on a Bio-Rad
CFX96. Vinculin or cyclophilin E was used as a reference gene. RT‒
qPCR primer sequences are provided in Supplementary Table 1. Values
are recorded as the fold change calculated by the ddCT method.
Immunoﬂuorescence
Cells were plated in triplicate in 8-well culture slides. Cells wereﬁxed in
4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 30 min followed by four washes in ice-
cold PBS. Afterﬁxation of the cells, the localization of YAP (green) and
nuclei (blue; Hoechst 33342) was examined under a confocal micro-
scope (Zeiss LSM 700 or LSM 900) in at least 10 randomly selected
ﬁelds at 400× magniﬁcation.
8XGTIIC (TEAD) luciferase reporter assay
A total of 3.0 × 105 cells were plated onto 6-well plates. After reaching
proper growth states (P and Q), the cells were then cotransfected with
8xGTIIC-luciferase and Renilla construct using FuGENE (Promega)
following the manufacturer’s instructions. 48 h post-transfection, the
cells were lysed, andﬁreﬂy/Renilla luciferase activity was quantiﬁed by
luminescence using a Dual-Luciferase® Reporter Assay System (Pro-
mega) following the manufacturer’si n s t r u c t i o n s .
Bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) cross-linking analysis
Cross-linking analysis was performed with BS3 Crosslinkers (Thermo)
following the manufacturer’si n s t r u c t i o n s .B r i eﬂy, cells were sus-
pended and washed three times with ice-cold PBS (pH 8.0) to remove
amine-containing culture media and proteins from the cells. Then,
2m MB S
3 solution was added, and the reaction mixture was incubated
for 30 min at room temperature. Next, quenching solution was added
to aﬁnal concentration of 10–20 mM Tris and incubated for 15 min at
room temperature. The samples were then lysed and prepared for
electrophoresis.
Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) and Propidium Iodide (PI) staining
for cell cycle
A total of 3.0 × 105 cells were plated onto 6-well plates. After reaching
proper growth states (P and Q), the cells were then incubated with 3 ug/
mL BrDU for 3 h, and then were harvested andﬁxed. Cells were dena-
turized in 2 N HCl + 0.5% Triton X and washed, then the residual acid was
neutralized with 0.1 M sodium borate pH8.5. Cells were incubated with
primary monoclonal antibody, Ms anti-Bromodeoxyuridine Clone
Bu20a (Dako M0744), overnight. After washed, cells were incubated in
anti-Ms Alexa 488 for 2 h protected from light. The pellets were resus-
pended in PI solution with RNase A for 30 min protected from light. Cells
were washed with PBS, and resuspended in FACS buffer (2% FBS, 2 mM
EDTA). Alexa 488 for BrdU and PE for PIﬂuorescences were measured on
a Beckman Coulter CytoFLEX Sﬂow cytometer.
Mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm)m e a s u r e m e n t
Mitochondrial membrane potential (ΔΨm) was assessed using TMRE
(tetramethylrhodamine, ethyl ester) (Invitrogen, T669). The intensity
of TMRE was determined as described previously
68. Cells were plated
onto 12-well plates at a plating density of 3.0 × 104 cells per well. After
reaching proper growth states (P and Q), the cells were then treated
with 100 nM TMRE for 30 min, trypsinized, washed with PBS, and
r e s u s p e n d e di nF A C Sb u f f e r( 2 %F B S ,2m ME D T A ) .T M R Eﬂuorescence
was measured on a Beckman Coulter CytoFLEX Sﬂow cytometer.
Whole-cell NAD+/NADH ratio measurement
A total of 3.0 × 105 cells were plated onto 6-well plates. After reaching
proper growth states (P and Q), the cells were then rapidly washed two
times in ice-cold PBS and extracted in 100 mL of ice-cold lysis buffer
(1% dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide [DTAB] in 0.2 N NaOH dilu-
ted 1:1 with PBS). The NAD
+/NADH ratio was measured using an NAD/
NADH-Glo Assay kit (Promega, G9072) according to a modiﬁed pro-
tocol as described previously69.B r i eﬂy, to measure NAD+,t h el y s a t e
was diluted with lysis buffer and 0.4 N HCl and subsequently incubated
at 60 °C for 15 min. For NADH measurement, the lysate was incubated
at 75 °C for 30 min. Acidic conditions permit the selective degradation
of NADH, while basic conditions degrade NAD
+. Following incubation,
the samples were spun on a bench-top centrifuge and quenched with
neutralizing solution. The neutralizing solution consisted of 0.5 M Tris
base for NAD
+ samples and 0.25 M Tris in 0.2 N HCl for the NADH
samples. The instructions in the Promega G9072 technical manual
were then followed to measure NAD+ and NADH levels using a lumin-
ometer (BioTek).
Cytosolic and mitochondrial NAD+/NADH ratio measurement
For cytosolic NAD+/NADH ratio measurement with the Peredox probe,
cells were transduced with the pMOS023: Peredox NADH/NAD+ sensor
(cytosolic) plasmid (Addgene 163060). For mitochondrial NADH
measurement, cells were transfected with pC1-mitoRexYFP (Addgene
60246). Cells were plated onto 12-well plates at a plating density of
3.0 × 10
4 c e l l sp e rw e l l .A f t e rr e a c h i n gp r o p e rg r o w t hs t a t e s( Pa n dQ ) ,
the cells were trypsinized and rapidly washed two times in ice-cold
P B S .C e l l sw e r ea n a l y z e do naC y t o F l e xﬂow cytometer. Data analysis
was performed using FlowJo software. Data were reported as the mean
ﬂuorescence intensity (MFI) normalized to the untransduced negative
control sample.
Cytosolic NADP+/NADPH ratio measurement with the
iNap1 sensor
For cytosolic NADP+,N A D P H ,a n dN A D P+/NADPH ratio measurement
with the iNap1 sensor, cells were transduced with the pPB iNap1 sensor
(cytosolic) plasmid
40. Cells were plated onto 12-well plates at a plating
density of 3.0 × 104 cells per well. After reaching proper growth states
(P and Q), the cells were trypsinized and rapidly washed two times in
ice-cold PBS. Cells were analyzed on a CytoFlexﬂow cytometer.
iNap1 signals were acquired with excitation wavelengths of 405 nm and
488 nm and an emission wavelength of 525 nm. Data analysis was
performed using FlowJo software. Data are reported as the MFI nor-
malized to the untransduced negative control sample.
Quantiﬁcation and statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed with built-in statistics tools in Prism9
(GraphPad Software). Statistical signiﬁcance was determined using
unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test and ordinary one-way analysis of
variance (ANOVA) with Dunnett’so rH o l m‒Sidak’sm u l t i p l ec o m p a r -
ison test or two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post hoc multiple compar-
ison test in comparisons of more than two groups of samples. Welch’s
unequal variances t-test used for theﬂux analyses. Statistical tests and
error bars can be found in theﬁgure legends.P values for comparisons
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 18
between groups are indicated in theﬁgures. The statistical method
used, and sample size (n) are indicated in the legends for eachﬁgure.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Data are available within the Article, Supplementary data tables, Sup-
plementary Information or Source Dataﬁle. The RNA-seq data repor-
ted in this study has been deposited in the NCBI Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) under accession numberGSE272680.S o u r c ed a t aa r e
provided with this paper.
References
1 . L a b u s c h a g n e ,C .F . ,C h e u n g ,E .C . ,B l a g i h ,J . ,D o m a r t ,M .C .&
Vousden, K. H. Cell clustering promotes a metabolic switch that
supports metastatic colonization.Cell Metab.30,7 2 0– 734
e725 (2019).
2 . B e r g ,J .M . ,T y m o c z k o ,J .L . ,G a t t o ,G .J .&S t r y e r ,L .Biochemistry9th
edn (W. H. Freeman/Macmillan Learning, 2019).
3. Stein, L. R. & Imai, S. The dynamic regulation of NAD metabolism in
mitochondria.Trends Endocrinol. Metab.23,4 2 0– 428 (2012).
4. Katsyuba, E., Romani, M., Hofer, D. & Auwerx, J. NAD(+) homeostasis
in health and disease.Nat. Metab.2,9 – 31 (2020).
5. Blacker, T. S. & Duchen, M. R. Investigating mitochondrial redox
state using NADH and NADPH autoﬂuorescence.Free Radic. Biol.
Med. 100,5 3– 65 (2016).
6. Rognoni, E. et al. Fibroblast state switching orchestrates dermal
maturation and wound healing.Mol. Syst. Biol.14, e8174 (2018).
7. Coller, H. A., Sang, L. & Roberts, J. M. A new description of cellular
quiescence.PLoS Biol.4,e 8 3( 2 0 0 6 ) .
8. Rognoni, E. et al. Inhibition of beta-catenin signalling in dermal
ﬁbroblasts enhances hair follicle regeneration during wound heal-
ing. Development143,2 5 2 2– 2535 (2016).
9. Vander Heiden, M. G., Cantley, L. C. & Thompson, C. B. Under-
standing the Warburg effect: the metabolic requirements of cell
proliferation.Science 324,1 0 2 9– 1033 (2009).
10. Palm, W. & Thompson, C. B. Nutrient acquisition strategies of
mammalian cells.Nature 546,2 3 4– 242 (2017).
11. Yao, C. H. et al. Mitochondrial fusion supports increased oxidative
phosphorylation during cell proliferation.Elife https://doi.org/10.
7554/eLife.41351(2019).
1 2 . L e m o n s ,J .M .e ta l .Q u i e s c e n tﬁbroblasts exhibit high metabolic
activity.PLoS Biol.8, e1000514 (2010).
13. Long, C. P. & Antoniewicz, M. R. High-resolution (13)C metabolic
ﬂux analysis.Nat. Protoc.14,2 8 5 6– 2877 (2019).
14. Kay, E. J., Koulouras, G. & Zanivan, S. Regulation of extracellular
matrix production in activatedﬁbroblasts: roles of amino acid
metabolism in collagen synthesis.Front. Oncol.11, 719922 (2021).
15. Majewski, N., Nogueira, V., Robey, R. B. & Hay, N. Akt inhibits
apoptosis downstream of BID cleavage via a glucose-dependent
mechanism involving mitochondrial hexokinases.Mol. Cell Biol.24,
730– 740 (2004).
1 6 . S k e e n ,J .E .e ta l .A k td eﬁciency impairs normal cell proliferation and
suppresses oncogenesis in a p53-independent and mTORC1-
dependent manner.Cancer Cell10,2 6 9– 280 (2006).
17. Young, J. D. Metabolicﬂux rewiring in mammalian cell cultures.
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.24, 1108– 1115 (2013).
18. Badur, M. G. & Metallo, C. M. Reverse engineering the cancer
metabolic network usingﬂux analysis to understand drivers of
human disease.Metab. Eng.45,9 5– 108 (2018).
19. Templeton, N. et al. Application of (13)Cﬂux analysis to identify
high-productivity CHO metabolic phenotypes.Metab. Eng.43,
218– 225 (2017).
20. Jiang, L. et al. Reductive carboxylation supports redox homeostasis
during anchorage-independent growth.Nature532,2 5 5– 258 (2016).
21. Ahn, W. S. & Antoniewicz, M. R. Parallel labeling experiments with
[1,2-C-13]glucose and [U-C-13]glutamine provide new insights into
CHO cell metabolism.Metab. Eng.15,3 4– 47 (2013).
22. Giacomello, M., Pyakurel, A.,Glytsou, C. & Scorrano, L. The cell
biology of mitochondrial membrane dynamics.Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol. 21,2 0 4– 224 (2020).
23. Alirol, E. & Martinou, J. C. Mitochondria and cancer: is there a
morphological connection?Oncogene25,4 7 0 6– 4716 (2006).
24. Petrelli, F. et al. Mitochondrial pyruvate metabolism regulates the
activation of quiescent adult neural stem cells.Sci. Adv.9,
eadd5220 (2023).
25. Tanner, L. B. et al. Four key steps control glycolyticﬂux in mam-
malian cells.Cell Syst.7,4 9– 62.e48 (2018).
26. Bricker, D. K. et al. A mitochondrial pyruvate carrier required for
pyruvate uptake in yeast, Drosophila, and humans.Science 337,
96– 100 (2012).
27. Gos, M. et al. Cellular quiescence induced by contact inhibition or
s e r u mw i t h d r a w a li nC 3 H 1 0 T 1 / 2c e l l s .Cell Prolif.38,1 0 7– 116 (2005).
28. Schlegelmilch, K. et al. Yap1 acts downstream of alpha-catenin to
control epidermal proliferation.Cell 144,7 8 2– 795 (2011).
29. Benham-Pyle, B. W., Pruitt, B. L. & Nelson, W. J. Cell adhesion.
Mechanical strain induces E-cadherin-dependent Yap1 and beta-
catenin activation to drive cell cycle entry.Science 348,
1024– 1027 (2015).
30. Kim, N. G., Koh, E., Chen, X. & Gumbiner, B. M. E-cadherin mediates
contact inhibition of proliferation through Hippo signaling-pathway
components.Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA108, 11930– 11935 (2011).
31. Boopathy, G. T. K. & Hong, W. Role of Hippo Pathway-YAP/TAZ
Signaling in Angiogenesis.Front. Cell Dev. Biol.7,4 9( 2 0 1 9 ) .
32. Dupont, S. et al. Role of YAP/TAZ in mechanotransduction.Nature
474,1 7 9– 183 (2011).
33. Plouffe, S. W. et al. Characterization of Hippo pathway components
by gene inactivation.Mol. Cell64, 993– 1008 (2016).
34. Zheng, X. et al. LncRNA wires up Hippo and Hedgehog signaling to
reprogramme glucose metabolism.EMBO J.36,3 3 2 5– 3335 (2017).
35. Zhao, B. et al. Inactivation of YAP oncoprotein by the Hippo pathway
is involved in cell contact inhibition and tissue growth control.
Genes Dev.21,2 7 4 7– 2761 (2007).
3 6 . G e l p i ,J .L . ,D o r d a l ,A . ,M o n t s e r r a t ,J . ,M a z o ,A .&C o r t e s ,A .K i n e t i c
studies of the regulation of mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase
by citrate.Biochem. J.283,2 8 9– 297 (1992).
37. Luengo, A. et al. Increased demand for NAD(+) relative to ATP drives
aerobic glycolysis.Mol. Cell81,6 9 1– 707 e696 (2021).
3 8 . Z h u ,Y .e ta l .D y n a m i cr e g u l a tion of ME1 phosphorylation and
acetylation affects lipid metabolism and colorectal tumorigenesis.
Mol. Cell77,1 3 8– 149.e135 (2020).
3 9 . S c h m i d t ,C .&R o b i n s o n ,C .V .Ac o m p a r a t i v ec r o s s - l i n k i n gs t r a t e g y
to probe conformational changes in protein complexes.Nat. Pro-
toc. 9, 2224– 2236 (2014).
40. Tao, R. et al. Genetically encodedﬂuorescent sensors reveal
dynamic regulation of NADPH metabolism.Nat. Methods14,
720– 728 (2017).
41. Fan, J. et al. Tyrosine phosphorylation of lactate dehydrogenase A is
important for NADH/NAD(+) redox homeostasis in cancer cells.Mol.
Cell Biol.31,4 9 3 8– 4950 (2011).
42. Nielsen, T. T., Stottrup, N. B., Lofgren, B. & Botker, H. E. Metabolic
ﬁngerprint of ischaemic cardioprotection: importance of the
malate-aspartate shuttle.Cardiovasc. Res.91,3 8 2– 391 (2011).
43. Wang, Y. et al. Saturation of the mitochondrial NADH shuttles
drives aerobic glycolysis in proliferating cells.Mol. Cell82,
3270– 3283.e3279 (2022).
44. Kauppinen, R. A., Sihra, T. S. & Nicholls, D. G. Aminooxyacetic acid
inhibits the malate-aspartate shuttle in isolated nerve terminals and
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 19
prevents the mitochondria from utilizing glycolytic substrates.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta930,1 7 3– 178 (1987).
45. Martinez-Reyes, I. & Chandel, N. S. Mitochondrial TCA cycle meta-
bolites control physiology and disease.Nat. Commun.11,
102 (2020).
46. Li, Q. & Hoppe, T. Role of amino acid metabolism in mitochondrial
homeostasis.Front. Cell Dev. Biol.11, 1127618 (2023).
47. Frantz, C., Stewart, K. M. & Weaver, V. M. The extracellular matrix at
ag l a n c e .J. Cell Sci.123,4 1 9 5– 4200 (2010).
4 8 . K a y ,E .J .e ta l .C a n c e r - a s s o c i a t e dﬁbroblasts require proline
synthesis by PYCR1 for the deposition of pro-tumorigenic extra-
cellular matrix.Nat. Metab.4,6 9 3– 710 (2022).
49. Hamanaka, R. B. et al. Glutamine metabolism is required for col-
lagen protein synthesis in lungﬁbroblasts.Am. J. Respir. Cell Mol.
Biol. 61,5 9 7– 606 (2019).
50. Schworer, S. et al. Proline biosynthesis is a vent for TGFbeta-
induced mitochondrial redox stress.EMBO J.39, e103334 (2020).
51. Filliol, A. et al. Opposing roles of hepatic stellate cell subpopula-
tions in hepatocarcinogenesis.Nature 610,3 5 6– 365 (2022).
52. Covarrubias, A. J., Perrone, R., Grozio, A. & Verdin, E. NAD(+)
metabolism and its roles in cellular processes during ageing.Nat.
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.22, 119– 141 (2021).
53. Johnson, E. L., Robinson, D. G. & Coller, H. A. Widespread changes
in mRNA stability contribute to quiescence-speciﬁcg e n ee x p r e s -
sion patterns in aﬁbroblast model of quiescence.BMC Genom.18,
123 (2017).
54. Martin, M. Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-
throughput sequencing reads.EMBnet. J.17,1 0– 12 (2011).
55. Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner.Bioinfor-
matics 29,1 5– 21 (2013).
56. Liao, Y., Smyth, G. K. & Shi, W. featureCounts: an efﬁcient general
purpose program for assigning sequence reads to genomic fea-
tures. Bioinformatics30,9 2 3– 930 (2014).
57. Hosios, A. M. et al. Amino acids rather than glucose account for the
majority of cell mass in proliferating mammalian cells.Dev. Cell36,
540– 549 (2016).
5 8 . Y o u n g ,L .E .A .e ta l .A c c u r a t ea n dsensitive quantitation of glucose
and glucose phosphates derived from storage carbohydrates by
mass spectrometry.Carbohydr. Polym.230, 115651 (2020).
59. Kind, T. et al. FiehnLib: mass spectral and retention index libraries for
metabolomics based on quadrupole and time-of-ﬂight gas chroma-
tography/mass spectrometry.Anal. Chem.81, 10038– 10048 (2009).
60. Fernandez, C. A., Des Rosiers, C., Previs, S. F., David, F. & Brunen-
graber, H. Correction of 13C mass isotopomer distributions for nat-
ural stable isotope abundance.J. Mass Spectrom.31,2 5 5– 262 (1996).
6 1 . O a t e s ,E .H .&A n t o n i e w i c z ,M .R .( 1 3 ) C - M e t a b o l i cﬂux analysis of
3T3-L1 adipocytes illuminates its core metabolism under hypoxia.
Metab. Eng.76,1 5 8– 166 (2023).
62. Antoniewicz, M. R. A guide to (13)C metabolicﬂux analysis for the
cancer biologist.Exp. Mol. Med.50,1 – 13 (2018).
63. Long, C. P., Au, J., Gonzalez, J. E. & Antoniewicz, M. R. 13C metabolic
ﬂux analysis of microbial and mammalian systems is enhanced with
GC-MS measurements of glycogen and RNA labeling.Metab. Eng.
38,6 5– 72 (2016).
64. Gomez, J. D. et al. Program for integration and rapid analysis of
mass isotopomer distributions (PIRAMID).Bioinformaticshttps://
doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btad661(2023).
65. Gebreselassie, N. A. & Antoniewicz, M. R. (13)C-metabolicﬂux
analysis of co-cultures: a novel approach.Metab. Eng.31,
132– 139 (2015).
66. Antoniewicz, M. R., Kelleher, J. K. & Stephanopoulos, G. Determi-
nation of conﬁdence intervals of metabolicﬂuxes estimated from
stable isotope measurements.Metab. Eng.8,3 2 4– 337 (2006).
67. Bhaskar, P. T. et al. mTORC1 hyperactivity inhibits serum
deprivation-induced apoptosis via increased hexokinase II and
GLUT1 expression, sustained Mcl-1 expression, and glycogen syn-
thase kinase 3beta inhibition.Mol. Cell Biol.29,5 1 3 6– 5147 (2009).
6 8 . P e r r y ,S .W . ,N o r m a n ,J .P . ,B a r b i e r i ,J . ,B r o w n ,E .B .&G e l b a r d ,H .A .
Mitochondrial membrane potential probes and the proton gradient:
a practical usage guide.Biotechniques
50,9 8– 115 (2011).
69. Gui, D. Y. et al. Environment dictates dependence on mitochondrial
complex I for NAD+ and aspartate production and determines
cancer cell sensitivity to metformin.Cell Metab.24,7 1 6– 727 (2016).
Acknowledgements
N.H. acknowledges support from NIH grants R01AG016927,
R01CA090764, R01CA206167, and R01CA258299; the VA merit awards
BX000733 and BX005092; and the VA research career scientist award
IK6BX004602. We thank UIC Genome Research Core and Research
Informatics Core for their help with next-generation sequencing and
RNA sequencing experiments. Figs.5ka n d7b were created with BioR-
ender.com released under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivs 4.0 International license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/deed.en).
Author contributions
N.H. and S.K. designed the study. S.K. conducted the experiments and
M.R.A. designed the metabolicﬂux analyses.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Nissim Hay.
Peer review informationNature Communicationsthanks Simon
Schwörer, Claudio Vernieri, and the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for
their contribution to the peer review of this work. A peer reviewﬁle is
available.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open AccessThis article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if
changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
This is a U.S. Government work and not under copyright protection in the
US; foreign copyright protection may apply 2024
Article https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51117-y
Nature Communications|         (2024) 15:6777 20