Citation: Loggia, D.; O’Flaherty, C.
Citrate Promotes Nitric Oxide
Production during Human Sperm
Capacitation. Antioxidants 2024, 13,
885. https://doi.org/10.3390/
antiox13080885
Academic Editors: Alessandra
Napolitano and Giulia Collodel
Received: 16 May 2024
Revised: 8 June 2024
Accepted: 19 July 2024
Published: 23 July 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
antioxidants 
Article
Citrate Promotes Nitric Oxide Production during Human
Sperm Capacitation
Diego Loggia 1,2,3,4 and Cristian O’Flaherty 1,2,3,4, *
1 Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, McGill University,
Montreal, QC H3G 1Y6, Canada
2 Department of Surgery, Urology Division, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, McGill University,
Montreal, QC H4A 3J1, Canada
3 The Research Institute, McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC H4A 3J1, Canada
4 Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, McGill University,
Montreal, QC H3A 0C7, Canada
* Correspondence: cristian.oflaherty@mcgill.ca; Tel.: +1-514-934-1934 (ext. 35410)
Abstract: Sperm capacitation is a complex process essential for the spermatozoon to recognize and
fertilize the oocyte. For capacitation to occur, human spermatozoa require low levels of reactive
oxygen species (ROS), increased protein tyrosine phosphorylation, and sufficient levels of energy
metabolites such as citrate. Human spermatozoa are exposed to high concentrations of citrate from
the seminal plasma, yet the role of citrate in sperm capacitation is largely unknown. We report that
citrate can support capacitation in human spermatozoa incubated with no other energy metabolites
in the capacitation medium. Reduced capacitation levels were observed in spermatozoa incubated
with inhibitors of mitochondrial citrate transporter (CIC), cytosolic ATP-citrate lyase (ACLY), malic
enzyme (ME), and nitric oxide synthase (NOS). The role of citrate metabolism in ROS production
was further elucidated as citrate increased NO • production in capacitated spermatozoa, whereas
inhibition of ACLY reduced NO• production. This research characterizes a novel metabolic pathway
for citrate to produce NO• in the process of human sperm capacitation.
Keywords: sperm capacitation; citrate; reactive oxygen species (ROS); nitric oxide (NO•); male fertility
1. Introduction
Human infertility is a growing global concern, as approximately one in six couples
currently suffer from infertility worldwide [1,2]. It has been reported that nearly half of
infertility cases are caused by male-related factors, including varicocele, hypogonadism, or
urogenital infections [3,4]. However, in almost 34% of male infertility cases, the cause of
infertility cannot be explained, presenting an unmet need to characterize the mechanisms
underlying male infertility [5].
To recognize and fertilize the oocyte, mammalian spermatozoa must undergo a series
of time-dependent biochemical and morphological changes during the process of capacita-
tion. Capacitation-associated events include an increase in intracellular pH and calcium,
the efflux of cholesterol from the sperm plasma membrane to increase its fluidity, the
generation of low and controlled amounts of reactive oxygen species (ROS), and activation
of several protein kinases that promote phosphorylation of proteins in serine, threonine,
and tyrosine residues to activate several ion channels and enzymes. The changes that occur
during capacitation allow the spermatozoon to acquire hyperactive movement and the abil-
ity to respond to progesterone and glycoproteins of the zona pellucida (ZP) to undergo the
acrosome reaction, the exocytotic event that allows the spermatozoon to dissolve the zona
pellucida to reach the oocyte and fertilize it [6–13]. In humans, sperm capacitation takes
four to ten hours, requires a temperature of 37 ◦C, and occurs in the female oviduct [14,15].
However, capacitation can be reproducedin vitro by incubating spermatozoa in specialized
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885. https://doi.org/10.3390/antiox13080885 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/antioxidants
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 2 of 17
media supplemented with well-established capacitation inducers such as fetal cord serum
ultrafiltrate (FCSu) or bovine serum albumin (BSA) with bicarbonate [16,17].
Sperm capacitation requires the low and controlled production of ROS, such as
the superoxide anion (O2•−), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and nitric oxide (NO•) [18,19].
These ROS trigger a series of timely and finely regulated signaling pathways including
cAMP/PKA, PKC, PI3K/AKT, ERK, and PTK, resulting in tyrosine phosphorylation events
necessary to promote capacitation [ 8–11]. Extracellular O 2•− production occurs during
the first 30 min of initiated capacitation, whereas NO• is produced throughout the capaci-
tation process [17,20,21]. To produce NO•, sperm nitric oxide synthases (NOS; neuronal,
endothelial, and inducible) use NADPH and molecular oxygen to catalyze the oxidation of
L-arginine to NO• and L-citrulline. Given that NOS enzymes are distributed throughout
the spermatozoon, and the permeability of NO• allows it to act both extracellularly and
intracellularly, the activity of NO• generated during capacitation may not be limited to one
cellular compartment [22,23]. Though it has been shown that the generation of this NO•
is essential for capacitation, the mechanism of its regulation during the process remains
largely unclear.
Citrate is an organic carboxylic acid whose primary function is to supply energy to
cells through the citric acid cycle within the mitochondrion. Human spermatozoa are
exposed to high levels of citrate from the seminal plasma, originating primarily from the
prostate [24]. It has been reported that the concentration of citrate in the seminal plasma
of fertile men ranges from 5–50 mM, whereas levels of citrate are considerably lower in
the seminal plasma of some infertile men [24–28]. Despite these high levels of citrate that
fertile human spermatozoa are exposed to, few studies have investigated the relationship
between citrate metabolism and male fertility, and the role of citrate in redox signaling
during human sperm capacitation has yet to be elucidated.
Citrate is typically associated with the citric acid cycle and mitochondrial respiration,
producing ATP which is required by the spermatozoon to sustain cell viability, flagellar
motility, and phosphorylation events in various signaling pathways [29,30]. However, the
metabolism of cytosolic citrate can also play an important role in the regulation of key
cellular processes. Extracellular citrate can be imported into the cytosol via sodium-coupled
solute carrier proteins (NaCT), and mitochondrial citrate can be exported to the cytosol
via the mitochondrial citrate transport protein (CIC/SLC25A1). Cytosolic citrate can then
be converted by the ATP- and Coenzyme A-dependent enzyme known as ATP-citrate
lyase (ACLY) to yield acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate, which participate in unique metabolic
pathways. Acetyl-CoA may be used in various processes, including de novo fatty acid
synthesis and protein acetylation. Meanwhile, oxaloacetate can be converted by malate
dehydrogenase (MDH) to produce malate and NAD+, using cytosolic NADH as a cofactor.
The malic enzyme (ME) can then convert malate and NADP+ to generate pyruvate and
NADPH. The pyruvate produced in this process can then re-enter the mitochondrion
to provide intermediates of the Krebs cycle and continue cellular respiration, and the
NADPH can serve many functions within the spermatozoon. For instance, NADPH can
be used in the biosynthesis of fatty acids for long-term energy storage or in the supply of
reducing equivalents for the thioredoxin/thioreductase system involved in the antioxidant
response of spermatozoa [31,32]. NADPH is also known to play a role in NO• production
as it serves as a cofactor for NOS activity, providing a potential connection between
citrate metabolism and NO• generation [33]. Indeed, CIC and ACLY are involved in NO•
production in macrophages during inflammation [34–36]. However, the link between the
NADPH produced from cytosolic citrate metabolism and intracellular NO• production in
capacitating spermatozoa has never been evaluated.
In this study, we hypothesized that cytosolic citrate supports human sperm capac-
itation by generating NO •. Our objectives were to determine the participation of mito-
chondrial CIC, ACLY, ME, and NOS in the process of NO • production during human
sperm capacitation.
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 3 of 17
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Materials
Percoll was purchased from GE Healthcare (Montreal, QC, Canada). Nitrocellulose
membranes (pore size, 0.22 mm) were purchased from Osmonics, Inc. (Westborough, MA,
USA). The primary antibodies, anti-phosphotyrosine and anti-phospho-ATP-citrate lyase,
were supplied by Cell Signaling Technology, Inc. (Beverly, MA, USA). The peroxidase-
conjugated secondary antibodies, goat anti-mouse IgG and donkey anti-rabbit IgG, were
supplied by Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories, Inc. (West Grove, PA, USA). PierceTM
ECL Western blotting substrate was purchased from ThermoScientific (Rockford, IL, USA).
The birthing center of the McGill University Health Center provided fetal cord serum.
Trisodium citrate dihydrate was purchased from BioShop (Burlington, ON, Canada). Mi-
tochondrial citrate transport protein inhibitor, SB204990, and bromopyruvic acid were
purchased from MilliporeSigma (Burlington, MA, USA). L-NG-Nitro arginine methyl ester
(L-NAME) was purchased from Cayman Chemicals (Ann Arbor, MI, USA). Pisum sativum
agglutinin conjugated to FITC (PSA-FITC) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Chemical
Co. Diaminofluorescein-2 diacetate (DAF-2DA) was supplied by Calbiochem (San Diego,
CA, USA). The other chemicals used were of reagent grade or higher.
2.2. Human Sperm Preparation
Semen samples were obtained from 20 fertile volunteers between the ages of 21 and
30 years old by masturbation after 72 h of sexual abstinence. All donors were recruited
at the McGill University Health Centre with informed consent and were non-smokers
and of good health with no known illnesses. The exclusion criteria were the presence of
abnormal semen parameters (low sperm count (>200 × 106 spermatozoa/mL), motility
(≥70% progressive motility), and normal spermatozoa (≥32%) according to World Health
Organization (WHO) guidelines on semen evaluation [37], and the inability of spermatozoa
to undergo in vitro capacitation and acrosome reaction. Samples were then incubated at
37 ◦C for 30 min to allow liquefaction followed by centrifugation at 2300 × g for 30 min
at room temperature over a four-layer Percoll gradient (95%, 60%, 40%, and 20% Percoll
bottom-to-top, made with isotonic HEPES buffered saline (HBS) and deionized water).
Highly motile spermatozoa from the 95% fraction and the 65–95% interface were recovered
and diluted to 150 × 106 or 250 × 106 cells/mL in Biggers, Whitten, and Whittingham
medium (BWW-REG; 91.5 mM NaCl, 4.6 mM KCl, 1.7 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM KH2PO4, 1.2 mM
MgSO4, 5.6 mM D-glucose, 0.25 mM sodium pyruvate, 21.6 mM sodium lactate, and 20 mM
HEPES, pH 7.95) [ 38]. In experiments that required the absence of energy substrates,
spermatozoa were instead prepared in BWW medium with no energy substrates (BWW-
NES), omitting the addition of sodium pyruvate, sodium lactate, and D-glucose. The
prepared sperm samples were diluted to 30 × 106 or 50 × 106 cells per mL (either in BWW-
REG or BWW-NES) and supplemented with 10% fetal cord serum ultrafiltrate (FCSu), a
known inducer of capacitation in human spermatozoa [39]. Each sample was incubated for
3.5 h at 37 ◦C in the presence and absence of the following compounds: trisodium citrate (5,
10, 15, and 20 mM), mitochondrial citrate transport inhibitor (0.5 mM), the ACLY inhibitor
SB204990 (30 µM), the ME inhibitor bromopyruvic acid (100 µM), and the NOS inhibitor
L-NAME (1 mM). Concentrations of citrate and each of the inhibitors used were considered
based on the reported concentrations of citrate in the seminal plasma of fertile men, as well
as IC50 values.
2.3. SDS-P AGE and Immunoblotting
Each prepared human sperm sample was supplemented with electrophoresis sample
buffer containing 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and phosphatase inhibitors (0.1 mM sodium
vanadate, 20 mM glycerol phosphate, and 5 mM sodium fluoride). Samples were then
heated at 97 ◦C for 5 min and centrifuged at 21,000× g for 5 min at room temperature. The
supernatant of each sample was loaded into a 10% polyacrylamide gel, electrophoresed,
and electrotransferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane. The membranes were blocked
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 4 of 17
for 1 h with 5% skim milk in Tris-buffered saline with Tween 20 (TTBS 1X), followed
by overnight incubation at 4 ◦C with either anti-phosphotyrosine or anti-phospho-ATP-
citrate lyase primary antibodies (1:10,000 and 1:500, respectively) in antibody buffer (TBS
1X, 0.1% Tween 20, 25 mg/mL BSA, and deionized water). Following primary antibody
incubation, the membranes were washed 5 times for 10 min in TTBS 1X and incubated
for 1 h in either goat anti-mouse or donkey anti-rabbit secondary antibodies (diluted at
1:2500 in TTBS 1X) at room temperature. Once the secondary antibody was removed,
the membranes were washed 5 times for 10 min in TTBS 1X and soaked in ECL solution
(luminol enhancer and peroxide) for 5 min. Imaging was carried out using the Amersham
Imager 600 supplied by GE Healthcare (Montreal, QC, Canada). The relative intensity of
each protein band was determined using Image J software version 2.1.0/1.53c (National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA), standardized to the corresponding band on the
silver-stained membrane, and normalized to the respective control.
2.4. Silver Staining
Following SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting, the nitrocellulose membranes were washed
3 times for 10 min in deionized water and incubated in silver stain solution (2% w/v
trisodium citrate, 0.8% w/v FeSO4, and 0.2% w/v AgNO3 in deionized water) [40]. Once a
maximum signal was obtained, the membrane was washed with deionized water. Two to
three drops of Farmer’s reducer (0.05% sodium carbonate, 0.15% potassium hexacyanofer-
rate, and 0.3% thiosulfate) was then added to the water to enhance staining, followed by
membrane imaging.
2.5. Sperm Motility and Viability Analysis
Sperm samples were loaded onto a Makler chamber, and sperm motility was deter-
mined using the HT-IVOS II CASA system set at 37 ◦C (Hamilton Thorne, Beverly, MA,
USA). The total and progressive motility values of at least 200 spermatozoa were saved
for analysis.
To determine sperm viability, the prepared sperm samples were incubated in hypo-
osmotic swelling solution (75 mM fructose and 25 mM sodium citrate dihydrate) for 30 min
at 37 ◦C. The samples were then loaded onto a Superfrost microscope slide provided by
Fisher Scientific (Ottawa, ON, Canada) and covered with a cover slip. A minimum of
200 spermatozoa were counted at 20X magnification using the HT-IVOS II CASA micro-
scope, and the percentage of viable spermatozoa was determined based on the WHO
guidelines [37].
2.6. Nitric Oxide Quantification
Highly motile Percoll-selected preparations of human spermatozoa at 250 × 106 cells
per mL were incubated with 10 µM diaminofluorescein-2 diacetate (DAF-2 DA, a sensitive
and specific fluorescent probe for intracellular NO•) for 30 min at 37 ◦C [21]. The treated
samples were then diluted to 50 × 106 cells per mL and incubated for 3.5 h at 37 ◦C with
or without 10% FCSu, citrate, and/or 30 µM ACLY inhibitor SB204990. Each sample was
centrifuged for 5 min at 600× g, and the pellet was resuspended in HBS 1X containing 2%
paraformaldehyde. A 10 µL aliquot was pipetted onto a Superfrost slide, and a drop of
ProLong Antifade with 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) was added. The samples
were then smeared across the microscope slide and covered with a cover slip. Fluorescence
intensity for at least 200 spermatozoa was analyzed using a Zeiss Axiophot microscope with
a 450–490 nm bandpass excitation filter, and levels of NO• were determined by obtaining
the average corrected total cell fluorescence (CTCF) using Image J software.
2.7. Citrate Quantification
Citrate levels were measured by spectrofluorometry using an enzyme-based kit
(ab83396) from Abcam (Toronto, ON, Canada). Samples of Percoll-selected spermato-
zoa were incubated in BWW-NES at 2 × 106 cells per tube, with or without FCSu and
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 5 of 17
0.5 mM CIC inhibitor, either before or after an incubation period at 37 ◦C for 3.5 h. Each
sample was deproteinized using 4 M perchloric acid (PCA) and 2 M potassium hydroxide
(KOH), and fluorescence was measured at Ex/Em 535/587 nm using a TECAN M200
Pro Multimode plate reader (Männedorf, ZH, Switzerland). Since 10% FCSu contained
36 µM ± 2.1 SEM citrate, the fluorescence of non-capacitated and FCSu-containing samples
were normalized to their respective controls (0 h without the CIC inhibitor) and expressed
in arbitrary units (a.u.).
2.8. Assessment of Sperm Acrosome Reaction
Sperm samples were capacitated with FCSu at 37 ◦C for 3.5 h in BWW-REG following
treatment with 0.5 mM CIC inhibitor, 30 µM SB204990 (ACLY inhibitor), or 100 µM bro-
mopyruvic acid (ME inhibitor) in the presence and absence of citrate. Samples were then
centrifuged for 5 min at 600× g, and the pellet was resuspended in fresh BWW medium
containing 10 µM progesterone upon incubation at 37 ◦C for 30 min to induce the acro-
some reaction [41]. Each sample was centrifuged for 5 min at 600× g, and the pellet was
fixed in 95% ethanol. Samples were smeared on a Superfrost microscope slide, air dried,
and incubated 30 µg/mL PSA-FITC at 37 ◦C for 5 min. Slides were washed and covered
with a coverslip, and the percentage of reacted acrosomes among 200 spermatozoa was
determined using a Leica DMI6000 microscope (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany).
2.9. Statistical Analysis
All results are presented as mean ± standard error. The normal data distribution was
confirmed using the Shapiro–Wilk test. The homogeneity of variances was determined
using the Bartlett test. The ANOVA test was used to determine whether there were
statistical differences between groups, and Tukey’s test was used to assess specific post hoc
comparisons among groups. The p ≤ 0.05 value was regarded as statistically significant.
3. Results
3.1. Citrate Supports Human Sperm Capacitation
Sperm capacitation was determined by quantifying protein tyrosine phosphorylation
levels in spermatozoa incubated in BWW-NES (lacking energy substrates pyruvate, lactate,
and glucose). The addition of the capacitation inducer FCSu in these samples promoted
an increase in tyrosine phosphorylation, which was further increased when spermatozoa
were supplemented with 5 and 10 mM citrate (Figure 1a). In samples incubated with both
5 and 10 mM citrate, levels of capacitation were comparable to spermatozoa incubated
with FCSu in BWW-REG containing pyruvate, lactate, and glucose. Importantly, the total
motility, progressive motility, and viability of spermatozoa incubated with 5 and 10 mM
citrate with or without FCSu were not significantly impaired, indicating that these citrate
concentrations have no effect on overall sperm health (Figure 1b). These results indicate
that citrate alone cannot promote sperm capacitation but is sufficient to support it when
spermatozoa are incubated with FCSu.
It should be noted, however, that spermatozoa incubated with higher concentrations
of citrate (15 and 20 mM) in BWW-NES exhibited decreased tyrosine phosphorylation,
at levels comparable to spermatozoa incubated in FCSu alone. The supplementation of
spermatozoa with these high concentrations of citrate also impaired total and progressive
motility, but not viability. In the absence of FCSu, the incubation of spermatozoa with
20 mM citrate significantly reduced total and progressive motility; in the presence of FCSu,
supplementation with both 15 and 20 mM citrate impaired motility.
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 6 of 17
Antioxidants 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 18 
 
 
In addition, following incubation of samples for 3.5 h with FCSu, levels of intracellu-
lar NO● were found to be increased in spermato zoa incubated with citrate in a dose-de-
pendent manner (Figure 1c). This result highlights that citrate may be supporting capaci-
tation through the production of low levels of NO ●, yet excessive citrate may promote 
oxidative stress, leading to the impairment of capacitation. 
 
Figure 1. Citrate supports human sperm capacitation. (a) Human spermatozoa incubated with 5 and 
10 mM citrate in BWW-NES (containing no energy substrates) supported tyrosine phosphorylation 
(P-Tyr) when FCSu was present, at levels compar able to spermatozoa incubated with FCSu in reg-
ular BWW (BWW REG containing py ruvate, lactate, and glucose).  (b) Incubation of capacitating 
spermatozoa with 5 and 10 mM citrate has no eﬀect on total sperm motility, progressive motility, or 
sperm viability. Incubation with 15 and 20 mM citrate impairs total and progressive motility, with 
no impact on sperm viability. (c) NO● quantiﬁcation using DAF-2DA reveals increased intracellular 
NO● production with FCSu, with a further increase  in spermatozoa supplemented with 5, 10, 15, 
and 20 mM citrate. The results were obtained with sperm samples from di ﬀerent healthy donors. 
Relative intensities and percent values are expressed as mean ± SEM (* p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 
0.005, # means higher than other samples, ANOVA and Tukey’s test, n = 4). 
3.2. Cytosolic Citrate Is Consumed during Human Sperm Capacitation In Vitro 
Next, citrate levels were quantiﬁed in spermatozoa incubated in BWW-NES with 0.5 
mM of a competitive inhibitor of the mitochondrial citrate transporter (CIC) and FCSu as 
a capacitation inducer. After 3.5 h of incubation at 37 °C, levels of citrate were signiﬁcantly 
decreased in all samples (Figure 2). In non-ca pacitated samples (lacking FCSu), the pres-
ence of the CIC inhibitor did not aﬀect levels of citrate at 0 or 3.5 h of incubation. However, 
in samples containing FCSu after 3.5 h, higher citrate levels were observed in spermatozoa 
capacitated in the presence of the CIC inhibitor when compared to samples capacitated in 
FCSu alone, indicating decreased citrate consumption. The concentration of citrate in 10% 
FCSu was found to be 36 µM ± 2.1 SEM. 
Figure 1. Citrate supports human sperm capacitation. (a) Human spermatozoa incubated with 5 and
10 mM citrate in BWW-NES (containing no energy substrates) supported tyrosine phosphorylation
(P-Tyr) when FCSu was present, at levels comparable to spermatozoa incubated with FCSu in
regular BWW (BWW REG containing pyruvate, lactate, and glucose). (b) Incubation of capacitating
spermatozoa with 5 and 10 mM citrate has no effect on total sperm motility, progressive motility, or
sperm viability. Incubation with 15 and 20 mM citrate impairs total and progressive motility, with
no impact on sperm viability. (c) NO• quantification using DAF-2DA reveals increased intracellular
NO• production with FCSu, with a further increase in spermatozoa supplemented with 5, 10, 15, and
20 mM citrate. The results were obtained with sperm samples from different healthy donors. Relative
intensities and percent values are expressed as mean ± SEM (* p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 0.005,
# means higher than other samples, ANOVA and Tukey’s test,n = 4).
In addition, following incubation of samples for 3.5 h with FCSu, levels of intracellular
NO• were found to be increased in spermatozoa incubated with citrate in a dose-dependent
manner (Figure 1c). This result highlights that citrate may be supporting capacitation
through the production of low levels of NO•, yet excessive citrate may promote oxidative
stress, leading to the impairment of capacitation.
3.2. Cytosolic Citrate Is Consumed during Human Sperm Capacitation In Vitro
Next, citrate levels were quantified in spermatozoa incubated in BWW-NES with
0.5 mM of a competitive inhibitor of the mitochondrial citrate transporter (CIC) and FCSu as
a capacitation inducer. After 3.5 h of incubation at 37 ◦C, levels of citrate were significantly
decreased in all samples (Figure 2). In non-capacitated samples (lacking FCSu), the presence
of the CIC inhibitor did not affect levels of citrate at 0 or 3.5 h of incubation. However, in
samples containing FCSu after 3.5 h, higher citrate levels were observed in spermatozoa
capacitated in the presence of the CIC inhibitor when compared to samples capacitated in
FCSu alone, indicating decreased citrate consumption. The concentration of citrate in 10%
FCSu was found to be 36 µM ± 2.1 SEM.
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 7 of 17
Antioxidants 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Cytosolic citrate is consumed in the proce ss of human sperm capacitation. Spermatozoa 
incubated in non-capacitating conditions (NC) for 3.5 h at 37 °C in BWW-NES exhibit decreased 
citrate levels compared to samples at 0 h. In samples containing the capacitation inducer FCSu, the 
presence of 0.5 mM CIC inhibitor leads to decreased citrate consumption after 3.5 h when compared 
to samples incubated in FCSu alone. The resu lts were obtained with sperm samples from di ﬀerent 
healthy donors. Citrate levels are expressed in ar bitrary units (a.u.) ± SEM and normalized to the 
NC or FCSu controls at 0 h, representing two distinct groups (** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 0.001, ANOVA and 
Tukey’s test, n = 6). 
3.3. Mitochondrial Citrate Transport Supports Human Sperm Capacitation 
The participation of mitochondrial citrate transport in sperm capacitation was then 
established in human spermatozoa capacitating in regular BWW medium (BWW-REG) 
with 0.5 mM CIC inhibitor. The presence of CIC inhibitor in the medium prevented FCSu-
induced capacitation, as determined by the low tyrosine phosphorylation levels in treated 
spermatozoa both in the presence and absence of citrate (Figure 3a). This e ﬀect was con-
sistent in spermatozoa capacitated in BWW-NES and in samples incubated in BWW-REG 
with 3 mg/mL BSA and 25 mM bicarbonate (another known capacitation inducer system) 
(Supplementary Figures S1 and S2, respectively). Importantly, total sperm motility, pro-
gressive motility, and sperm viability were all una ﬀected by both citrate and the mito-
chondrial CIC inhibitor, demonstrating that any eﬀect of reduced tyrosine phosphoryla-
tion was not due to any toxic eﬀects of the CIC inhibitor (Figure 3b). 
 
Figure 3. Mitochondrial citrate transport supports human sperm capacitation. ( a) Spermatozoa ca-
pacitated with FCSu in BWW-REG in the presence of 0.5 mM of a competitive inhibitor of the mito-
chondrial citrate transporter (C IC) exhibit decreased tyrosine phosphorylation (P-Tyr) in the 
Figure 2. Cytosolic citrate is consumed in the process of human sperm capacitation. Spermatozoa
incubated in non-capacitating conditions (NC) for 3.5 h at 37 ◦C in BWW-NES exhibit decreased
citrate levels compared to samples at 0 h. In samples containing the capacitation inducer FCSu, the
presence of 0.5 mM CIC inhibitor leads to decreased citrate consumption after 3.5 h when compared
to samples incubated in FCSu alone. The results were obtained with sperm samples from different
healthy donors. Citrate levels are expressed in arbitrary units (a.u.) ± SEM and normalized to the
NC or FCSu controls at 0 h, representing two distinct groups (** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 0.001, ANOVA and
Tukey’s test, n = 6).
3.3. Mitochondrial Citrate Transport Supports Human Sperm Capacitation
The participation of mitochondrial citrate transport in sperm capacitation was then
established in human spermatozoa capacitating in regular BWW medium (BWW-REG)
with 0.5 mM CIC inhibitor. The presence of CIC inhibitor in the medium prevented
FCSu-induced capacitation, as determined by the low tyrosine phosphorylation levels in
treated spermatozoa both in the presence and absence of citrate (Figure 3a). This effect
was consistent in spermatozoa capacitated in BWW-NES and in samples incubated in
BWW-REG with 3 mg/mL BSA and 25 mM bicarbonate (another known capacitation
inducer system) (Supplementary Figures S1 and S2, respectively). Importantly, total sperm
motility, progressive motility, and sperm viability were all unaffected by both citrate
and the mitochondrial CIC inhibitor, demonstrating that any effect of reduced tyrosine
phosphorylation was not due to any toxic effects of the CIC inhibitor (Figure 3b).
Antioxidants 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Cytosolic citrate is consumed in the proce ss of human sperm capacitation. Spermatozoa 
incubated in non-capacitating conditions (NC) for 3.5 h at 37 °C in BWW-NES exhibit decreased 
citrate levels compared to samples at 0 h. In samples containing the capacitation inducer FCSu, the 
presence of 0.5 mM CIC inhibitor leads to decreased citrate consumption after 3.5 h when compared 
to samples incubated in FCSu alone. The resu lts were obtained with sperm samples from di ﬀerent 
healthy donors. Citrate levels are expressed in ar bitrary units (a.u.) ± SEM and normalized to the 
NC or FCSu controls at 0 h, representing two distinct groups (** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 0.001, ANOVA and 
Tukey’s test, n = 6). 
3.3. Mitochondrial Citrate Transport Supports Human Sperm Capacitation 
The participation of mitochondrial citrate transport in sperm capacitation was then 
established in human spermatozoa capacitating in regular BWW medium (BWW-REG) 
with 0.5 mM CIC inhibitor. The presence of CIC inhibitor in the medium prevented FCSu-
induced capacitation, as determined by the low tyrosine phosphorylation levels in treated 
spermatozoa both in the presence and absence of citrate (Figure 3a). This e ﬀect was con-
sistent in spermatozoa capacitated in BWW-NES and in samples incubated in BWW-REG 
with 3 mg/mL BSA and 25 mM bicarbonate (another known capacitation inducer system) 
(Supplementary Figures S1 and S2, respectively). Importantly, total sperm motility, pro-
gressive motility, and sperm viability were all una ﬀected by both citrate and the mito-
chondrial CIC inhibitor, demonstrating that any eﬀect of reduced tyrosine phosphoryla-
tion was not due to any toxic eﬀects of the CIC inhibitor (Figure 3b). 
 
Figure 3. Mitochondrial citrate transport supports human sperm capacitation. ( a) Spermatozoa ca-
pacitated with FCSu in BWW-REG in the presence of 0.5 mM of a competitive inhibitor of the mito-
chondrial citrate transporter (C IC) exhibit decreased tyrosine phosphorylation (P-Tyr) in the 
Figure 3. Mitochondrial citrate transport supports human sperm capacitation. ( a) Spermatozoa
capacitated with FCSu in BWW-REG in the presence of 0.5 mM of a competitive inhibitor of the
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 8 of 17
mitochondrial citrate transporter (CIC) exhibit decreased tyrosine phosphorylation (P-Tyr) in the
presence and absence of 5 mM citrate, indicating an impairment of capacitation. ( b) Inhibition of
mitochondrial CIC does not affect total sperm motility, progressive motility, or sperm viability. The
results were obtained with sperm samples from different healthy donors. Relative intensities and
percent values are expressed as mean ± SEM (* p ≤ 0.05, ANOVA and Tukey’s test,n = 4).
3.4. ATP-Citrate Lyase Supports Human Sperm Capacitation
We then investigated the role of ATP-citrate lyase (ACLY) in sperm capacitation by de-
termining tyrosine phosphorylation levels in spermatozoa capacitating in BWW-REG with
SB204990, an inhibitor of ACLY. Tyrosine phosphorylation levels were decreased in sperma-
tozoa treated with 30 µM SB204990 in the presence and absence of citrate (Figure 4a). The
inhibition of sperm ACLY also decreased levels of tyrosine phosphorylation in BWW-NES
and in BWW-REG with BSA and bicarbonate as an inducer of capacitation (Supplementary
Figures S1 and S2, respectively). No effect on total sperm motility, progressive motility, or
sperm viability was observed, demonstrating no effect on overall sperm health (Figure 4b).
Antioxidants 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 18 
 
 
presence and absence of 5 mM citrate, indicating an impairment of capacitation. ( b) Inhibition of 
mitochondrial CIC does not aﬀect total sperm motility, progressive motility, or sperm viability. The 
results were obtained with sperm samples from di ﬀerent healthy donors. Relative intensities and 
percent values are expressed as mean ± SEM (* p ≤ 0.05, ANOVA and Tukey’s test, n = 4). 
3.4. ATP-Citrate Lyase Supports Human Sperm Capacitation 
We then investigated the role of ATP-citrate lyase (ACLY) in sperm capacitation by 
determining tyrosine phosphorylation levels in spermatozoa capacitating in BWW-REG 
with SB204990, an inhibitor of ACLY. Tyrosine phosphorylation levels were decreased in 
spermatozoa treated with 30 µM SB204990 in the presence and absence of citrate (Figure 
4a). The inhibition of sperm ACLY also decreased levels of tyrosine phosphorylation in 
BWW-NES and in BWW-REG with BSA and bica rbonate as an inducer of capacitation 
(Supplementary Figures S1 and S2, respectively). No e ﬀect on total sperm motility, pro-
gressive motility, or sperm viabilit y was observed, demonstrating no e ﬀect on overall 
sperm health (Figure 4b). 
 
Figure 4. ATP-citrate lyase supports human sperm capacitation. ( a) Spermatozoa capacitating in 
BWW-REG with 30 µM SB204990, an inhibitor of ATP-citrate lyase (ACLY), show decreased tyrosine 
phosphorylation in the presence and absence of 5 mM citrate. ( b) Incubation of spermatozoa with 
30 µM SB204990 or citrate has no eﬀect on total sperm motility, progressive motility, or sperm via-
bility. The results were obtained with sperm samples from diﬀerent healthy donors. Relative inten-
sities and percent values are expressed as mean ± SEM (* p ≤ 0.05, ANOVA and Tukey’s test, n = 4). 
3.5. ATP-Citrate Lyase Is Activated during Sperm Capacitation 
We followed by examining whether ACLY activation occurs during sperm capacita-
tion by determining levels of phosphorylated ACLY (P-ACLY). P-ACLY levels were found 
to be increased in spermatozoa incubated in BWW-REG supplemented with the capacita-
tion inducer FCSu and further increased when citrate was present in the capacitation me-
dia (Figure 5). We also observed increased AC LY activation in spermatozoa capacitated 
with FCSu and citrate in BWW-NES (Supplementary Figure S3). These results aligned well 
with the patterns of tyrosine phosphorylation that were observed, where citrate increased 
levels of FCSu-induced capacitation. 
Figure 4. ATP-citrate lyase supports human sperm capacitation. ( a) Spermatozoa capacitating in
BWW-REG with 30 µM SB204990, an inhibitor of ATP-citrate lyase (ACLY), show decreased tyrosine
phosphorylation in the presence and absence of 5 mM citrate. (b) Incubation of spermatozoa with
30 µM SB204990 or citrate has no effect on total sperm motility, progressive motility, or sperm viability.
The results were obtained with sperm samples from different healthy donors. Relative intensities and
percent values are expressed as mean ± SEM (* p ≤ 0.05, ANOVA and Tukey’s test,n = 4).
3.5. ATP-Citrate Lyase Is Activated during Sperm Capacitation
We followed by examining whether ACLY activation occurs during sperm capacitation
by determining levels of phosphorylated ACLY (P-ACLY). P-ACLY levels were found to
be increased in spermatozoa incubated in BWW-REG supplemented with the capacitation
inducer FCSu and further increased when citrate was present in the capacitation media
(Figure 5). We also observed increased ACLY activation in spermatozoa capacitated with
FCSu and citrate in BWW-NES (Supplementary Figure S3). These results aligned well with
the patterns of tyrosine phosphorylation that were observed, where citrate increased levels
of FCSu-induced capacitation.
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 9 of 17
Antioxidants 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 5. ATP-citrate lyase is activated during human sperm capacitation. Phospho-ATP-citrate ly-
ase (P-ACLY) levels reveal increased ACLY activation in spermatozoa incubated in BWW-REG with 
the capacitation inducer FCSu, which is further incr eased in the presence of 10 mM citrate. Levels 
of P-ACLY are consistent with tyrosine phosphorylation patterns in the same samples. The results 
were obtained with sperm samples from diﬀerent healthy donors. Relative intensities are expressed 
as mean ± SEM (* p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 0.005 ANOVA and Tukey’s test, n = 6). 
3.6. Malic Enzyme Supports Human Sperm Capacitation 
The next step was to determine the import ance of the malic enzyme (ME) in sperm 
capacitation. Here, capacitating spermatozoa were incubated in BWW-REG with 100 µM 
bromopyruvic acid (BPA), a non-competitive inhibitor of ME, in the presence and absence 
of citrate. In each condition, the incubation of capacitating spermatozoa with BPA led to a 
signiﬁcant decrease in capacitation (Figure 6a). The same e ﬀect was observed in sperma-
tozoa incubated in BWW-NES, and in samp les incubated in BWW-REG with BSA and 
bicarbonate as an inducer of capacitation (Supplementary Figures S1 and S2, respectively). 
The presence of BPA did not a ﬀect total sperm motility, progressive motility, or sperm 
viability (Figure 6b). Thus, the conversion of malate to pyruvate and NADPH was found 
to play an important role in the process of capacitation. 
Figure 5. ATP-citrate lyase is activated during human sperm capacitation. Phospho-ATP-citrate lyase
(P-ACLY) levels reveal increased ACLY activation in spermatozoa incubated in BWW-REG with the
capacitation inducer FCSu, which is further increased in the presence of 10 mM citrate. Levels of
P-ACLY are consistent with tyrosine phosphorylation patterns in the same samples. The results were
obtained with sperm samples from different healthy donors. Relative intensities are expressed as
mean ± SEM (* p ≤ 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01, *** p ≤ 0.005 ANOVA and Tukey’s test,n = 6).
3.6. Malic Enzyme Supports Human Sperm Capacitation
The next step was to determine the importance of the malic enzyme (ME) in sperm
capacitation. Here, capacitating spermatozoa were incubated in BWW-REG with 100 µM
bromopyruvic acid (BPA), a non-competitive inhibitor of ME, in the presence and absence
of citrate. In each condition, the incubation of capacitating spermatozoa with BPA led to
a significant decrease in capacitation (Figure 6a). The same effect was observed in sper-
matozoa incubated in BWW-NES, and in samples incubated in BWW-REG with BSA and
bicarbonate as an inducer of capacitation (Supplementary Figures S1 and S2, respectively).
The presence of BPA did not affect total sperm motility, progressive motility, or sperm
viability (Figure 6b). Thus, the conversion of malate to pyruvate and NADPH was found to
play an important role in the process of capacitation.
3.7. Citrate Metabolism Supports the Ability of Spermatozoa to Undergo Acrosome Reaction
To validate whether CIC, ACLY, and ME are involved in sperm capacitation, the
ability of spermatozoa to undergo the acrosome reaction was assessed, as only capacitated
spermatozoa may undergo this process. Spermatozoa capacitated with FCSu in BWW-
REG were incubated with the CIC inhibitor, SB204990 (ACLY inhibitor), or bromopyruvic
acid (ME inhibitor) in the presence and absence of citrate. Following the 3.5-h incubation
period, only samples treated with FCSu or FCSu with 5 mM citrate could undergo the
progesterone-induced acrosome reaction (Figure 7). Notably, samples incubated with each
of the respective inhibitors exhibited significantly lower levels of the acrosome reaction
and were comparable to that observed in the non-capacitated control. These results were
consistent with the tyrosine phosphorylation described above and confirm the need for
citrate metabolism in human sperm capacitation.
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 10 of 17
Antioxidants 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Malic enzyme supports human sperm capacitation. (a) Spermatozoa capacitated in BWW-
REG with FCSu in the presence of 100 µM bromopyruvic acid (BPA ), an inhibitor of the malic en-
zyme (ME), show decreased tyrosine phosphorylation in the presence and absence of 5 mM citrate. 
(b) Incubation of spermatozoa with 100 µM BPA or citrate has no eﬀect on total motility, progressive 
motility, or viability of capacitating spermatozoa. The results were obtained with sperm samples 
from diﬀerent healthy donors. Relative intensities and percent values are expressed as mean ± SEM 
(* p ≤ 0.05, ANOVA and Tukey’s test, n = 4). 
3.7. Citrate Metabolism Supports the Ability of Spermatozoa to Undergo Acrosome Reaction 
To validate whether CIC, ACLY, and ME are involved in sperm capacitation, the abil-
ity of spermatozoa to undergo the acrosome reaction was assessed, as only capacitated 
spermatozoa may undergo this process. Spermatozoa capacitated with FCSu in BWW-
REG were incubated with the CIC inhibitor, SB204990 (ACLY inhibitor), or bromopyruvic 
acid (ME inhibitor) in the presence and absence of citrate. Following the 3.5-hour incuba-
tion period, only samples treated with FCSu  or FCSu with 5 mM citrate could undergo 
the progesterone-induced acrosome reaction (Figure 7). Notably, samples incubated with 
each of the respective inhibitors exhibited signiﬁcantly lower levels of the acrosome reac-
tion and were comparable to that observed in  the non-capacitated control. These results 
were consistent with the tyrosine phosphorylation described above and conﬁrm the need 
for citrate metabolism in human sperm capacitation. 
Figure 6. Malic enzyme supports human sperm capacitation. (a) Spermatozoa capacitated in BWW-
REG with FCSu in the presence of 100 µM bromopyruvic acid (BPA), an inhibitor of the malic
enzyme (ME), show decreased tyrosine phosphorylation in the presence and absence of 5 mM citrate.
(b) Incubation of spermatozoa with 100 µM BPA or citrate has no effect on total motility, progressive
motility, or viability of capacitating spermatozoa. The results were obtained with sperm samples
from different healthy donors. Relative intensities and percent values are expressed as mean ± SEM
(* p ≤ 0.05, ANOVA and Tukey’s test,n = 4).
Antioxidants 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Citrate metabolism supports the ability of spermatozoa to undergo the acrosome reaction. 
Incubation of spermatozoa in BWW-REG with 0.5 mM CIC inhibitor, 30 µM SB204990 (ACLY inhib-
itor), or 100 µM bromopyruvic acid (ME inhibito r) decreases the percentage of progesterone-in-
duced acrosome reaction in the presence and abse nce of 5 mM citrate. The results were obtained 
with sperm samples from diﬀerent healthy donors. Percent values are expressed as mean ± SEM (# 
means higher than other samples, ANOVA and Tukey’s test, n = 4). 
3.8. Nitric Oxide Production Is Involved in Citrate-Mediated Capacitation 
To elucidate whether NO● synthesis occurs in citrate-mediated capacitation, sperma-
tozoa capacitated with FCSu were supplemented with 1 mM L-NG-Nitro arginine methyl 
ester (L-NAME), with or without 10 mM citr ate. L-NAME is a competitive inhibitor of 
NOS previously reported to decrease capaci tation in mammalian spermatozoa [20,42]. 
Here, the incubation of spermatozoa in L-NAME resulted in a signi ﬁcant decrease in ty-
rosine phosphorylation in the presence and absence of citrate, validating the need for NO● 
in sperm capacitation (Figure 8a). The same eﬀect of L-NAME on sperm capacitation was 
observed in spermatozoa incubated in BWW-NES (Supplementary Figure S4). 
NO● levels were then quantiﬁed in capacitating spermatozoa incubated with FCSu in 
the presence and absence of citrate and the ATP-citrate lyase inhibitor SB204990. In sper-
matozoa incubated with FCSu alone, NO ● levels were signiﬁcantly increased when com-
pared to the non-capacitated control (Figure 8b). In samples supplemented with 10 mM 
citrate, levels of NO ● were increased further. However, when incubated in capacitating 
conditions with 30 µM SB204990, NO● levels were decreased in the presence and absence 
of citrate, highlighting the role of ACLY in NO● production during sperm capacitation. 
 
Figure 8. Nitric oxide production is required for citrate-mediated capacitation. (a) Human sperma-
tozoa incubated in BWW-REG with 1 mM L-NG-Nitro arginine methyl ester (L-NAME, an inhibitor 
Figure 7. Citrate metabolism supports the ability of spermatozoa to undergo the acrosome reac-
tion. Incubation of spermatozoa in BWW-REG with 0.5 mM CIC inhibitor, 30 µM SB204990 (ACLY
inhibitor), or 100 µM bromopyruvic acid (ME inhibitor) decreases the percentage of progesterone-
induced acrosome reaction in the presence and absence of 5 mM citrate. The results were obtained
with sperm samples from different healthy donors. Percent values are expressed as mean ± SEM
(# means higher than other samples, ANOVA and Tukey’s test,n = 4).
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 11 of 17
3.8. Nitric Oxide Production Is Involved in Citrate-Mediated Capacitation
To elucidate whether NO• synthesis occurs in citrate-mediated capacitation, sperma-
tozoa capacitated with FCSu were supplemented with 1 mM L-NG-Nitro arginine methyl
ester (L-NAME), with or without 10 mM citrate. L-NAME is a competitive inhibitor of NOS
previously reported to decrease capacitation in mammalian spermatozoa [ 20,42]. Here,
the incubation of spermatozoa in L-NAME resulted in a significant decrease in tyrosine
phosphorylation in the presence and absence of citrate, validating the need for NO • in
sperm capacitation (Figure 8a). The same effect of L-NAME on sperm capacitation was
observed in spermatozoa incubated in BWW-NES (Supplementary Figure S4).
Antioxidants 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Citrate metabolism supports the ability of spermatozoa to undergo the acrosome reaction. 
Incubation of spermatozoa in BWW-REG with 0.5 mM CIC inhibitor, 30 µM SB204990 (ACLY inhib-
itor), or 100 µM bromopyruvic acid (ME inhibito r) decreases the percentage of progesterone-in-
duced acrosome reaction in the presence and abse nce of 5 mM citrate. The results were obtained 
with sperm samples from diﬀerent healthy donors. Percent values are expressed as mean ± SEM (# 
means higher than other samples, ANOVA and Tukey’s test, n = 4). 
3.8. Nitric Oxide Production Is Involved in Citrate-Mediated Capacitation 
To elucidate whether NO● synthesis occurs in citrate-mediated capacitation, sperma-
tozoa capacitated with FCSu were supplemented with 1 mM L-NG-Nitro arginine methyl 
ester (L-NAME), with or without 10 mM citr ate. L-NAME is a competitive inhibitor of 
NOS previously reported to decrease capaci tation in mammalian spermatozoa [20,42]. 
Here, the incubation of spermatozoa in L-NAME resulted in a signi ﬁcant decrease in ty-
rosine phosphorylation in the presence and absence of citrate, validating the need for NO● 
in sperm capacitation (Figure 8a). The same eﬀect of L-NAME on sperm capacitation was 
observed in spermatozoa incubated in BWW-NES (Supplementary Figure S4). 
NO● levels were then quantiﬁed in capacitating spermatozoa incubated with FCSu in 
the presence and absence of citrate and the ATP-citrate lyase inhibitor SB204990. In sper-
matozoa incubated with FCSu alone, NO ● levels were signiﬁcantly increased when com-
pared to the non-capacitated control (Figure 8b). In samples supplemented with 10 mM 
citrate, levels of NO ● were increased further. However, when incubated in capacitating 
conditions with 30 µM SB204990, NO● levels were decreased in the presence and absence 
of citrate, highlighting the role of ACLY in NO● production during sperm capacitation. 
 
Figure 8. Nitric oxide production is required for citrate-mediated capacitation. (a) Human sperma-
tozoa incubated in BWW-REG with 1 mM L-NG-Nitro arginine methyl ester (L-NAME, an inhibitor 
Figure 8. Nitric oxide production is required for citrate-mediated capacitation. (a) Human spermato-
zoa incubated in BWW-REG with 1 mM L-NG-Nitro arginine methyl ester (L-NAME, an inhibitor of
nitric oxide synthase) show decreased capacitation in the presence and absence of 10 mM citrate, with
FCSu as an inducer of capacitation. (b) NO• quantification using DAF-2DA reveals decreased NO•
production in capacitating spermatozoa incubated in BWW-REG with the ACLY inhibitor SB204990
but increased NO• production in spermatozoa incubated with citrate. The results were obtained with
sperm samples from different healthy donors. Relative intensities and percent values are expressed
as mean ± SEM (* p < 0.05, ** p ≤ 0.01, ANOVA and Tukey’s test,n = 4).
NO• levels were then quantified in capacitating spermatozoa incubated with FCSu
in the presence and absence of citrate and the ATP-citrate lyase inhibitor SB204990. In
spermatozoa incubated with FCSu alone, NO• levels were significantly increased when
compared to the non-capacitated control (Figure 8b). In samples supplemented with 10 mM
citrate, levels of NO• were increased further. However, when incubated in capacitating
conditions with 30 µM SB204990, NO• levels were decreased in the presence and absence
of citrate, highlighting the role of ACLY in NO• production during sperm capacitation.
4. Discussion
The results presented in this study reveal a novel role of citrate during human sperm
capacitation. Although it is known that spermatozoa are exposed to high concentrations
of citrate via seminal plasma, its functions in spermatozoa beyond its canonical role in
energy production have remained elusive. In this study, we show evidence that citrate
supports sperm capacitation in humans and propose a pathway whereby mitochondrial
citrate is exported to the cytosol through the mitochondrial citrate transporter (CIC) and
metabolized by ATP-citrate lyase (ACLY) and the malic enzyme (ME) (Figure 9). The
NADPH produced in this process can then be used by sperm NOS to produce NO•, which
is known to modulate tyrosine phosphorylation events in sperm capacitation through
activation of cAMP/PKA, PI3K/AKT, and ERK signaling pathways.
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 12 of 17
Antioxidants 2024, 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 9. Cytosolic citrate metabolism promotes NO● production in capacitating human spermato-
zoa. Extracellular citrate can enter the cytosol th rough carriers such as the sodium-citrate cotrans-
porter (NaCT), and mitochondrial citrate can be transported to the cytoso l via the mitochondrial 
citrate transporter (CIC). Cytosolic citrate is then converted to acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate via ATP-
citrate lyase (ACLY). The oxaloacetate produced is converted by malate dehydrogenase (MDH) to 
yield malate, which is then converted by the malic enzyme (ME) to NADPH and pyruvate. Pyruvate 
can re-enter the mitochondrion via the mitochondr ial pyruvate carrier (MPC) to continue energy 
production through the Krebs cycle. NADPH can be used by cytosolic nitric oxide synthase (NOS) 
to yield nitric oxide (NO●) to promote sperm capacitation. Created with BioRender.com. 
Capacitating spermatozoa incubated with the mitochondrial CIC inhibitor were then 
shown to exhibit decreased tyrosine phosphorylation and the inability to undergo the 
acrosome reaction upon trea tment with progesterone, con ﬁrming the need of citrate ex-
port from mitochondria to support capacitation. This ﬁnding agrees with a previous re-
port in which the mitochondrial CIC was shown to play a role in human sperm capacita-
tion [47]. Surprisingly, the supplementation of these samples with 5 mM citrate did not 
rescue capacitation levels in CIC-inhibited spermatozoa, yet this can be explained by the 
restriction of CIC-dependent malate import into the mitochondrion, which is used in the 
citric acid cycle to continue energy production. In addition, the accumulation of cytosolic 
malate arising from CIC inhibition may result in excessive NO ● production based on our 
proposed pathway, which would promote oxid ative stress, thereby impairing capacita-
tion. 
The role of ACLY in human sperm capacitation was then investigated. Here, a de-
crease in tyrosine phosphorylation and acrosome-reacted spermatozoa was observed 
upon ACLY inhibition in the presence and absence of citrate, demonstrating the require-
ment of the conversion of citrate to acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate for sperm capacitation. 
Consistent with this ﬁnding, the incubation of spermatozoa with the capacitation inducer 
FCSu was shown to increase levels of phosphorylated ACLY (P-ACLY), and the supple-
mentation with citrate, an allosteric activator of the enzyme, led to a further increase in P-
ACLY. The increase in ACLY activation corresponded to an increase in tyrosine phosphor-
ylation in the same samples, validating that active ACLY plays a role in the capacitation 
process. 
Following the inhibition of ME with BPA, a similar reduction in tyrosine phosphory-
lation and acrosome reaction was observed in the presence and absence of citrate. We pro-
pose that the NADPH generated by ME downstream of citrate metabolism may be used 
as a substrate for NOS, providing a mechanism by which citrate metabolism can promote 
intracellular NO
● production during capacitation. However, it should be noted that sper-
matozoa possess other sources of NADPH. For instance, the activity of glucose-6-phos-
phate dehydrogenase (G6PD) and 6-phosphog luconate dehydrogenase (6PGD) from the 
Figure 9. Cytosolic citrate metabolism promotes NO• production in capacitating human spermatozoa.
Extracellular citrate can enter the cytosol through carriers such as the sodium-citrate cotransporter
(NaCT), and mitochondrial citrate can be transported to the cytosol via the mitochondrial citrate
transporter (CIC). Cytosolic citrate is then converted to acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate via ATP-citrate
lyase (ACLY). The oxaloacetate produced is converted by malate dehydrogenase (MDH) to yield
malate, which is then converted by the malic enzyme (ME) to NADPH and pyruvate. Pyruvate
can re-enter the mitochondrion via the mitochondrial pyruvate carrier (MPC) to continue energy
production through the Krebs cycle. NADPH can be used by cytosolic nitric oxide synthase (NOS) to
yield nitric oxide (NO•) to promote sperm capacitation. Created with BioRender.com (accessed on 8
June 2024).
Following the incubation of highly motile spermatozoa with FCSu in a medium
devoid of energy substrates (BWW-NES), tyrosine phosphorylation levels were higher than
that of non-treated cells, indicating that capacitation occurred. This finding highlights
that spermatozoa contain sufficient energy metabolites to undergo capacitation, which
may originate from the FCSu used or endogenous sources loaded into the cell through
contact with the epidydimal fluid and seminal plasma before capacitation. Moreover, the
incubation of these samples with 5 and 10 mM citrate resulted in a greater increase in
tyrosine phosphorylation at levels similar to spermatozoa incubated with FCSu in BWW-
REG containing pyruvate, lactate, and glucose. This finding reveals that, although citrate
cannot induce capacitation alone, it supports the capacitation process when the capacitation
inducer is present.
When spermatozoa were incubated with high concentrations of citrate (15 and 20 mM),
levels of tyrosine phosphorylation in capacitating spermatozoa were decreased at lev-
els similar to the non-capacitated control. This was consistent with decreased total and
progressive sperm motility but not sperm viability in the same samples. These findings
may result from the dose-dependent increase in intracellular NO • production that was
observed after the capacitation media was supplemented with increasing concentrations of
citrate. Indeed, although low NO • levels are required for signaling during capacitation,
excessive NO• levels would result in oxidative stress that would impair the spermatozoon’s
ability to capacitate [43–46]. Consistent with this study, previous research from our lab has
suggested that increasing NO• levels impairs total and progressive sperm motility but not
viability [46]. Thus, the spermatozoon must be exposed to an optimal concentration range
of citrate for optimal capacitation.
Citrate levels were then quantified in capacitating spermatozoa incubated with FCSu
and an inhibitor of the mitochondrial CIC. Unsurprisingly, citrate levels in spermatozoa
were significantly higher before capacitation (0 h) than after capacitation (3.5 h), suggesting
the utilization of this metabolite by the spermatozoon during capacitation. However, citrate
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 13 of 17
consumption after 3.5 h was significantly lower in spermatozoa treated with FCSu in the
presence of the CIC inhibitor compared to that of spermatozoa treated with FCSu alone.
This indicates that cytosolic citrate exported from the mitochondrion is metabolized during
human sperm capacitation. We also found that 10% FCSu contains about 36 µM citrate,
which may partially explain why spermatozoa incubated in BWW-NES with FCSu showed
increased tyrosine phosphorylation with no other exogenous sources of energy metabolites
present in the capacitation medium.
Capacitating spermatozoa incubated with the mitochondrial CIC inhibitor were then
shown to exhibit decreased tyrosine phosphorylation and the inability to undergo the
acrosome reaction upon treatment with progesterone, confirming the need of citrate export
from mitochondria to support capacitation. This finding agrees with a previous report in
which the mitochondrial CIC was shown to play a role in human sperm capacitation [47].
Surprisingly, the supplementation of these samples with 5 mM citrate did not rescue
capacitation levels in CIC-inhibited spermatozoa, yet this can be explained by the restriction
of CIC-dependent malate import into the mitochondrion, which is used in the citric acid
cycle to continue energy production. In addition, the accumulation of cytosolic malate
arising from CIC inhibition may result in excessive NO• production based on our proposed
pathway, which would promote oxidative stress, thereby impairing capacitation.
The role of ACLY in human sperm capacitation was then investigated. Here, a decrease
in tyrosine phosphorylation and acrosome-reacted spermatozoa was observed upon ACLY
inhibition in the presence and absence of citrate, demonstrating the requirement of the
conversion of citrate to acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate for sperm capacitation. Consistent
with this finding, the incubation of spermatozoa with the capacitation inducer FCSu was
shown to increase levels of phosphorylated ACLY (P-ACLY), and the supplementation
with citrate, an allosteric activator of the enzyme, led to a further increase in P-ACLY. The
increase in ACLY activation corresponded to an increase in tyrosine phosphorylation in the
same samples, validating that active ACLY plays a role in the capacitation process.
Following the inhibition of ME with BPA, a similar reduction in tyrosine phospho-
rylation and acrosome reaction was observed in the presence and absence of citrate. We
propose that the NADPH generated by ME downstream of citrate metabolism may be used
as a substrate for NOS, providing a mechanism by which citrate metabolism can promote
intracellular NO• production during capacitation. However, it should be noted that sper-
matozoa possess other sources of NADPH. For instance, the activity of glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PD) and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase (6PGD) from the pen-
tose phosphate pathway, as well as cytosolic NADP+-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase
(IDPc), can lead to the production of cytosolic NADPH [32,48,49]. While NADPH can origi-
nate from different sources, it is important to note that NADPH is used in other cellular
processes within the spermatozoon, including the lipid biosynthesis needed for long-term
energy storage and the maintenance of peroxiredoxin (PRDX) antioxidant activity, which
the spermatozoon requires to protect itself from excessive oxidative damage [31,32,50,51].
Thus, the human spermatozoon is equipped with a sufficient supply of NADPH to support
NO• production and PRDX activity to maintain low levels of ROS necessary for sperm
capacitation and avoid oxidative stress.
The effects of CIC, ACLY, and ME inhibition on sperm capacitation were not specific to
one definite capacitation inducer, since the same inhibitory effects on CIC, ACLY, and ME in
FCSu-capacitated spermatozoa were observed in spermatozoa capacitated with the widely
used BSA/bicarbonate system. These findings highlight the role of citrate metabolism in
the physiological process of sperm capacitation, rather than a specific phenomenon driven
solely by FCSu.
Following incubation of capacitating spermatozoa with inhibitors of CIC, ACLY, and
ME, we also investigated any potential effects on sperm motility or viability. Importantly,
the inhibition of each of these proteins did not affect total motility, progressive motility, or
sperm viability, indicating that any decrease in tyrosine phosphorylation was not a result
of cell death but rather a direct effect on capacitation.
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 14 of 17
To determine how citrate may play a role in NO• production, capacitating sperma-
tozoa were incubated with L-NAME, an inhibitor of NOS, in the presence and absence of
citrate. Here, it was determined that L-NAME decreased tyrosine phosphorylation in each
condition. Our results align well with previous studies in which L-NAME was shown to
decrease human sperm capacitation, validating the need for NOS in this process [20,52].
This was observed in spermatozoa incubated in both BWW-REG and BWW-NES, indicat-
ing that the effect was not altered by the presence of other exogenous energy substrates.
Knowing that ME inhibition results in a similar reduction in sperm capacitation, it can be
said that the NADPH generated from ME can be used by NOS in the production of NO•
during capacitation. These findings were supported by the decreased intracellular NO •
levels observed in capacitating spermatozoa incubated with the ACLY inhibitor SB204990,
further reinforcing the relationship between citrate metabolism and NO• production during
sperm capacitation.
Altogether, we examined the role of the oxaloacetate generated through cytosolic
citrate metabolism. However, it must be noted that the acetyl-CoA generated from ACLY
activity may also play an important role in sperm capacitation. For instance, acetyl-CoA
may play a role in energy storage in spermatozoa through the initiation of fatty acid
synthesis. Fatty acid synthesis may provide the spermatozoon with long-term energy
stores that can be used through β-oxidation during the capacitation process, as it has been
previously suggested that the energy requirement for spermatozoa to reach the ovum
exceeds what is supplied by glycolysis alone [53–55]. In addition, the acetyl-CoA produced
from cytosolic citrate metabolism may be implicated in protein acetylation, which has
been shown to play a role in capacitation. For instance, acetylproteomic studies revealed
capacitation-associated functions of lysine-acetylated proteins in human spermatozoa, and
inhibition of sperm deacetylases resulted in the onset of phosphorylation of PKA substrates
and calcium influx in mouse spermatozoa [ 56–58]. Thus, while this study highlights
an important aspect of cytosolic citrate metabolism in the context of ROS generation,
further studies would be required to fully understand how citrate supports the process of
sperm capacitation.
In this study, the variability of semen samples from different donors must be con-
sidered as a potential limitation, since the response to the treatment could vary among
individuals. In addition, although we present citrate as a metabolite that supports capac-
itation, it should be noted that citrate has other effects on the spermatozoon that must
be carefully balanced to maintain capacitation. For instance, citrate is a known calcium
chelator, and a decrease in intracellular calcium levels may impair the spermatozoon’s
motility and ability to capacitate [59–61]. However, this potential issue was addressed by
adding CaCl2 to each BWW medium, allowing the spermatozoa to be exposed to sufficient
calcium for capacitation. Citrate is also a known alkalization agent, as its metabolism leads
to the production of bicarbonate ions; thus, it can contribute to the increase in intracellular
pH and activation of adenylyl cyclase necessary for capacitation [58–60].
Understanding the role of citrate metabolism in human sperm capacitation and how
this process may be dysregulated in male infertility would greatly help improve current
treatment options for infertile couples, such as in vitro fertilization (IVF) or intrauterine
insemination (IUI). For instance, pre-treatment of spermatozoa with citrate prior to IVF
or IUI, or the inclusion of citrate in commercially available IVF media may simulate the
loading of citrate of citrate from the seminal plasma that occurs in the spermatozoa of fertile
men. Although further studies are necessary to test the effects of citrate supplementation
in these contexts, this presents a potential increase in capacitation in the spermatozoa of
infertile men, leading to increased success rates in these assisted reproductive technologies.
5. Conclusions
This study reveals a novel role for cytosolic citrate in human sperm capacitation, in
a process involving intracellular NO • generation. The incubation of spermatozoa with
optimal concentrations of citrate was shown to support capacitation and increase intracel-
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 15 of 17
lular NO• production, while the presence of inhibitors of mitochondrial CIC, ACLY, ME,
and NOS suppressed capacitation. Altogether, these findings provide evidence that citrate
exits the mitochondrion through CIC converted by ACLY and ME, yielding NADPH that
can be used by NOS to produce intracellular NO• during human sperm capacitation. This
research will help understand the regulation of citrate in sperm capacitation, in an effort to
improve the overall success rates of current treatment options for infertile couples.
Supplementary Materials: The following supporting information can be downloaded at: https:
//www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/antiox13080885/s1, Figure S1: Inhibition of CIC, ACLY, and ME
decreases sperm capacitation in BWW-NES; Figure S2: Inhibition of CIC, ACLY, and ME decreases
BSA-bicarbonate-induced sperm capacitation; Figure S3: ATP-citrate lyase is activated during sperm
capacitation in BWW-NES; Figure S4: Inhibition of NOS decreases sperm capacitation in BWW-NES.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, D.L. and C.O.; methodology, D.L. and C.O.; validation,
D.L.; formal analysis, D.L. and C.O.; investigation, D.L. and C.O.; resources, C.O.; data curation,
D.L. and C.O.; writing—original draft preparation, D.L.; writing—review and editing, D.L. and C.O.;
visualization, D.L. and C.O.; supervision, C.O.; project administration, D.L.; funding acquisition, D.L.
and C.O. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), grant
number PJT-165962, Desjardins Studentship to D.L., and Graduate Excellence Fellowship to D.L.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted in accordance with the Declara-
tion of Helsinki and approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Research Institute, McGill
University Health Centre (SDR-08-046).
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
Data Availability Statement: Data are contained within the article.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The funders had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript; or
in the decision to publish the results.
References
1. World Health Organization. Infertility Prevalence Estimates, 1990–2021; WHO Press: Geneva, Switzerland, 2023; ISBN 978-92-4-
006831-5.
2. Bushnik, T.; Cook, J.L.; Yuzpe, A.A.; Tough, S.; Collins, J. Estimating the prevalence of infertility in Canada.Hum. Reprod. 2012, 27,
738–746. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Fallara, G.; Cazzaniga, W.; Boeri, L.; Capogrosso, P .; Candela, L.; Pozzi, E.; Belladelli, F.; Schifano, N.; Ventimiglia, E.; Abbate,
C.; et al. Male factor infertility trends throughout the last 10 years: Report from a tertiary-referral academic andrology centre.
Andrology 2021, 9, 610–617. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Leslie, S.W.; Soon-Sutton, T.L.; Khan, M.A.B. Male Infertility; StatPearls Publishing: Treasure Island, FL, USA, 2024.
5. Longo, V .; Forleo, A.; Provenzano, S.P .; Coppola, L. Seminal VOCs Analysis Investigating Sperm Quality Decline—New Studies
to Improve Male Fertility Contrasting Population Ageing. Lect. Notes Electr. Eng. 2019, 544, 501–508. [CrossRef]
6. Chávez, J.C.; Carrasquel-Martínez, G.; Hernández-Garduño, S.; Matamoros Volante, A.; Treviño, C.L.; Nishigaki, T.; Darszon, A.
Cytosolic and Acrosomal pH Regulation in Mammalian Sperm. Cells 2024, 13, 865. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. De Jonge, C. Biological basis for human capacitation-revisited. Hum. Reprod. Update 2017, 23, 289–299. [CrossRef]
8. Leclerc, P .; de Lamirande, E.; Gagnon, C. Cyclic adenosine 3’,5’monophosphate-dependent regulation of protein tyrosine
phosphorylation in relation to human sperm capacitation and motility. Biol. Reprod. 1996, 55, 684–692. [CrossRef]
9. Leclerc, P .; de Lamirande, E.; Gagnon, C. Regulation of protein-tyrosine phosphorylation and human sperm capacitation by
reactive oxygen derivatives. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 1997, 22, 643–656. [CrossRef]
10. de Lamirande, E.; O’Flaherty, C. Sperm activation: Role of reactive oxygen species and kinases. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2008, 1784,
106–115. [CrossRef]
11. O’Flaherty, C.; de Lamirande, E.; Gagnon, C. Positive role of reactive oxygen species in mammalian sperm capacitation: Triggering
and modulation of phosphorylation events. Free Radic. Biol. Med. 2006, 41, 528–540. [CrossRef]
12. Serafini, S.; O’Flaherty, C. Redox Regulation to Modulate Phosphorylation Events in Human Spermatozoa. Antioxid. Redox Signal.
2022, 37, 437–450. [CrossRef]
13. Benko, F.; Urminská, D.; ˇDuraˇ cka, M.; Tvrdá, E. Signaling Roleplay between Ion Channels during Mammalian Sperm Capacitation.
Biomedicines 2023, 11, 2519. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 16 of 17
14. Marín-Briggiler, C.I.; Tezón, J.G.; Miranda, P .V .; Vazquez-Levin, M.H. Effect of incubating human sperm at room temperature on
capacitation-related events. Fertil. Steril. 2002, 77, 252–259. [CrossRef]
15. Puga Molina, L.C.; Luque, G.M.; Balestrini, P .A.; Marín-Briggiler, C.I.; Romarowski, A.; Buffone, M.G. Molecular Basis of Human
Sperm Capacitation. Front. Cell Dev. Biol. 2018, 6, 72. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. de Lamirande, E.; Leclerc, P .; Gagnon, C. Capacitation as a regulatory event that primes spermatozoa for the acrosome reaction
and fertilization. Mol. Hum. Reprod. 1997, 3, 175–194. [CrossRef]
17. de Lamirande, E.; Harakat, A.; Gagnon, C. Human sperm capacitation induced by biological fluids and progesterone, but not by
NADH or NADPH, is associated with the production of superoxide anion. J. Androl. 1998, 19, 215–225. [CrossRef]
18. de Lamirande, E.; Gagnon, C. Capacitation-associated production of superoxide anion by human spermatozoa. Free Radic. Biol.
Med. 1995, 18, 487–495. [CrossRef]
19. Zini, A.; De Lamirande, E.; Gagnon, C. Low levels of nitric oxide promote human sperm capacitation in vitro. J. Androl. 1995, 16,
424–431. [CrossRef]
20. Herrero, M.B.; de Lamirande, E.; Gagnon, C. Nitric oxide regulates human sperm capacitation and protein-tyrosine phosphoryla-
tion in vitro. Biol. Reprod. 1999, 61, 575–581. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21. de Lamirande, E.; Lamothe, G. Reactive oxygen-induced reactive oxygen formation during human sperm capacitation. Free Radic.
Biol. Med. 2009, 46, 502–510. [CrossRef]
22. Herrero, M.B.; Pérez Martínez, S.; Viggiano, J.M.; Polak, J.M.; de Gimeno, M.F. Localization by indirect immunofluorescence of
nitric oxide synthase in mouse and human spermatozoa. Reprod. Fertil. Dev. 1996, 8, 931–934. [CrossRef]
23. Lewis, S.E.; Donnelly, E.T.; Sterling, E.S.; Kennedy, M.S.; Thompson, W.; Chakravarthy, U. Nitric oxide synthase and nitrite
production in human spermatozoa: Evidence that endogenous nitric oxide is beneficial to sperm motility. Mol. Hum. Reprod. 1996,
2, 873–878. [CrossRef]
24. Costello, L.C.; Franklin, R.B. Concepts of citrate production and secretion by prostate. 1. Metabolic relationships. Prostate 1991, 18,
25–46. [CrossRef]
25. Zöpfgen, A.; Priem, F.; Sudhoff, F.; Jung, K.; Lenk, S.; Loening, S.A.; Sinha, P . Relationship between semen quality and the seminal
plasma components carnitine, alpha-glucosidase, fructose, citrate and granulocyte elastase in infertile men compared with a
normal population. Hum. Reprod. 2000, 15, 840–845. [CrossRef]
26. Gruhl, S.L.; Ho, L.M.; Sim, M.Y.X.; Lee, S.N.; Yu, S.L.; Yong, T.T.; Lim, L.S.; Rajesh, H. Seminal biomarkers and their correlations to
semen parameters in subfertile men. Eur. J. Obstet. Gynecol. Reprod. Biol. X 2023, 19, 100229. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Gupta, A.; Mahdi, A.A.; Ahmad, M.K.; Shukla, K.K.; Jaiswer, S.P .; Shankhwar, S.N. 1H NMR spectroscopic studies on human
seminal plasma: A probative discriminant function analysis classification model. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 2011, 54, 106–113.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
28. Hamamah, S.; Seguin, F.; Barthelemy, C.; Akoka, S.; Le Pape, A.; Lansac, J.; Royere, D. 1H nuclear magnetic resonance studies of
seminal plasma from fertile and infertile men. J. Reprod. Fertil. 1993, 97, 51–55. [CrossRef]
29. Miki, K. Energy metabolism and sperm function. Soc. Reprod. Fertil. Suppl. 2007, 65, 309–325.
30. Visconti, P .E. Sperm Bioenergetics in a Nutshell. Biol. Reprod. 2012, 87, 72. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. Fernandez, M.C.; O’Flaherty, C. Peroxiredoxin 6 is the primary antioxidant enzyme for the maintenance of viability and DNA
integrity in human spermatozoa. Hum. Reprod. 2018, 33, 1394–1407. [CrossRef]
32. O’Flaherty, C. Redox regulation of mammalian sperm capacitation. Asian J. Androl. 2015, 17, 583–590. [CrossRef]
33. Herrero, M.B.; Gagnon, C. Nitric oxide: A novel mediator of sperm function. J. Androl. 2001, 22, 349–356. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Infantino, V .; Iacobazzi, V .; Menga, A.; Avantaggiati, M.L.; Palmieri, F. A key role of the mitochondrial citrate carrier (SLC25A1) in
TNFα- and IFNγ-triggered inflammation. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2014, 1839, 1217–1225. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Infantino, V .; Iacobazzi, V .; Palmieri, F.; Menga, A. ATP-citrate lyase is essential for macrophage inflammatory response.Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 2013, 440, 105–111. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Infantino, V .; Convertini, P .; Cucci, L.; Panaro, M.A.; Di Noia, M.A.; Calvello, R.; Palmieri, F.; Iacobazzi, V . The mitochondrial
citrate carrier: A new player in inflammation. Biochem. J. 2011, 438, 433–436. [CrossRef]
37. World Health Organization.WHO Laboratory Manual for the Examination and Processing of Human Semen; World Health Organization:
Geneva, Switzerland, 2021; ISBN 978-92-4-0030787.
38. Biggers, J.D.; Whitten, W.K.; Whittingham, D.G. The culture of mouse embryosin vitro. In Methods in Mammalian Embryology;
WH Freeman Co.: San Francisco, CA, USA, 1971.
39. de Lamirande, E.; Gagnon, C. Human sperm hyperactivation and capacitation as parts of an oxidative process. Free Radic. Biol.
Med. 1993, 14, 157–166. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40. Jacobson, G.; Karsnas, P . Important parameters in semi-dry electrophoretic transfer.Electrophoresis 1990, 11, 46–52. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
41. Sagare-Patil, V .; Galvankar, M.; Satiya, M.; Bhandari, B.; Gupta, S.K.; Modi, D. Differential concentration and time dependent
effects of progesterone on kinase activity, hyperactivation and acrosome reaction in human spermatozoa.Int. J. Androl. 2012, 35,
633–644. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. O’Flaherty, C.; Rodriguez, P .; Srivastava, S. L-arginine promotes capacitation and acrosome reaction in cryopreserved bovine
spermatozoa. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2004, 1674, 215–221. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Antioxidants 2024, 13, 885 17 of 17
43. Luo, Y.; Zhu, Y.; Basang, W.; Wang, X.; Li, C.; Zhou, X. Roles of Nitric Oxide in the Regulation of Reproduction: A Review.Front.
Endocrinol. 2021, 12, 752410. [CrossRef]
44. Ramya, T.; Misro, M.M.; Sinha, D.; Nandan, D.; Mithal, S. Altered levels of seminal nitric oxide, nitric oxide synthase, and
enzymatic antioxidants and their association with sperm function in infertile subjects. Fertil. Steril. 2011, 95, 135–140. [CrossRef]
45. Balercia, G.; Moretti, S.; Vignini, A.; Magagnini, M.; Mantero, F.; Boscaro, M.; Ricciardo-Lamonica, G.; Mazzanti, L. Role of nitric
oxide concentrations on human sperm motility. J. Androl. 2004, 25, 245–249. [CrossRef]
46. Morielli, T.; O’Flaherty, C. Oxidative stress impairs function and increases redox protein modifications in human spermatozoa.
Reproduction 2015, 149, 113–123. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Cappello, A.R.; Guido, C.; Santoro, A.; Santoro, M.; Capobianco, L.; Montanaro, D.; Madeo, M.; Andò, S.; Dolce, V .; Aquila, S. The
mitochondrial citrate carrier (CIC) is present and regulates insulin secretion by human male gamete. Endocrinology 2012, 153,
1743–1754. [CrossRef]
48. Koh, H.J.; Lee, S.M.; Son, B.G.; Lee, S.H.; Ryoo, Z.Y.; Chang, K.T.; Park, J.W.; Park, D.C.; Song, B.J.; Veech, R.L.; et al. Cytosolic
NADP+-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase plays a key role in lipid metabolism. J. Biol. Chem. 2004, 279, 39968–39974.
[CrossRef]
49. Stanton, R.C. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, NADPH, and cell survival. IUBMB Life 2012, 64, 362–369. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
50. Jump, D. Mammalian Fatty Acid Elongases. In Methods in Molecular Biology; Humana Press: Totowa, NJ, USA, 2009; Volume 579,
pp. 375–389. [CrossRef]
51. Lee, D.; Moawad, A.R.; Morielli, T.; Fernandez, M.C.; O’Flaherty, C. Peroxiredoxins prevent oxidative stress during human sperm
capacitation. Mol. Hum. Reprod. 2017, 23, 106–115. [CrossRef]
52. Thundathil, J.; de Lamirande, E.; Gagnon, C. Nitric oxide regulates the phosphorylation of the threonine-glutamine-tyrosine
motif in proteins of human spermatozoa during capacitation. Biol. Reprod. 2003, 68, 1291–1298. [CrossRef]
53. Cosson, J. ATP: The sperm movement energizer. In Adenosine Triphosphate: Chemical Properties, Biosynthesis and Functions in Cells;
Nova Publisher Inc.: New York, NY, USA, 2013; pp. 1–46.
54. Furse, S.; Kusinski, L.C.; Ray, A.; Glenn-Sansum, C.; Williams, H.E.L.; Koulman, A.; Meek, C.L. Relative Abundance of Lipid
Metabolites in Spermatozoa across Three Compartments. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2022, 23, 11655. [CrossRef]
55. Amaral, A. Energy metabolism in mammalian sperm motility. WIREs Mech. Dis. 2022, 14, e1569. [CrossRef]
56. Ritagliati, C.; Luque, G.M.; Stival, C.; Baro Graf, C.; Buffone, M.G.; Krapf, D. Lysine acetylation modulates mouse sperm
capacitation. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 13334. [CrossRef]
57. Sun, G.; Jiang, M.; Zhou, T.; Guo, Y.; Cui, Y.; Guo, X.; Sha, J. Insights into the lysine acetylproteome of human sperm.J. Proteom.
2014, 109, 199–211. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Yu, H.; Diao, H.; Wang, C.; Lin, Y.; Yu, F.; Lu, H.; Xu, W.; Li, Z.; Shi, H.; Zhao, S.; et al. Acetylproteomic analysis reveals functional
implications of lysine acetylation in human spermatozoa (sperm). Mol. Cell. Proteom. 2015, 14, 1009–1023. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59. Davenport, A.; Tolwani, A. Citrate anticoagulation for continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) in patients with acute
kidney injury admitted to the intensive care unit. NDT Plus 2009, 2, 439–447. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. Ford, W.C.; Harrison, A. The role of citrate in determining the activity of calcium ions in human semen.Int. J. Androl. 1984, 7,
198–202. [CrossRef]
61. Finkelstein, M.; Etkovitz, N.; Breitbart, H. Ca(2+) signaling in mammalian spermatozoa. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 2020, 516, 110953.
[CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.