Citation: Santarsiero, A.; Todisco, S.;
Convertini, P .; De Leonibus, C.;
Infantino, V . Transcriptional
Regulation and Function of Malic
Enzyme 1 in Human Macrophage
Activation. Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
biomedicines12092089
Academic Editor: Chak-Sum Ho
Received: 1 August 2024
Revised: 4 September 2024
Accepted: 10 September 2024
Published: 13 September 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
biomedicines
Article
Transcriptional Regulation and Function of Malic Enzyme 1 in
Human Macrophage Activation
Anna Santarsiero 1
 , Simona Todisco 1, Paolo Convertini 1, Chiara De Leonibus 2,3 and Vittoria Infantino 2, *
1 Department of Science, University of Basilicata, 85100 Potenza, Italy; anna.santarsiero@unibas.it (A.S.);
simona.todisco@unibas.it (S.T.); paolo.convertini@gmail.com (P .C.)
2 Department of Health Sciences, University of Basilicata, 85100 Potenza, Italy; chiara.deleonibus@unibas.it
3 Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), 80078 Pozzuoli, Italy
* Correspondence: vittoria.infantino@unibas.it
Abstract: Macrophages represent primary players of the innate immune system. Macrophage
activation triggers several signaling pathways and is tightly associated with metabolic changes,
which drive different immune subsets. Recent studies unveil the role of various metabolic enzymes in
macrophage activation. Here, we show that malic enzyme 1 (ME1) is overexpressed in LPS-induced
macrophages. Through chromatin immunoprecipitation, we demonstrate that ME1 transcriptional
regulation is under control of NF-κB. Furthermore, ME1 activity is also increased in activated human
PBMC-derived macrophages. Notably, ME1 gene silencing decreases nitric oxide as well as reactive
oxygen species and prostaglandin E2 inflammatory mediators. Therefore, modulating ME1 provides
a potential approach for immunometabolic regulation and in turn macrophage function.
Keywords: malic enzyme 1; gene expression; NF- κB; macrophage activation; inflammation ;
immunometabolism; reactive oxygen species; nitric oxide; PGE2
1. Introduction
Malic enzyme (ME) catalyzes the reversible oxidative decarboxylation of L-malate
into pyruvate and CO2 with the reduction of NAD (P)+ to NAD (P)H in the presence of
a divalent metal ion, Mn2+ or Mg2+. This enzyme is widely distributed in all organisms,
bacteria, plants, and animals. In humans, there are three isoforms of ME: cytosolic NADP+
ME (ME1), mitochondrial NAD (P) + ME (ME2), and mitochondrial NADP + ME (ME3).
Structurally, MEs have the same homotetrameric quaternary structure, described as a
double dimer with a separate active site in each monomer. ME2 isoform presents an
allosteric site for the activator fumarate and binds to L-malate in a cooperative manner,
whereas ME1 and ME3 are non-allosteric enzymes [1].
The function of ME1 in intermediary metabolism is well known, as it supplies cytosolic
NADPH for lipogenesis and cholesterol biosynthesis and connects the glycolysis and
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle pathways through malate decarboxylation. As part of the
citrate/pyruvate shuttle, ME1 plays a role in the homeostasis of reducing equivalents. The
NADPH pool is mainly guaranteed in the cytoplasm by ME1, isocitrate dehydrogenase
(IDH1), the one-carbon cycle, and the pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) [2], the regulation
and crosstalk of which is still little known.
Different findings confirm a key function of ME1 in liver, adipose tissue, and in
cancer cells. In this context, by balancing NADPH, it has been described as a crucial
metabolic enzyme in regulating oxidative stress and biosynthesis of macromolecules [3].
Indeed, ME1 has been found increased in different kinds of cancers as well as IDH1 and
glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase (G6PD), likely preserving cancer cells from excessive
reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels and in turn damage to molecules and apoptosis [4–6].
Furthermore, ME1 activates the PPP by interacting with 6-phosphogluconate dehydro-
genase (6PGD), which is the second enzyme of this pathway, to provide NADPH [ 7].
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089. https://doi.org/10.3390/biomedicines12092089 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/biomedicines
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089 2 of 15
Therefore, ME1 knockdown is linked to oxidative stress and NADPH decrease in cancer
patients [6,8,9].
Macrophages play a major role in innate immunity by regulating inflammatory re-
sponse and safeguarding tissue homeostasis. Heterogeneity and high plasticity are hall-
marks of macrophages that show distinct phenotypes according to the microenvironmental
signals. Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands, including lipopolysaccharide (LPS), represent
critical triggers during M1 proinflammatory macrophage polarization. Conversely, po-
larization into M2 macrophages—playing a central role in tissue remodeling and tumor
promotion—is triggered by IL-4 and IL-13 [ 10]. M1 macrophages induce inflammatory
responses and fight against infections through the production of inflammatory mediators
as well as proinflammatory cytokines. However, if activated excessively and for a long time,
proinflammatory macrophages may lead to tissue damage and sustained inflammation [11].
Moreover, M1 macrophages are involved in the development and progression of chronic
inflammatory diseases [12], representing the dominant cellular population in the inflamed
joint. Recently, it was demonstrated that M1 macrophages contribute to the initiation and
progression of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) by inducing inflammation of synovial membrane
and cartilage–pannus junction. Accordingly, M1 macrophages are the predominant im-
mune cells found in RA synovium and a higher M1/M2 ratio is present in RA patients
compared to healthy subjects [12].
More recently, several features of metabolic reprogramming have been emerging in
immune cells. Macrophages regulate their activation, phenotype, and plasticity through
various mechanisms, including the modulation of specific metabolic pathways [ 13,14].
Altered amino acid (including glutamine and arginine) and glycolytic and mitochondrial
metabolism are hallmarks of the M1 macrophage subset as well as activated dendritic
cells [15]. A growing number of studies highlight that metabolic rewiring controls in-
flammatory macrophages through regulating gene expression, levels of metabolites, and
mediators of inflammation [ 16–18]. These findings have fostered investigations in im-
munometabolism. Among the immunometabolic pathways, the citrate metabolism has
been recently evaluated. During classically macrophage activation with LPS or tumor
necrosis factor alpha/interferon gamma (TNF- α/IFNγ), citrate is transported from the
mitochondria to the cytosol via the mitochondrial citrate carrier (CIC). Once in the cytosol,
citrate is cleaved by ATP citrate lyase (ACLY) into acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) and
oxaloacetate (OAA). Acetyl-CoA serves as a precursor for fatty acid or cholesterol biosyn-
thesis, but it is also a substrate for histone and protein acetylation. OAA is reduced to
malate by cytosolic malate dehydrogenase 1 (MDH1). Then, ME1 decarboxylates malate
to pyruvate with production of NADPH. It is worth noting that NADPH is a substrate
for both inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and NADPH oxidase (NOX), involved in
the synthesis of nitric oxide (NO) and ROS inflammatory mediators, respectively. Further-
more, citrate-derived acetyl-CoA can be used for prostaglandin biosynthesis by supplying
arachidonic acid for chain elongation of the essential fatty acid, linoleic acid.
We previously reported that both ACLY and SLC25A1—the gene coding CIC—are
transcriptionally upregulated via NF-κB in LPS-activated macrophages. Interestingly, ACLY
or CIC activity inhibition pulls down prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) secretion along with ROS
and NO production in classically activated macrophages [16]. More recently, citrate-derived
ACLY immunomodulatory activity has been linked to gene expression reprogramming
through histone and NF-κB acetylation [19,20]. In vivo investigations indicate that ACLY
knockdown in myeloid cell lineage improves atherosclerosis in mice [21]. Citrate pathway
dysregulation has been found in Down syndrome, sepsis, and Behçet’s syndrome [19,22].
Furthermore, both ACLY and ME1 are found upregulated in PBMC-derived macrophages
from metabolic dysfunction-associated steatohepatitis (MASH) patients [23]. An increase
in malate levels has been observed upon 4 and 24 h LPS treatment of bone marrow-derived
macrophages (BMDMs) [24]. These findings suggest a potential involvement of ME1 in
macrophage activation. However, its role has been poorly investigated until now. Here, we
demonstrate that ME1 gene expression is upregulated in LPS-triggered macrophages. ME1
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089 3 of 15
gene promoter contains a phylogenetically conserved binding site for NF-κB that is active
during macrophage activation. Accordingly, a significant increment in ME1 activity has
been observed. Furthermore, inflammatory mediators such as TNF-α, NO, ROS, and PGE2
are decreased following ME1 gene silencing in PBMC-derived macrophages triggered by
LPS alone or LPS plus IFNγ.
In summary , our study provides new insights into the function of ME1 in macrophage regu-
lation assessing its potential immunometabolic value and application ininflammatory diseases.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Analysis of GEO Datasets for ME1 Expression
The Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/, accessed
on 31 July 2024) was searched to understand whether ME1 was differently expressed in
patients suffering from immune-inflammatory disorders compared to healthy individuals.
We analyzed GSE57383 dataset (gene expression of CD14+ cells from RA, PsA, and PsO
patients with infliximab treatment) focusing on ME1 gene expression from CD14+ primary
cells from healthy controls and patients affected by RA at time point week 0, before starting
an anti-TNF therapy. We further explored GEO dataset GSE82221 (GPL10558) by selecting
normal controls and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients. The number of subjects
and relative demographic features are listed in Table 1 (GSE57383) and Table 2 (GPL10558
series GSE82221).
Table 1. Demographic features of subjects analyzed from GSE57383 dataset.
HC (n = 19) RA (n = 9)
Age, mean ± SD (years) 42.0 ± 13.3 50.8 ± 11.1
Male sex, num (%) 6 (32) 1 (11)
Female sex, num (%) 13 (68) 8 (89)
Abbreviations: HC = healthy control; RA = rheumatoid arthritis.
Table 2. Demographic features of subjects analyzed from GSE82221 (GPL10558) dataset.
HC (n = 25) SLE (n = 15)
Age, mean ± SD (years) 32.2 ± 9.0 28.0 ± 8.7
Male sex, num (%) 5 (20) 2 (13)
Female sex, num (%) 20 (80) 13 (87)
Abbreviations: HC = healthy control; SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus.
GEO2R web tool (with R program operating back end) was used for comparisons
between RA/SLE patients and healthy individuals in relative GEO series for differential
ME1 gene expression. Data are expressed as Log2 fold change between healthy individuals
and RA/SLE patients.
2.2. Isolation of Human PBMCs from Whole-Blood and Differentiation of
PBMC-Derived Macrophages
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated from anonymized human
whole-blood samples from healthy subjects. The informed consent was obtained from all
participants. This study was carried out in agreement with the Declaration of Helsinki and
the local Italian Committee on Human Research’s approved procedures (REF. TS/CEUR-
CET/CEL n.20230044811—3 November 2023). Venous blood, collected into K2 EDTA-
coated BD vacutainer tubes (Becton, Dickinson and Company, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA),
was mixed with Hanks’ Balanced Salt solution (HBSS, Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA)
at a ratio of 1:2 (v/v). PBMCs were isolated by Histopaque-1077 (Sigma-Aldrich) density
gradient centrifugation as previously described [25]. PBMCs were cultured for 3 days in
Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI) 1640 medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose,
CA, USA) supplemented with 100 ng/mL recombinant human M-CSF (Cell Guidance
Systems, St. Louis, MO, USA), 10% fetal bovine serum, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 U/mL
penicillin, and 100 µg/mL streptomycin at 37 ◦C in a humidified chamber of 5% CO2.
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089 4 of 15
2.3. RNA Interference and Treatments
The ME1 gene was transiently silenced via a specific small interfering RNA (siRNA)
targeting human ME1 (siME1, s8638, Silencer® Select, Thermo Fisher Scientific). PBMC-
derived macrophages were transfected for two consecutive days with siME1 or Negative
Control siRNA (4390843, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using Lipofectamine RNAiMax Reagent
(13778-030, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, 2 µL of siRNA (25 µM) was mixed with
3 µL Lipofectamine® RNAiMAX Reagent in 100 µL Opti-MEM Reduced Serum Medium
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were incubated at room temperature for 15 min to form
siRNA–Lipofectamine RNAiMAX complexes. The 100 µL transfection mixture was put into
each well of a 12-well plate and 1 mL of cells (1 × 106 cells) in complete growth medium
was added. Twenty-four hours after the reverse transfection, the cells were transfected
again. Cells were incubated at 37 ◦C and 5% CO2 for additional 24 h before LPS stimulation
or other further treatments.
The cells were incubated with 1 µg/mL LPS from Escherichia coli K12 (tlrl-peklps,
Invivogen, CA, USA) alone or combined with 10 ng/mL IFN γ (ImmunoTools GmbH,
Friesoythe, Germany) for up to 48 h. Where indicated, PBMC-derived macrophages
were pretreated for 1 h with 20 µM IKK Inhibitor VII (IKK16, 401486, Sigma-Aldrich),
50 µM Apocynin (178385, Sigma-Aldrich), 20 µM Rotenone (R8875, Sigma-Aldrich), or
1 mM β-Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 2’-phosphate reduced tetrasodium salt hydrate
(NADPH, N7505, Sigma-Aldrich) followed by stimulation with LPS.
2.4. Western Blot Analysis
The lysis of 2 × 106 PBMC-derived macrophages was performed in 100 µL of an
ice-cold 0.1% Nonidet P40/PBS solution carrying out three freeze–melt cycles (−80 ◦C for
8 min/40 ◦C for 4 min). After centrifugation at 8600× g at 4 ◦C for 5 min, the supernatant
was collected. A Bradford assay (Pierce™ Coomassie (Bradford) Protein Assay Kit, 23200,
Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to determine protein concentration. A 4 × Laemmli
Sample Buffer (1610747, Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) was added to 30 µg
of proteins, and the samples were boiled at 95 ◦ C for 5 min. The proteins were sepa-
rated by 12% sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and
transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes. The membranes were blocked for 1 h at room
temperature in a tris-buffered saline solution containing 0.5% Tween (TBST) and 5% nonfat
dry milk. Then, the membranes were immunostained overnight at 4 ◦C with anti-ME1
(ab97445, Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA), anti-PPARγ (sc-7273, Santa Cruz Biotechnology,
USA), anti-AMPKα1 (sc-398861, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), or anti-β–actin (ab8227, Ab-
cam) primary antibodies. After three washes with TBST, the membranes were incubated
for 1 h at room temperature with horseradish peroxidase (HRP) conjugated goat anti-rabbit
secondary antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA). The immunoreac-
tions were visualized at Chemidoc™ XRS detection system (Bio-Rad Laboratories) using
WesternBright™ ECL (Advansta, Menlo Park, CA, USA). Image Lab software (Version
5.2.1) was used for image acquisition and densitometric analysis.
2.5. Quantitative Real-Time PCR (RT-qPCR)
Total RNA was extracted from 2 × 106 cells using an RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (Qiagen,
Hilden, Germany) as specified by the manufacturer. Complementary DNA (cDNA) was
synthesized from 1 µg of total RNA by iScript ™ cDNA Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad Labora-
tories, Hercules, CA, USA) according to the following protocol: 5 min at 25 ◦C, 20 min
at 46 ◦C, and 1 min at 95 ◦C. RT-qPCR experiments were run in triplicate with human
ME1 (Hs00159110, RefSeq NM_002395.5) and β-actin (Hs01060665, RefSeq NM_001101.3)
TaqMan Gene Expression Assays (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on the 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR
System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were analyzed according to the ∆∆Ct method, as
previously reported [26]. The fold changes in ME1 expression were determined as 2−∆∆Ct.
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089 5 of 15
2.6. ME1 Activity
ME1 activity was assayed in cell extracts following the oxidative decarboxylation
of L-malate by the spectrophotometric method based on the increase in absorbance of
NADPH at 340 nm. PBMC-derived macrophages (1 × 107), treated for 0–1–2–4–8 h with
LPS, were collected and washed twice in ice-cold PBS by centrifugation at 8600 × g at
4 ◦C for 5 min. The cell pellet was resuspended in an ice-cold 0.1% Nonidet P40/PBS
solution, and three freeze–melt cycles ( −80 ◦C for 8 min/40 ◦C for 4 min) were carried
out. The supernatant was recovered after centrifugation at 8600× g at 4 ◦C for 5 min, and
the protein concentration was measured by a Bradford assay. To determine ME1 activity,
150 µg of proteins were added to the standard assay mixture made of 50 mM Tris/HCl
(pH 7.4), 0.5 mM NADP+ (Sigma-Aldrich), and 1 mM MnCI2. The reaction was started by
adding 10 mM L-malate (Sigma-Aldrich) and followed by tracking the increase in NADPH
absorbance at 340 nm at 25◦C for 20 min with a spectrophotometer (Multiskan Sky, Thermo
Fisher Scientific). The specific ME1 activity was normalized to the protein concentration
and expressed as a percentage of the control (set at 100%).
2.7. In Silico Analysis of ME1 Promoters
Gene sequences of ME1 genes from Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, Rattus norvegicus, and
Sus scrofa were retrieved as FASTA file from National Center for Biotechnology Information
(NCBI) Genome Browser (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene, accessed on 31 July 2024)
and used for in silico analysis. Promoter regions were defined as the 2 kb upstream
sequence from the start codon of each gene. AliBaba 2.1 software (http://gene-regulation.
com/pub/programs/alibaba2, accessed on 31 July 2024) was employed to predict the
potential binding sites of transcription factors within the ME1 promoter region.
2.8. ChIP-qPCR
Human PBMC-derived macrophages (5 × 106), at the end of treatment with LPS for
3 h, were fixed by 1% formaldehyde at 37 ◦C for 10 min. Subsequently, the cells were
collected by centrifugation and the cell pellet was resuspended in a lysis buffer (5 mM
Pipes pH 8.0, 85 mM KCl, 0.5% NP40, 1 × PIC). The cells were lysed by 10 strokes of
a chilled Potter-Elvehjem homogenizer and sheared by sonication at 70% power, cycle
9, for 10 min in a 0.1% SDS lysis buffer to generate chromatin fragments of 300–400 bp.
The chromatin was immunoprecipitated overnight at 4 ◦C on a rocking platform using
5 µg of anti-NF-κB/p65 specific antibody (ab16502, Abcam) and 40 µL A/G PLUS agarose
beads (SC-2003, Santa Cruz). After reverse cross-linking with RNase and Protease K, the
immunoprecipitates were purified using a PureLink™ PCR Purification Kit (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) and analyzed by qPCR using SYBR™ Green PCR Master Mix (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) and 20 pmol forward (5′-CACCCTAACACCTTGACTCTTATC-3′) and reverse
(5′-CCCTCTTTCTACAGATCCACAAC-3′) primers suitable to amplify the 227 bp region of
the human ME1 promoter containing the NF-κB binding site. The reactions were run on a
7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific).
2.9. ROS and NO Detection
The quantification of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and nitric oxide (NO) levels was
performed on PBMC-derived macrophages (1 × 106) after 24 h stimulation with LPS
or LPS + IFN γ. Where indicated, apocynin, rotenone, and NADPH were added 1 h
before LPS. ROS and NO concentrations were determined by using fluorescent probes
6-carboxy-2′, 7′-dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate (DCF-DA, Thermo Fisher Scientific,
San Jose, CA, USA) and 4-amino-5-methylamino-2′, 7′-difluorofluorescein diacetate (DAF-
FM diacetate, Thermo Fisher Scientific), respectively. In detail, cells were collected, counted,
and centrifuged at 6500 × g for 5 min. The cell pellet was resuspended in PBS to have
105 cells/100 µL. In cell suspension, 10 µM DCF-DA or 2.24 µM DAF-FM diacetate were
added. After incubation in the dark at 37◦C for 30 min, 100µL of the sample was transferred
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089 6 of 15
to triplicate wells on a black microtiter plate. Fluorescence was measured using a GloMax®
Discover Microplate Reader (Promega, Madison, WI, USA).
2.10. PGE2 and TNF-α Detection
PBMC-derived macrophages (5 × 105) were treated with LPS or LPS + IFNγ following
ME1 gene silencing. PGE2 levels were measured after 48 h of LPS or LPS + IFN-γ treatment
using a DetectX® Prostaglandin E2 High-Sensitivity Immunoassay Kit (Arbor Assays, Ann
Arbor, MI, USA) as previously reported [25].
TNF-α levels were quantified after 24 h of LPS treatment using a commercially available
ELISA kit (Immunotools, Friesoythe, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions.
2.11. Statistical Analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism software version number
8.0.2 (La Jolla, CA, USA). Results are presented as mean±standard deviation (SD) from
three independent experiments, each run at least in triplicate. For pairwise comparisons,
we used Student’s t-test when the data were normally distributed. If the data did not follow
a normal distribution, we employed the non-parametric Mann–Whitney U test. One-way
ANOVA was utilized for comparisons involving more than two groups. Tukey’s test was
used for post hoc analysis to compare every mean with every other mean. When Tukey’s
post-hoc test was performed, we used different letters in the figures to indicate significant
differences between treatments at p < 0.05. Dunnett’s test was chosen as an alternative
when we tested for differences only in comparison to unstimulated cells. The statistical
method employed for each experiment is detailed in the figure legends. The asterisks in
the figures indicate statistical significance (* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.01; and *** p < 0.001).
3. Results
3.1. ME1 Expression in Rheumatoid Arthritis and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
Considering the recent findings highlighting the role of the citrate export pathway
in macrophage activation and inflammation, we wondered if ME1—a citrate–pyruvate
shuttle enzyme—could also be involved in innate immune regulation. To this end, we
performed a preliminary analysis of disease gene expression databases to establish whether
there were differences in ME1 expression in patients affected by chronic inflammatory
diseases. Analysis of GEO dataset GSE57383 revealed a significant upregulation of ME1 in
CD14+ monocytes from patients affected by RA (mean ± SD = 5.71 ± 0.87) in comparison
to healthy individuals (mean ± SD = 4.61 ± 0.54) (Figure 1A). We also observed a slight
but significant increase in ME1 gene expression in PBMCs derived from patients with SLE
(mean ± SD = 6.02 ± 0.55) versus healthy controls (mean ± SD = 5.58 ± 0.54) (Figure 1B)
when we examined the GSE82221 (GPL10558) dataset. These data suggest a potential
involvement of ME1 in inflammatory diseases.
Biomedicines 2024, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 16  
 
Figure 1. ME1 expression levels in rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus: (A) Box 
plot with individual data points for ME1 gene expression in peripheral blood CD14 + monocytes 
from healthy controls (HC) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients from published array GSE57383. 
(B) Box plot with individual data points for ME1 gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells from healthy subjects (HC) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients from GEO dataset 
GSE82221 (GPL10558). Statistical analysis was perf ormed by using a two-tailed unpaired Mann–
Whitney U test (* p < 0.05, *** p < 0.001). 
3.2. Early Activation of ME1 in LPS-Treated Human Macrophages 
In order to investigate the role of ME1 in the metabolic reprogramming of innate 
immune cells, we performed a time course of both mRNA and protein levels in human 
PBMC-derived macrophages triggered by LPS. Real-time PCR experiments showed a sig-
nificant increase in ME1 mRNA levels after 4 h of LPS treatment. Accordingly, through 
Western blotting analysis, we observed a significant increase in the ME1 protein amount 
at the same time (Figure 2A,B). Remarkably, the ME1 enzymatic activity time course 
showed a fast and strong peak of activation following 4 h activation with LPS (Figure 2C). 
To confirm the specificity for the M1 program, protein levels of PPARγ and AMPKα1, two 
well-known markers of M2 macrophages [27,28], were evaluated. Supplementary Figure 
S1 shows a marked decrease in PPAR γ and a slight reduction in AMPK α1 in LPS-acti-
vated macrophages. All together, these result s suggest an early involvement of ME1 in 
inflammatory signaling of classically activated human macrophages.  
 
Figure 1. ME1 expression levels in rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus: (A) Box
plot with individual data points for ME1 gene expression in peripheral blood CD14+ monocytes from
healthy controls (HC) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients from published array GSE57383. (B) Box
plot with individual data points for ME1 gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
healthy subjects (HC) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients from GEO dataset GSE82221
(GPL10558). Statistical analysis was performed by using a two-tailed unpaired Mann–Whitney U test
(* p < 0.05, *** p < 0.001).
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089 7 of 15
3.2. Early Activation of ME1 in LPS-Treated Human Macrophages
In order to investigate the role of ME1 in the metabolic reprogramming of innate
immune cells, we performed a time course of both mRNA and protein levels in human
PBMC-derived macrophages triggered by LPS. Real-time PCR experiments showed a
significant increase in ME1 mRNA levels after 4 h of LPS treatment. Accordingly, through
Western blotting analysis, we observed a significant increase in the ME1 protein amount
at the same time (Figure 2A,B). Remarkably, the ME1 enzymatic activity time course
showed a fast and strong peak of activation following 4 h activation with LPS (Figure 2C).
To confirm the specificity for the M1 program, protein levels of PPAR γ and AMPKα1,
two well-known markers of M2 macrophages [ 27,28], were evaluated. Supplementary
Figure S1 shows a marked decrease in PPARγ and a slight reduction in AMPKα1 in LPS-
activated macrophages. All together, these results suggest an early involvement of ME1 in
inflammatory signaling of classically activated human macrophages.
Biomedicines 2024, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 16  
 
Figure 1. ME1 expression levels in rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus: (A) Box 
plot with individual data points for ME1 gene expression in peripheral blood CD14 + monocytes 
from healthy controls (HC) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients from published array GSE57383. 
(B) Box plot with individual data points for ME1 gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells from healthy subjects (HC) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients from GEO dataset 
GSE82221 (GPL10558). Statistical analysis was perf ormed by using a two-tailed unpaired Mann–
Whitney U test (* p < 0.05, *** p < 0.001). 
3.2. Early Activation of ME1 in LPS-Treated Human Macrophages 
In order to investigate the role of ME1 in the metabolic reprogramming of innate 
immune cells, we performed a time course of both mRNA and protein levels in human 
PBMC-derived macrophages triggered by LPS. Real-time PCR experiments showed a sig-
nificant increase in ME1 mRNA levels after 4 h of LPS treatment. Accordingly, through 
Western blotting analysis, we observed a significant increase in the ME1 protein amount 
at the same time (Figure 2A,B). Remarkably, the ME1 enzymatic activity time course 
showed a fast and strong peak of activation following 4 h activation with LPS (Figure 2C). 
To confirm the specificity for the M1 program, protein levels of PPARγ and AMPKα1, two 
well-known markers of M2 macrophages [27,28], were evaluated. Supplementary Figure 
S1 shows a marked decrease in PPAR γ and a slight reduction in AMPK α1 in LPS-acti-
vated macrophages. All together, these result s suggest an early involvement of ME1 in 
inflammatory signaling of classically activated human macrophages.  
 
Figure 2. Induction of ME1 expression and activity in LPS-stimulated human macrophages. Human
PBMC-derived macrophages were triggered by LPS, and ME1 mRNA (A), protein levels (B), and
activity (C) were evaluated over time. Panel (B) shows representative Western blotting from 3 inde-
pendent experiments, with protein levels quantified relative to β-actin and normalized to untreated
cells (0). The bottom panel in (B) displays ME1 protein quantitation across the 3 independent Western
blots. In (C), the ME1 activity is expressed as a percentage compared to the control (0). In (A,C) data
are presented as means ± SD (error bars) from 3 independent experiments. Significant differences,
where indicated in (A–C), were determined using one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple
comparison test (* p < 0.05; ** p < 0.001, *** p < 0.001).
3.3. Identification and Functionality of the NF-κB-Responsive Element in ME1 Gene Promoter
Since we found high levels of ME1 gene expression and activity in classically activated
macrophages, we wondered what molecular mechanisms were underlying this effect. To
this end, we performed an in silico analysis of the human ME1 gene promoter. This
analysis revealed the presence of an NF-κB-responsive element located at −823/−814 bp
upstream of the translational start site (Figure 3A). In order to check if the NF-κB binding
site was active in our experimental conditions, ChIP experiments were carried out by using
a p65 specific antibody, because it is well known that p50/p65 heterodimer represents
the main form of NF-κB in M1 proinflammatory macrophages [29]. Figure 3B shows that
LPS stimulation of PBMC-derived macrophages induced a strong binding of NF- κB to
the human ME1 gene promoter. Interestingly, the inhibition of NF-κB signaling through
IKK inhibitor VII markedly reduced ME1 protein content (Figure 3C). Furthermore, the
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089 8 of 15
presence of NF-κB-responsive elements in other mammals (Figure 3D) demonstrates how
important this transcriptional factor is in regulating ME1 gene expression. Our data so
far indicate that the upregulation of the human ME1 gene is under control of NF- κB in
classically activated macrophages.
Biomedicines 2024, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 16  
 
Figure 3. Effect of NF-κB on ME1 gene expression. ( A) Schematic representation showing NF- κB-
responsive element location in the human ME1 gene promoter. ( B) Human PBMC-derived macro-
phages untreated (C) or triggered by LPS (L) were used to perform chromatin immunoprecipitation 
(ChIP) analysis with an antibody against p65 (subunit of NF-κB). After immunoprecipitation, ME1 
gene promoter was analyzed in real-time PCR expe riments by specific prim ers. Differences were 
significant according to Student’s t-test (*** p < 0.001). ( C) The same cells, indicated as C and L, in 
the presence or absence of IKK inhibitor VII (IKKinhVII) were analyzed by Western blotting with a 
specific anti-ME1 antibody. Protei n levels are quantified against β-actin. Western blots presented 
are representative of 3 experiments. Means of prot ein values were normalized versus the mean of 
protein in control macrophages (C). (D) Panel displaying the location of NF-κB-responsive elements 
in promoter of mammals of the following species: Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, Rattus norvegicus,  
and Sus scrofa. Gene ID and RefSeq of each sequence are also reported. 
3.4. Effect of ME1 Gene Silencing on NO and PGE2 Secretion 
Inducible nitric oxide synthase becomes active when macrophages are exposed to 
inflammatory stimuli, such as LPS, and is responsible for huge NO generation. It is worth 
noting that NADPH is essential for iNOS activity. Indeed, the reaction of conversion of L-
arginine to NO and L-citrulline, catalyzed by iNOS, requires NADPH as cofactor. In hu-
man LPS-triggered macrophages, ME1 gene silencing caused a drastic reduction in NO 
Figure 3. Effect of NF- κB on ME1 gene expression. ( A) Schematic representation showing NF-
κB-responsive element location in the human ME1 gene promoter. ( B) Human PBMC-derived
macrophages untreated (C) or triggered by LPS (L) were used to perform chromatin immunoprecipi-
tation (ChIP) analysis with an antibody against p65 (subunit of NF-κB). After immunoprecipitation,
ME1 gene promoter was analyzed in real-time PCR experiments by specific primers. Differences
were significant according to Student’s t-test (*** p < 0.001). (C) The same cells, indicated as C and L,
in the presence or absence of IKK inhibitor VII (IKKinhVII) were analyzed by Western blotting with a
specific anti-ME1 antibody. Protein levels are quantified against β-actin. Western blots presented
are representative of 3 experiments. Means of protein values were normalized versus the mean of
protein in control macrophages (C). (D) Panel displaying the location of NF-κB-responsive elements
in promoter of mammals of the following species: Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, Rattus norvegicus, and
Sus scrofa. Gene ID and RefSeq of each sequence are also reported.
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089 9 of 15
3.4. Effect of ME1 Gene Silencing on NO and PGE2 Secretion
Inducible nitric oxide synthase becomes active when macrophages are exposed to
inflammatory stimuli, such as LPS, and is responsible for huge NO generation. It is worth
noting that NADPH is essential for iNOS activity. Indeed, the reaction of conversion of
L-arginine to NO and L-citrulline, catalyzed by iNOS, requires NADPH as cofactor. In
human LPS-triggered macrophages, ME1 gene silencing caused a drastic reduction in NO
levels, bringing levels back to baseline (Figure 4A). A similar trend was observed when we
quantified PGE2: in the presence of the specific siRNA against the human ME1 gene, PGE2
content was similar to those of unstimulated cells (C) (Figure 4B).
Biomedicines 2024, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 16  
 
Figure 4. NO and PGE2 production in ME1-silenced macrophages. Human PBMC-derived macro-
phages were transfected for two consecutive da ys with a specific siRNA targeting human ME1 
(siME1) or negative control siRNA (C). At twenty-four hours from the last gene silencing, cells were 
triggered by LPS (L) ( A,B) or LPS + IFN γ (L+ IFN γ, C and D). NO ( A–C) and PGE2 ( B–D) levels 
were determined following 24 and 48 h of LPS ± IFNγ stimulation, respectively. Data are presented 
as means ± SD (error bars) of 3 independent experiments, each with at least three replicates. Letters 
above the bars (a, b, and c) refer to statistical analysis performed by one-way ANOVA followed by 
Tukey’s post-hoc test: different letters indicate significant differences between treatments at p < 0.05. 
3.5. ROS Generation Mediated by ME1 in M1-like State Macrophages 
To ascertain the role of ME1 in the production of ROS in proinflammatory macro-
phages, we measured ROS levels in ME1-silenced PBMC-derived macrophages triggered 
by LPS or LPS + IFN γ. The combination of LPS and IFN γ led to greater ROS secretion 
(152.1 ± 5.2 % of C, Figure 5B) compared to cells activated with LPS alone (136.1 ± 2.1 % of 
C, Figure 5A). ME1 gene silencing reduced ROS levels in both cases (Figure 5A,B). Any 
off-target effects can be ruled out, as ROS levels in macrophages treated with negative 
Figure 4. NO and PGE2 production in ME1-silenced macrophages. Human PBMC-derived
macrophages were transfected for two consecutive days with a specific siRNA targeting human ME1
(siME1) or negative control siRNA (C). At twenty-four hours from the last gene silencing, cells were
triggered by LPS (L) (A,B) or LPS + IFNγ (L+ IFNγ, C and D). NO (A–C) and PGE2 (B–D) levels were
determined following 24 and 48 h of LPS ± IFNγ stimulation, respectively. Data are presented as
means ± SD (error bars) of 3 independent experiments, each with at least three replicates. Letters
above the bars (a, b, and c) refer to statistical analysis performed by one-way ANOVA followed by
Tukey’s post-hoc test: different letters indicate significant differences between treatments at p < 0.05.
Synergistic induction by LPS and IFN- γ is known to strengthen the activation of
the proinflammatory macrophage phenotype via canonical, inflammatory NF-κB target
genes [30]. Therefore, we performed the same experiments in the presence of both LPS and
IFN-γ. Indeed, we observed a more marked secretion of the proinflammatory mediators
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089 10 of 15
in macrophages induced by LPS + IFNγ: a 35% increase in NO and almost 70% increase
in PGE2 compared to the control (Figure 4C,D). Even under these conditions, ME1 gene
silencing lowered NO and PGE2 levels. In the case of NO, we observed a significant
reduction of 20% compared to cells treated with LPS + IFN-γ (Figure 4C). For PGE2, the
shift was like that observed in cells activated by LPS alone, with levels being restored to
control values (Figure 4D). The comparison between NO and PGE2 levels in untreated
macrophages (Unt MP) and macrophages transfected with negative control siRNA (C) rule
out any off-target effect (Supplementary Figure S2A,B).
Altogether, our findings suggest that NADPH produced by ME1 is crucial for NO
and PGE2 secretion during M1-like state macrophage activation since human ME1 gene
silencing abrogates the increase of both these inflammatory mediators upon LPS addition.
3.5. ROS Generation Mediated by ME1 in M1-like State Macrophages
To ascertain the role of ME1 in the production of ROS in proinflammatory macrophages,
we measured ROS levels in ME1-silenced PBMC-derived macrophages triggered by LPS or
LPS + IFNγ. The combination of LPS and IFNγ led to greater ROS secretion (152.1 ± 5.2 %
of C, Figure 5B) compared to cells activated with LPS alone (136.1 ± 2.1 % of C, Figure 5A).
ME1 gene silencing reduced ROS levels in both cases (Figure 5A,B). Any off-target effects
can be ruled out, as ROS levels in macrophages treated with negative control siRNA were
comparable to those in untreated cells (Supplementary Figure S2C). Given that NOX and the
mitochondrial respiratory chain may be the primary sources of ROS under these conditions,
we measured ROS levels in the presence or absence of apocynin (the NOX inhibitor) and
rotenone (inhibitor of the mitochondrial respiratory chain Complex I). Figure 5A illustrates
how ME1-silenced PBMC-derived macrophages displayed reduced ROS levels that were
unaffected by apocynin compared to LPS treatment. Conversely, ROS levels in the presence
of rotenone were the same as those of control (Figure 5A) suggesting that mitochondrial
ROS production could be ME1-independent in macrophages. Remarkably, high levels
of ROS were observed when NADPH was added, by highlighting the involvement of
ME1-derived NADPH in ROS generation in classically activated human macrophages.
Biomedicines 2024, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 16  
control siRNA were comparable to those in untreated cells (Supplementary Figure S2C). 
Given that NOX and the mitochondrial respiratory chain may be the primary sources of 
ROS under these conditions, we measured ROS levels in the presence or absence of 
apocynin (the NOX inhibitor) and rotenone (inhibitor of the mitochondrial respiratory 
chain Complex I). Figure 5A illustrates how ME1-silenced PBMC-derived macrophages 
displayed reduced ROS levels that were una ffected by apocynin compared to LPS treat-
ment. Conversely, ROS levels in the presence of rotenone were the same as those of control 
(Figure 5A) suggesting that mitochondrial ROS production could be ME1-independent in 
macrophages. Remarkably, high levels of ROS were observed when NADPH was added, 
by highlighting the involvement of ME1-derived NADPH in ROS generation in classically 
activated human macrophages.  
 
Figure 5. ROS generation is mediated by ME1 activi ty. Human PBMC-derived macrophages were 
transfected for two consecutive days with a specific siRNA targeting human ME1 (siME1) or nega-
tive control siRNA (C). At twenty-four hours from the last gene silencing, cells were triggered by 
LPS (L, A) or LPS + IFN γ (L+ IFNγ, B). Where indicated, cells were pretreated for 1 h with 50 µM 
apocynin (L+siME1+Apo), 20 µM rotenone (L + siME1 + Rot), or 1 mM NADPH (L + siME1 + 
NADPH). After 24 h treatment, ROS were measured . Data are expressed as the mean ± SD (error 
bars) of three independent experiments. Letters above the bars (a, b, c, d, and e) refer to results from 
one-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test: different letters indicate significant differences 
between treatments at p < 0.05. 
3.6. Effect of ME1 Gene Silencing on TNF-α Secretion  
It is well-established that TNF-α, a key inflammatory mediator involved in the path-
ogenesis of numerous diseases, including RA and SLE, is regulated by NF-κB [31]. In RA, 
TNF-α is the major inflammatory cytokine driv ing disease progression and joint inflam-
mation [32]. Likewise, increased serum levels of TNF-α in SLE patients correlate with dis-
ease activity and are linked to systemic manifestations, including cardiovascular disease 
and lupus nephritis [33]. Furthermore, the secretion of TNF-α by human macrophages is 
notably induced by LPS stimulation [31]. 
Considering that (i) ME1 is overexpressed in RA and SLE patients, (ii) ME1 is upreg-
ulated in macrophages activated by LPS, and (iii) ME1 is under the transcriptional control 
of NF-kB, we measured the levels of TNF- α following ME1 gene silencing. Interestingly, 
we observed a significant decrease in TNF- α levels in macrophages where ME1 was 
Figure 5. ROS generation is mediated by ME1 activity. Human PBMC-derived macrophages were
transfected for two consecutive days with a specific siRNA targeting human ME1 (siME1) or negative
control siRNA (C). At twenty-four hours from the last gene silencing, cells were triggered by LPS (L,
A) or LPS + IFNγ (L+ IFNγ, B). Where indicated, cells were pretreated for 1 h with 50 µM apocynin
(L+siME1+Apo), 20 µM rotenone (L + siME1 + Rot), or 1 mM NADPH (L + siME1 + NADPH). After
24 h treatment, ROS were measured. Data are expressed as the mean ± SD (error bars) of three
independent experiments. Letters above the bars (a, b, c, d, and e) refer to results from one-way
ANOVA followed by Tukey’s post-hoc test: different letters indicate significant differences between
treatments at p < 0.05.
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089 11 of 15
3.6. Effect of ME1 Gene Silencing on TNF-α Secretion
It is well-established that TNF-α, a key inflammatory mediator involved in the patho-
genesis of numerous diseases, including RA and SLE, is regulated by NF- κB [31]. In
RA, TNF-α is the major inflammatory cytokine driving disease progression and joint
inflammation [32]. Likewise, increased serum levels of TNF- α in SLE patients correlate
with disease activity and are linked to systemic manifestations, including cardiovascular dis-
ease and lupus nephritis [33]. Furthermore, the secretion of TNF-α by human macrophages
is notably induced by LPS stimulation [31].
Considering that (i) ME1 is overexpressed in RA and SLE patients, (ii) ME1 is upregu-
lated in macrophages activated by LPS, and (iii) ME1 is under the transcriptional control of
NF-kB, we measured the levels of TNF-α following ME1 gene silencing. Interestingly, we
observed a significant decrease in TNF-α levels in macrophages where ME1 was silenced,
compared to those treated with LPS alone (Figure 6). These results suggest a crucial interac-
tion between NF-κB, TNF-α, and ME1, highlighting the potential regulatory role of ME1 in
the inflammatory response mediated by NF-κB and TNF-α. Our findings open avenues for
further investigation into the molecular mechanisms governing inflammatory responses
and the potential therapeutic targeting of ME1 in inflammatory diseases.
Biomedicines 2024, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 16  
silenced, compared to those treated with LPS alone (Figure 6). These results suggest a 
crucial interaction between NF-κB, TNF-α, and ME1, highlighting the potential regulatory 
role of ME1 in the inflammatory response mediated by NF- κB and TNF-α. Our findings 
open avenues for further investigation into the molecular mechanisms governing inflam-
matory responses and the potential therapeutic targeting of ME1 in inflammatory dis-
eases. 
 
Figure 6. TNF-α production in ME1-silenced macrophages. Human PBMC-derived macrophages 
were transfected for two consecutive days with a specific siRNA targeting human ME1 (siME1) or 
negative control siRNA (C). At twenty-four hours from the last gene silencing, cells were triggered 
by LPS (L). TNF-α levels were determined following 24 h of LPS stimulation. Data are presented as 
means ± SD (error bars) of 3 independent experiments with at least three replicates in each. Letters 
above the bars (a, b, and c) refer to statistical analysis performed by one-way ANOVA followed by 
Tukey’s post-hoc test: different letters indicate significant differences between treatments at p < 0.05. 
4. Discussion 
Main functions of the macrophages are played in development, homeostasis, innate 
immunity, and inflammation. As a result, ma crophage dysfunctions are involved in a 
large number of diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), ather-
osclerosis, autoimmune diseases, asthma, and coronavirus pneumonia COVID-19 
[14,34,35]. 
A hallmark of macrophages is the plasticity referring to their ability to change func-
tion, features, and phenotype through polarization in response to external or internal trig-
gers. A complex network of signaling cascades links stimulation to metabolic and gene 
expression reprogramming resulting in different subsets.  
Among transduction mechanisms, the canonical NF- κB activation pathway fosters 
the transcription of numberless proinflammatory genes in classically activated macro-
phages. In the last few years, it has been reported that metabolic signals including AMP-
activated protein kinase (AMPK), ACLY, succinate, and peroxisome receptors PPARα and 
PPARγ control NF- κB activity in innate immune cells [36,37]. Therefore, immunometa-
bolic crosstalk between NF-κB signaling and metabolism emerges in macrophage activa-
tion. Here, we demonstrate that ME1 gene expression is upregulated in classically acti-
vated macrophages through NF-κB, whose signaling inhibition abolishes the effect. Fur-
thermore, ChIP experiments reveal an increased binding of NF-κB to the human ME1 gene 
C L
L+siME
1
TNF-
  (pg/mL)
Figure 6. TNF-α production in ME1-silenced macrophages. Human PBMC-derived macrophages
were transfected for two consecutive days with a specific siRNA targeting human ME1 (siME1) or
negative control siRNA (C). At twenty-four hours from the last gene silencing, cells were triggered
by LPS (L). TNF-α levels were determined following 24 h of LPS stimulation. Data are presented as
means ± SD (error bars) of 3 independent experiments with at least three replicates in each. Letters
above the bars (a, b, and c) refer to statistical analysis performed by one-way ANOVA followed by
Tukey’s post-hoc test: different letters indicate significant differences between treatments at p < 0.05.
4. Discussion
Main functions of the macrophages are played in development, homeostasis, innate
immunity, and inflammation. As a result, macrophage dysfunctions are involved in a large
number of diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), atherosclerosis,
autoimmune diseases, asthma, and coronavirus pneumonia COVID-19 [14,34,35].
A hallmark of macrophages is the plasticity referring to their ability to change function,
features, and phenotype through polarization in response to external or internal triggers. A
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089 12 of 15
complex network of signaling cascades links stimulation to metabolic and gene expression
reprogramming resulting in different subsets.
Among transduction mechanisms, the canonical NF-κB activation pathway fosters the
transcription of numberless proinflammatory genes in classically activated macrophages.
In the last few years, it has been reported that metabolic signals including AMP-activated
protein kinase (AMPK), ACLY, succinate, and peroxisome receptors PPARα and PPARγ con-
trol NF-κB activity in innate immune cells [36,37]. Therefore, immunometabolic crosstalk
between NF-κB signaling and metabolism emerges in macrophage activation. Here, we
demonstrate that ME1 gene expression is upregulated in classically activated macrophages
through NF-κB, whose signaling inhibition abolishes the effect. Furthermore, ChIP experi-
ments reveal an increased binding of NF-κB to the human ME1 gene promoter following
LPS stimulation. Interestingly, a responsive element for NF-κB is also present in ME1 gene
promoter of other mammals such as Mus musculus, Sus scrofa, and Rattus norvegicus.
Our in silico analysis unveils a significant upregulation of ME1 gene expression in
rheumatoid arthritis and lupus erythematosus highlighting a potential role of ME1 in
inflammatory diseases. Proinflammatory signaling activates NOX, which generates super-
oxide anion (O2•−) in an NADPH-dependent manner. Accordingly, NOX activity is dysreg-
ulated in autoimmune diseases and injury caused by infections [38]. Mechanistically, we
found a relationship between ME1-derived NADPH and NOX activity. Indeed, ME1 gene
silencing reduces ROS, and the presence of NADPH nullifies the decrement, while apocynin
(NOX inhibitor) addition does not affect the trend in human-activated macrophages.
Mitochondria represent another central source of ROS as metabolic byproducts during
oxidative phosphorylation [39]. It has been another central source observed that mitochon-
drial ROS foster pyrin domain containing 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome activation through
different molecular mechanisms including the cytosolic release of mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA) which interacts directly with NLRP3 [40]. Notably, inhibition of the mitochon-
drial complex I of the electron transport chain, a major source of mitochondrial ROS,
significantly reduces ROS levels in ME1-silenced human macrophages. Therefore, mito-
chondrial ROS production seems ME1-independent in macrophages. Conceptually, these
findings demonstrate a link between ME1 and NOX activity to drive the production of
O2•−, a key inflammatory mediator.
NADPH is also required as cofactor for inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS or NOS2)
and in turn for NO biosynthesis in LPS- or cytokine-triggered macrophages. Nuclear factor
1 transducer and activator of transcription 1a (STAT-1a) and NF-κB signaling activation me-
diates transcriptional upregulation of iNOS. As critical inflammatory mediator, increased
levels of exhaled NO are present in asthmatics, while their lowering follows treatment with
corticosteroids [41]. Upregulation of iNOS has been found in allergic asthma and exhaled
NO measurements have currently become clinical routine in disease management [ 42].
Moreover, measuring mucosal release of NO is a method to detect inflammatory pro-
cesses in inflammatory bowel disease, vaginitis, and cystitis [43]. Our observations prove
that iNOS activity is also dependent on ME1 activity since ME1 gene silencing reduces
NO levels.
However, the role of ME1 seems much wider as ME1 gene silencing significantly
affects PGE2 secretion, likely through supplying cytosolic NADPH for arachidonic acid
biosynthesis [44]. It is worth noting that the significant decrease in ROS, NO, and PGE2
in LPS + IFN γ-activated and ME1-silenced macrophages strengthens the role of ME1
in proinflammatory M1 macrophages. Therefore, our findings bring to light ME1 as a
new immunometabolic enzyme target of NF- κB signaling in innate immune cells. We
can speculate that overexpression and activation of ME1 in LPS-activated macrophages
contributes to the “immuno-NADPH” pool, i.e., the NADPH pool is necessary to activate
the inflammatory response through NOX, iNOS, and prostaglandin biosynthesis.
Future investigations to delve deeper into molecular mechanisms underlying ME1
in inflammatory diseases as well as further studies about specific ME1 inhibitors will be
important in understanding ME1 immunometabolic role in immune cells.
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089 13 of 15
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/10
.3390/biomedicines12092089/s1, Figure S1: Specificity for the M1 program, Figure S2: NO·, PGE2,
and ROS levels in untreated macrophages and macrophages transfected with negative control siRNA.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, V .I.; methodology, A.S., C.D.L., and S.T.; formal analysis,
A.S., P .C., and S.T.; investigation, A.S., C.D.L., and S.T.; resources, V .I.; writing—original draft
preparation, A.S., P .C., V .I., and S.T.; writing—review and editing, A.S., V .I., and S.T.; supervision, V .I.;
funding acquisition, V .I. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was supported by FSC European Funds (Grant number C37G22000400001).
Institutional Review Board Statement: This study was conducted according to the guidelines of the
Declaration of Helsinki and approved by the ethics committee—Protocol code TS/CEUR-CET/CEL
n.20230044811—3 November 2023).
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in this
study. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients to publish this paper.
Data Availability Statement: The data used to support the findings of this study are available from
the corresponding authors upon request.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Hsieh, J.Y.; Li, S.Y.; Chen, M.C.; Yang, P .C.; Chen, H.Y.; Chan, N.L.; Liu, J.H.; Hung, H.C. Structural characteristics of the
nonallosteric human cytosolic malic enzyme. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 2014, 1844, 1773–1783. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Chandel, N.S. NADPH-The Forgotten Reducing Equivalent. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 2021, 13, a040550. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
3. Murai, S.; Ando, A.; Ebara, S.; Hirayama, M.; Satomi, Y.; Hara, T. Inhibition of malic enzyme 1 disrupts cellular metabolism and
leads to vulnerability in cancer cells in glucose-restricted conditions. Oncogenesis 2017, 6, e329. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Todisco, S.; Convertini, P .; Iacobazzi, V .; Infantino, V . TCA Cycle Rewiring as Emerging Metabolic Signature of Hepatocellular
Carcinoma. Cancers 2019, 12, 68. [CrossRef]
5. Hu, W.C.; Yang, Y.F.; Cheng, C.F.; Tu, Y.T.; Chang, H.T.; Tsai, K.W. Overexpression of malic enzyme is involved in breast cancer
growth and is correlated with poor prognosis. J. Cell Mol. Med. 2024, 28, e18163. [CrossRef]
6. Simmen, F.A.; Alhallak, I.; Simmen, R.C.M. Malic enzyme 1 (ME1) in the biology of cancer: It is not just intermediary metabolism.
J. Mol. Endocrinol. 2020, 65, R77–R90. [CrossRef]
7. Yao, P .; Sun, H.; Xu, C.; Chen, T.; Zou, B.; Jiang, P .; Du, W. Evidence for a direct cross-talk between malic enzyme and the pentose
phosphate pathway via structural interactions. J. Biol. Chem. 2017, 292, 17113–17120. [CrossRef]
8. Wen, D.; Liu, D.; Tang, J.; Dong, L.; Liu, Y.; Tao, Z.; Wan, J.; Gao, D.; Wang, L.; Sun, H.; et al. Malic enzyme 1 induces
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and indicates poor prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma. Tumour Biol. 2015, 36, 6211–6221.
[CrossRef]
9. Nakashima, C.; Yamamoto, K.; Fujiwara-Tani, R.; Luo, Y.; Matsushima, S.; Fujii, K.; Ohmori, H.; Sasahira, T.; Sasaki, T.; Kitadai, Y.;
et al. Expression of cytosolic malic enzyme (ME1) is associated with disease progression in human oral squamous cell carcinoma.
Cancer Sci. 2018, 109, 2036–2045. [CrossRef]
10. Mantovani, A.; Sica, A.; Locati, M. Macrophage polarization comes of age. Immunity 2005, 23, 344–346. [CrossRef]
11. Sica, A.; Mantovani, A. Macrophage plasticity and polarization: In vivo veritas. J. Clin. Investig. 2012, 122, 787–795. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
12. Fukui, S.; Iwamoto, N.; Takatani, A.; Igawa, T.; Shimizu, T.; Umeda, M.; Nishino, A.; Horai, Y.; Hirai, Y.; Koga, T.; et al. M1
and M2 Monocytes in Rheumatoid Arthritis: A Contribution of Imbalance of M1/M2 Monocytes to Osteoclastogenesis. Front.
Immunol. 2017, 8, 1958. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Gauthier, T.; Chen, W. Modulation of Macrophage Immunometabolism: A New Approach to Fight Infections.Front. Immunol.
2022, 13, 780839. [CrossRef]
14. Wang, L.; Wang, D.; Zhang, T.; Ma, Y.; Tong, X.; Fan, H. The role of immunometabolism in macrophage polarization and its
impact on acute lung injury/acute respiratory distress syndrome. Front. Immunol. 2023, 14, 1117548. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Van den Bossche, J.; O’Neill, L.A.; Menon, D. Macrophage Immunometabolism: Where Are We (Going)? Trends Immunol. 2017, 38,
395–406. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Infantino, V .; Pierri, C.L.; Iacobazzi, V . Metabolic Routes in Inflammation: The Citrate Pathway and its Potential as Therapeutic
Target. Curr. Med. Chem. 2019, 26, 7104–7116. [CrossRef]
17. Groh, L.; Keating, S.T.; Joosten, L.A.B.; Netea, M.G.; Riksen, N.P . Monocyte and macrophage immunometabolism in atherosclerosis.
Semin. Immunopathol. 2018, 40, 203–214. [CrossRef]
18. Makowski, L.; Chaib, M.; Rathmell, J.C. Immunometabolism: From basic mechanisms to translation. Immunol. Rev. 2020, 295,
5–14. [CrossRef]
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089 14 of 15
19. Santarsiero, A.; Convertini, P .; Todisco, S.; Pierri, C.L.; De Grassi, A.; Williams, N.C.; Iacobazzi, D.; De Stefano, G.; O’Neill,
L.A.J.; Infantino, V . ACLY Nuclear Translocation in Human Macrophages Drives Proinflammatory Gene Expression by NF-κB
Acetylation. Cells 2021, 10, 2962. [CrossRef]
20. Lauterbach, M.A.; Hanke, J.E.; Serefidou, M.; Mangan, M.S.J.; Kolbe, C.C.; Hess, T.; Rothe, M.; Kaiser, R.; Hoss, F.; Gehlen, J.;
et al. Toll-like Receptor Signaling Rewires Macrophage Metabolism and Promotes Histone Acetylation via ATP-Citrate Lyase.
Immunity 2019, 51, 997–1011.e7. [CrossRef]
21. Baardman, J.; Verberk, S.G.S.; van der Velden, S.; Gijbels, M.J.J.; van Roomen, C.P .P .A.; Sluimer, J.C.; Broos, J.Y.; Griffith, G.R.;
Prange, K.H.M.; van Weeghel, M.; et al. Macrophage ATP citrate lyase deficiency stabilizes atherosclerotic plaques. Nat. Commun.
2020, 11, 6296. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Convertini, P .; Menga, A.; Andria, G.; Scala, I.; Santarsiero, A.; Castiglione Morelli, M.A.; Iacobazzi, V .; Infantino, V . The
contribution of the citrate pathway to oxidative stress in Down syndrome. Immunology 2016, 149, 423–431. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Convertini, P .; Santarsiero, A.; Todisco, S.; Gilio, M.; Palazzo, D.; Pappalardo, I.; Iacobazzi, D.; Frontuto, M.; Infantino, V . ACLY as
a modulator of liver cell functions and its role in Metabolic Dysfunction-Associated Steatohepatitis. J. Transl. Med. 2023, 21, 568.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Tannahill, G.M.; Curtis, A.M.; Adamik, J.; Palsson-McDermott, E.M.; McGettrick, A.F.; Goel, G.; Frezza, C.; Bernard, N.J.; Kelly, B.;
Foley, N.H.; et al. Succinate is an inflammatory signal that induces IL-1β through HIF-1α. Nature 2013, 496, 238–242. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
25. Santarsiero, A.; Convertini, P .; Vassallo, A.; Santoro, V .; Todisco, S.; Iacobazzi, D.; Fondufe-Mittendorf, Y.; Martelli, G.; de Oliveira,
M.R.; Montanaro, R.; et al. Phenolic Compounds of Red Wine. Oxid. Med. Cell Longev. 2021, 2021, 5533793. [CrossRef]
26. Convertini, P .; Todisco, S.; De Santis, F.; Pappalardo, I.; Iacobazzi, D.; Castiglione Morelli, M.A.; Fondufe-Mittendorf, Y.N.;
Martelli, G.; Palmieri, F.; Infantino, V . Transcriptional Regulation Factors of the Human Mitochondrial Aspartate/Glutamate
Carrier Gene, Isoform 2. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, 1888. [CrossRef]
27. Zhou, Z.; Luo, G.; Li, C.; Zhang, P .; Chen, W.; Li, X.; Tang, J.; Qing, L. Metformin induces M2 polarization via AMPK/PGC-
1α/PPAR-γ pathway to improve peripheral nerve regeneration. Am. J. Transl. Res. 2023, 15, 3778–3792.
28. Abdalla, H.B.; Napimoga, M.H.; Lopes, A.H.; de Macedo Maganin, A.G.; Cunha, T.M.; Van Dyke, T.E.; Clemente Napimoga, J.T.
Activation of PPAR-γ induces macrophage polarization and reduces neutrophil migration mediated by heme oxygenase 1. Int.
Immunopharmacol. 2020, 84, 106565. [CrossRef]
29. Ghosh, S.; Hayden, M.S. New regulators of NF-kappaB in inflammation. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 2008, 8, 837–848. [CrossRef]
30. Kang, K.; Bachu, M.; Park, S.H.; Kang, K.; Bae, S.; Park-Min, K.H.; Ivashkiv, L.B. IFN- γ selectively suppresses a subset of
TLR4-activated genes and enhancers to potentiate macrophage activation. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 3320. [CrossRef]
31. Liu, H.; Sidiropoulos, P .; Song, G.; Pagliari, L.J.; Birrer, M.J.; Stein, B.; Anrather, J.; Pope, R.M. TNF-alpha gene expression in
macrophages: Regulation by NF-kappa B is independent of c-Jun or C/EBP beta. J. Immunol. 2000, 164, 4277–4285. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
32. Jang, D.I.; Lee, A.H.; Shin, H.Y.; Song, H.R.; Park, J.H.; Kang, T.B.; Lee, S.R.; Yang, S.H. The Role of Tumor Necrosis Factor Alpha
(TNF-α) in Autoimmune Disease and Current TNF- α Inhibitors in Therapeutics. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2021, 22, 2719. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
33. Ghorbaninezhad, F.; Leone, P .; Alemohammad, H.; Najafzadeh, B.; Nourbakhsh, N.S.; Prete, M.; Malerba, E.; Saeedi, H.; Tabrizi,
N.J.; Racanelli, V .; et al. Tumor necrosis factor-α in systemic lupus erythematosus: Structure, function and therapeutic implications.
Int. J. Mol. Med. 2022, 49, 1–13. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Wang, C.; Xie, J.; Zhao, L.; Fei, X.; Zhang, H.; Tan, Y.; Nie, X.; Zhou, L.; Liu, Z.; Ren, Y.; et al. Alveolar macrophage dysfunction
and cytokine storm in the pathogenesis of two severe COVID-19 patients. EBioMedicine 2020, 57, 102833. [CrossRef]
35. Belchamber, K.B.R.; Donnelly, L.E. Macrophage Dysfunction in Respiratory Disease. Results Probl. Cell Differ. 2017, 62, 299–313.
36. Iacobazzi, D.; Convertini, P .; Todisco, S.; Santarsiero, A.; Iacobazzi, V .; Infantino, V . New Insights into NF-κB Signaling in Innate
Immunity: Focus on Immunometabolic Crosstalks. Biology 2023, 12, 776. [CrossRef]
37. Todisco, S.; Santarsiero, A.; Convertini, P .; De Stefano, G.; Gilio, M.; Iacobazzi, V .; Infantino, V . PPAR Alpha as a Metabolic
Modulator of the Liver: Role in the Pathogenesis of Nonalcoholic Steatohepatitis (NASH). Biology 2022, 11, 792. [CrossRef]
38. Taylor, J.P .; Tse, H.M. The role of NADPH oxidases in infectious and inflammatory diseases. Redox Biol. 2021, 48, 102159.
[CrossRef]
39. Idelchik, M.D.P .S.; Begley, U.; Begley, T.J.; Melendez, J.A. Mitochondrial ROS control of cancer.Semin. Cancer Biol. 2017, 47, 57–66.
[CrossRef]
40. Mills, E.L.; O’Neill, L.A. Reprogramming mitochondrial metabolism in macrophages as an anti-inflammatory signal. Eur. J.
Immunol. 2016, 46, 13–21. [CrossRef]
41. Chen, S.; Saeed, A.F.U.H.; Liu, Q.; Jiang, Q.; Xu, H.; Xiao, G.G.; Rao, L.; Duo, Y. Macrophages in immunoregulation and
therapeutics. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther.2023, 8, 207. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Dweik, R.A.; Boggs, P .B.; Erzurum, S.C.; Irvin, C.G.; Leigh, M.W.; Lundberg, J.O.; Olin, A.C.; Plummer, A.L.; Taylor, D.R.;
American Thoracic Society Committee on Interpretation of Exhaled Nitric Oxide Levels (FENO) for Clinical Applications. An
official ATS clinical practice guideline: Interpretation of exhaled nitric oxide levels (FENO) for clinical applications. Am. J. Respir.
Crit. Care Med. 2011, 184, 602–615. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Biomedicines 2024, 12, 2089 15 of 15
43. Lundberg, J.O.; Weitzberg, E. Nitric oxide signaling in health and disease. Cell 2022, 185, 2853–2878. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Ting, K.K.Y.; Jongstra-Bilen, J.; Cybulsky, M.I. The multi-faceted role of NADPH in regulating inflammation in activated myeloid
cells. Front. Immunol. 2023, 14, 1328484. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.