communicationsbiology Article
A Nature Portfolio journal
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3
Quantitative decoding of coupled carbon
and energy metabolism inPseudomonas
putida for lignin carbon utilization
Check for updates
Nanqing Zhou1, Rebecca A. Wilkes2, Xinyu Chen1,K e l l yP .T e i t e l1, James A. Belgrave3,
Gregg T. Beckham 2, Allison Z. Werner2,Y a n b a oY u4 & Ludmilla Aristilde 1,3
Soil Pseudomonas species, which thrive on lignin derivatives, are widely explored for biotechnology
applications in lignin valorization. However, how the native metabolism coordinates phenolic carbon
processing with required cofactor generation remains poorly understood. Here, we achieve
quantitative understanding of this metabolic balance through a detailed multi-omics investigation
of Pseudomonas putidaKT2440 grown on four common phenolic acid substrates: ferulate,
p-coumarate, vanillate, and 4-hydroxybenzoate. Relative to succinate, proteomics reveals > 140-fold
increase in transport and catabolic proteins for aromatics, but metabolomics identiﬁes bottlenecks in
initial catabolism to maintain favorable cellular energy charge, which is compromised in mutants with
resolved bottlenecks. Up to 30-fold increase in pyruvate carboxylase and glyoxylate shunt proteins
implies a metabolic remodeling conﬁrmed by kinetic
13C-metabolomics. Quantitative analysis by
13C-ﬂuxomics demonstrates coupling of this remodeling with cofactor production. Speciﬁcally,
anaplerotic carbon recycling through pyruvate carboxylase promotes tricarboxylic acid cycleﬂuxes to
generate 50-60% NADPH yield and 60-80% NADH yield, resulting in up to 6-fold greater ATP surplus
than with succinate metabolism; the glyoxylate shunt sustains catapleroticﬂux through malic enzyme
for the remaining NADPH yield. This quantitative blueprint affords cofactor imbalance predictions in
proposed engineering of key metabolic nodes in lignin valorization pathways.
Lignin, a structural polymer in plant biomass that is considered the
second most abundant biopolymer after cellulose, represents an
important renewable carbon source
1. Chemical depolymerization of
lignin generates various phenolic acid compounds, which can be used as
feedstocks for bioproduction of valuable chemicals 2– 4. These lignin-
related phenolic acid structures include hydroxybenzoates (4-hydro-
xybenzoate, vanillate, gallate, and syringate) and hydroxycinnamates ( p-
coumarate and ferulate)
5. Soil Pseudomonas species have native meta-
bolic capabilities to process benzoate, 4-hydroxybenzoate (4HB),
vanillate (VAN), gallate, p-coumarate (COU), and ferulate (FER)
6.O f
particular interest is Pseudomonas putidaKT2440, which is extensively
explored as a chassis for biotechnology 7– 11, including notably the bio-
conversion of lignin-derived aromatics 12,13. Encoded in P. putida
KT2440 are pathways for the catabolism of hydroxybenzoates and
hydroxycinnamates involving ortho-cleavage of the intermediate
protocatechuate (PCA) through β-ketoadipate to generate carbon in ﬂux
into the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle in the central carbon metabolism
6
(Fig. 1A). In the peripheral pathways upstream of β-ketoadipate, the
uptake and catabolism of hydroxycinnamates (COU and FER) and
hydroxybenzoates (4HB and VAN) to PCA are catalyzed by a series of
enzymes with distinct cofactor speci ﬁcities6,13– 17 (Fig. 1A). Previous
metabolic engineering of P. putidatargeted directing carbon in ﬂux from
phenolic carbons from initial catabolism towards desired products such
as PCA, vanillin, β-ketoadipate, muconic acid, pyridine 2,4-dicarboxylic
acid, adipic acid, indigoidine, free fatty acids and
polyhydroxyalkanoates
18– 31. Metabolic bottlenecks, which were inferred
from extracellular accumulation of VAN in FER-fed cells or of 4HB in
COU-fed cells
21,29,30,32– 34, could not be overcome completely via genetic
engineering due to cofactor de ﬁciency21,30,32. Therefore, metabolic engi-
neering to enhance phenolic carbon conversion must address
1Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, McCormick School of Engineering and Applied Science, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.
2Renewable Resources and Enabling Sciences Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO, USA.3Northwestern Center for Synthetic Biology,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA.4Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA.
e-mail: ludmilla.aristilde@northwestern.edu
Communications Biology|          (2025) 8:1310 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
appropriate cofactor supply. However, largely lacking is a quantitative
understanding of how the native metabolic network in P. putidaKT2440
couples carbon ﬂuxes from phenolic acid structures with required
cofactor production.
Metabolic ﬂux modeling or ﬂuxomics constrained by
13C-metabolomics data provides quantitative analysis of carbon ﬂuxes35– 40.
Previous 13C-ﬂuxomics studies of P. putidafocused on glycolytic metabo-
lism for sugars (i.e., glucose, xylose) or gluconeogenic metabolism for suc-
cinate (SUC) 41– 51.T h eo n l yt w o ﬂuxomics studies of aromatic carbon
metabolism in P. putida, for benzoate alone or with glucose as a co-
substrate41,52, both illustrated the activation of the glyoxylate shunt, which
conserved carbon by channeling isocitrate away from the canonical dec-
arboxylation steps in the TCA cycle. Flux through the glyoxylate shunt can
feed into malic enzyme for NADPH generation, or malate dehydrogenase,
for NADH or ubiquinol generation. Interestingly, for benzoate catabolism,
the ﬂu xt h r o u g hm a l a t ed e h y d r o g e n a s ew a se i t h e r3 - f o l dh i g h e rt h a nt h e
ﬂux through malic enzyme or there was only ﬂux through malate dehy-
drogenase, both of which would be advantageous to satisfy the NADH
demand for benzoate catabolism through the catechol pathway in P.
putida
41,52. For the catabolism of hydroxybenzoate and hydroxycinnamate
structures, which is funneled through PCA instead of catechol, it remains
unknown how metabolic ﬂuxes would be partitioned in P. putidato opti-
mize the catabolic pathways with cofactor supply (Fig. 1A).
While ATP in aerobic bacteria is generated primarily through oxidative
phosphorylation of NADH produced in glycolysis and the TCA cycle
53,t h e
supply of NADPH required for biosynthesis and stress tolerance is pro-
duced from different metabolic routes. During growth on glucose, NADPH
production in P. putidaincludes the important involvement of glucose-6-
phosphate dehydrogenase and 6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase in the
oxidative pentose phosphate pathway (oxPPP)44,47. However, minimal to no
ﬂux through oxPPP was reported during growth on two gluconeogenic
substrates (SUC or benzoate)48,52. Instead, gluconeogenic metabolism in P.
putida was reported to rely on high ﬂux through isocitrate dehydrogenase
and malic enzyme in the TCA cycle to produce NADPH, and on transhy-
drogenase reactions to generate NADPH from excess NADH pool
48.
Whether P. putidawould rely on similar metabolic routing or energetic
bypass for NADPH production during phenolic acid utilization remains to
be elucidated.
T h ec a t a p l e r o t i ca n da n a p l e r o t i cn o des, which distribute respectively
carbon ﬂuxes from the TCA cycle to gluconeogenesis and from lower gly-
colysis to the TCA cycle
54, have implications for cofactor balance (Fig. 1A).
In the cataplerotic direction, due to lack of phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP)
carboxykinase for the decarboxylation of oxaloacetate (OAA) to PEP
55, P.
putida KT2440 must rely on either malic enzyme to convert malate to
pyruvate with NADPH production or OAA decarboxylase to convert OAA
to pyruvate with no cofactor involved 56. In the anaplerotic direction, pyr-
uvate carboxylation to OAA consumes ATP, while PEP carboxylation to
OAA has no cofactor input
56. It remains unclear how P. putidaKT2440
would distribute carbonﬂuxes between cataplerosis and anaplerosis to meet
the demand for reducing equivalents and energy required for phenolic
carbon catabolism.
Here, our central hypothesis was tha t remodeling of metabolic nodes
into and within the TCA cycle by P. putidaKT2440 would establish the
ﬂuxes of NAD(P)H and ATP to satisfy the cofactor demands in the p-
coumaroyl and coniferyl pathways (Fig. 1A). We tested our hypothesis by
employing genetic engineering, metabolomics pro ﬁling, whole-cell pro-
teomics, kinetic
13C-metabolomics, and13C-ﬂuxomics during feeding of P.
putida KT2440 on FER, COU, VAN, or 4HB as the sole carbon source,
compared to SUC as non-aromatic subst rate reference. First, using quan-
titative metabolomics for cofactor proﬁling in wild-type and mutant strains,
Fig. 1 | Intracellular evidence of bottleneck nodes in initial catabolic pathways of
phenolic acid substrates. ASchematic illustration of cofactor investment and
production in the peripheral pathway and central carbon metabolism.
B Intracellular levels of metabolites involved in FER and VAN utilization in the
coniferyl branch; the colored arrows indicate the catabolic entry of the different
substrates, blue arrow for FER and orange arrow for VAN. C Intracellular levels of
intermediates involved in COU and 4HB utilization; the colored arrows indicate the
catabolic entry of the different substrates, blue arrow for COU and orange arrow for
4HB. In A, the white crosses are to represent the reported lack of carbon ﬂux through
the oxPPP and Entner – Doudoroff pathway during gluconeogenetic substrate
metabolism
48; the oxPPP reactions 91 were therefore not involved in cofactor pro-
duction during the metabolism of the phenolic acids. Only NADH was reported to
be produced during formaldehyde and formate oxidation based on previous
studies
92,93.I n B, C red bowties indicate the identi ﬁed bottlenecks. B.D. below
detection limit. FER ferulate, FER-CoA feruloyl-CoA, COU p-coumarate, COU-
CoA p-coumaroyl-CoA, GSH glutathione, GSSG glutathione disul ﬁde. Data in
(B, C) are shown as mean ± standard deviation of four independent biological
replicates ( n = 4).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3 Article
Communications Biology|          (2025) 8:1310 2
we investigated how the cellular energy state would be inﬂuenced by altera-
tions in the aromatic carbon inﬂux due to overexpression of key bottleneck-
relevant genes. Second, to elucidate the metabolic network that underlies the
cellular energy state, we proﬁled protein levels to id entify metabolic remo-
deling nodes and verify these nodes using kinetic
13C-proﬁling in metabolites
coupled with13C-carbon mapping. Third, we integrated the proteomics and
13C-metabolomics data to perform13C-ﬂuxomics to map quantitatively car-
bon ﬂuxes throughout the metabolic ne twork. Fourth, we leveraged the
quantitativeﬂux analysis to determine production and consumption rates of
cofactors and evaluate metabolic ﬂux controls on cofactor maintenance
during conversion of the different lignin-derived phenolic acid compounds.
This research provides the ﬁrst quantitative mapping of the relationship
between carbon metabolism and energy metabolism in P. putidaKT2440
utilizing different hydroxycinnama te and hydroxybenzoate substrates,
thereby guiding the predictions of cofactor balancing required during engi-
neering of metabolic pathways for lignin valorization.
Results
Favorable cellular energy balance is sustained despite
bottleneck nodes in native catabolism
Bottlenecks were proposed previously at three nodes in initial phenolic acid
catabolism, based on extr acellular metabolic over ﬂow in exponentially
growing cells: the VanAB node in the coniferyl branch21,29,t h eP o b An o d ei n
the p-coumaroyl branch21,30,32, and the PcaHG node downstream of both
branches29 (Fig. 1A). Here, we obtained direct evidence using intracellular
metabolomics analysis and 13C kinetic isotopic pro ﬁling of exponentially
growing cells to con ﬁrm the three reported bottlenecks (at VanAB, PobA,
and PcaHG nodes) and identify one additional bottleneck at the Vdh node
(Fig. 1B, C; Supplementary Information (SI), Fig. S1).
In the coniferyl branch, bottleneck at the Vdh node was characterized
by a 20-fold and 4-fold higher intracellular vanillin concentration
(4.3 ± 0.5 μmol g
CDW
−1) relative to its precursor feruloyl-CoA
(0.2 ± 0.03 μmol gCDW
−1) and its downstream metabolite vanillate
(1.1 ± 0.2 μmol gCDW
−1), respectively; further downstream, PCA was
below the detection limit of 0.1 μM (Fig. 1B). This bottleneck was further
illustrated by 50% lower incorporation of 13C-FER in vanillin compared to
feruloyl-CoA within 1 min of isotope switch ( P < 0.05) (SI, Fig. S1). Even
with VAN as the direct carbon source, PCA level remained low
(0.8 ± 0.1 μmol gCDW
−1), in accordance with inef ﬁcient VAN conversion
to intracellular PCA by VanAB (Fig. 1B). In the p-coumaroyl branch, in
line with the reported bottleneck node at PobA 21,30,32,t h e r ew a sah i g h
intracellular 4HB level (18.1 ± 7.6 μmol g CDW
−1) during COU catabolism,
while 4-hydroxybenzaldehyde (4HBA) level was 67% lower (P < 0.05) and
PCA level was below the detection limit (Fig. 1C). Furthermore, consistent
with this bottleneck at PobA, there was 31% smaller fraction of 13C-COU
carbons in 4HB than in 4HBA within 1 min ( P < 0.01) (SI, Fig. S1). During
growth on 4HB, PCA accumulated (19.8 ± 5.4 μmol g CDW
−1), in accor-
dance with the reported bottleneck at PcaHG (Fig. 1C)29.
Towards resolving the bottlenecks in the coniferyl branch, we
constructed four mutant strains: RW124 with vanAB overexpression,
RW125 with combined overexpression of vanAB and pcaHG, RW127
with overexpression of vdh, and RW126 with stacked overexpression of
vdh, vanAB,a n d pcaHG (Fig. 2A). Overexpression of vdh (strain RW127)
led to an 80% decrease in vanillin and a 24-fold increase in VAN
(P < 0.001), indicating that addressing the bottleneck at Vdh triggered a
downstream bottleneck at VanAB (Fig. 2B). Compared to metabolite
levels in RW127 fed on FER, a decreased VAN level (by 93%, P < 0.001)
in RW126 indicated simultaneous alleviation of the bottlenecks at both
Vdh and VanAB (Fig. 2B). Compared to the wild-type strain grown on
VAN, the unchanged intracellular PCA level in RW124 and depletion of
PCA (by 83%, P < 0.001) in RW125 demonstrated ef ﬁcient PCA cleavage
and thus elimination of the bottleneck at PcaHG during VAN catabolism
(Fig. 2C). Cellular energy charge was 25 – 44% lower in the mutant strains
in the coniferyl branch compared to the wild-type strain ( P < 0.05)
(Fig. 2B, C; SI, Table S1).
To resolve the bottlenecks in the p-coumaroyl branch, we prepared
three mutant strains that overexpressed either pobA (RW128), pcaHG
(RW123), or both pobA and pcaHG (RW129) (Fig. 2D). Compared to the
wild-type strain, the bottlenecks were resolved in RW128 and RW123,
characterized by a 90% decrease in 4HB during growth on COU and a 50%
decrease in PCA during growth on 4HB (P < 0.05), respectively (Fig.2E, F).
Similar to the coniferyl branch, the energy charge of the mutants of the p-
coumaroyl branch was 32– 4 0 %l o w e rt h a ni nt h ew i l d - t y p es t a i n(P <0 . 0 5 )
(Fig. 2E, F; SI and Table S1).
In sum, alleviation of native metabolite buildups in initial substrate
catabolism led to adverse change in the cellular energy charge, thereby
implying an interplay between the regulation of phenolic carbon inﬂux and
cofactor balance and a potenti al energy burden caused by gene
overexpression
50. It remains to be investigated whether this metabolic
burden could be overcome through alternative genetic engineering
approaches, such as tuning of the ribo somal binding site or chromosomal
integration. Interestingly, when wecompared growth phenotypes of the P.
putida KT2440 cells on FER, COU, VAN, or 4HB to reported growth
phenotype on SUC (a nonaromatic substrate ref.48), the biomass yield ofP.
putida was similar across all ﬁve substrates ( P =0 . 6 4– 0.99), despite the
differences in growth and substrate depl e t i o nr a t e s( S I ,F i g .S 2 ) .H o w e v e r ,w e
obtained 25– 31% higher energy charge when the wild-type cells were grown
on the phenolic substrates compared to growth on SUC ( P < 0.001) (SI,
Fig. S2). These data further implied that carbon inﬂux during phenolic acid
assimilation was optimized for a favorable cellular energy charge. Towards
understanding the metabolic mechanisms underlying native cofactor bal-
ance, we investigated protein levels, metabolite pools, and the network of
carbon ﬂuxes during processing of the different phenolic acid compounds.
Abundances of transporters and specialized enzymes are
modulated to adapt to phenolic carbon inﬂux
We obtained whole-cell proteomics data to compare the abundance of
proteins involved in membrane transport, the coniferyl branch, the p-
coumaroyl branch, and the central carbon metabolism in P. putidacells
fed on each phenolic substrate relative to cells fed on SUC (Fig. 3). For
each of the four biological replicates across the ﬁve growth substrates, we
employed a high-resolution proteomics method to capture over 4300
proteins out of the 5950 total proteins encoded by P. putida KT2440,
including low-abundance proteins that are typically undetected (SI,
Table S2). In agreement with the assignment of HcnK as the common
transporter for hydroxycinnamate uptake to both the coniferyl and p-
coumaroyl branches
13, abundance of HcnK was 700-fold greater in P.
putida cells fed with FER or COU relative to SUC (Fig. 3A; SI, Table S3).
The HcnK abundance was also 9-fold to 13-fold higher in cells grown on
VAN and 4HB relative to SUC (Fig. 3A; SI, Table S3), indicating that the
abundance of this transporter was also induced by downstream meta-
bolites in the pathways. For the VAN transporter VanK
13, its abundance
was 830-fold higher in cells fed with VAN or FER compared to SUC
(Fig. 3A; SI, Table S3), consistent with the dependence of VanK level on
the presence of VAN either as a substrate or as an intermediate in FER
catabolism (Fig. 1A). Similarly, the abundance of the 4HB transporter
PcaK was increased to similar extent (>140-fold) during growth across all
four phenolic substrates compared to growth on SUC, in accordance with
PcaK serving also as a transporter of PCA
13,16, a common downstream
intermediate in both the coniferyl and p-coumaroyl branches (Fig. 3A; SI,
Table S3).
After substrate uptake, a series of cofactor-dependent enzymes are
involved in the initial catabolism (Fig.3A). Compared to SUC-fed cells, the
abundances of Fcs, Ech, and Vdh, which collectively catalyze the conversion
of FER to VAN or COU to 4HB, were up to 590-fold higher in cells fed on
F E Ro rC O U ,b u tr e m a i n e du n c h a n g e di nc e l l sg r o w no nV A No r4 H B
(Fig. 3A; SI, Table S3). The abundance of VanAB, which catalyzes O-
demethylation of VAN to produce PCA and formaldehyde, was up to 2700-
fold higher in cells grown on FER or VAN compared to SUC; the corre-
sponding increase during feeding on COU and 4HB was 60-fold (Fig. 3A;
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3 Article
Communications Biology|          (2025) 8:1310 3
SI, Table S3). To avoid the accumu lation of toxic formaldehyde, P. putida
can oxidize formaldehyde to CO 2 via formate as an intermediate using
formaldehyde dehydrogenase (FrmA, FdhA) and formate dehydrogenase
(Fdh, Fmd, Fdo) (Fig. 3B; SI, Table S3)
57. Accordingly, relative to SUC-
grown cells, the abundance of FrmA and FdhD was up to 40-fold higher in
cells grown on FER or VAN, but remained unchanged in cells grown on
COU or 4HB (Fig. 3B; SI and Table S3). Related to stress tolerance
strategies
58,59, abundance of TtgABC efﬂux pump was 3-fold higher in VAN-
grown cells compared to SUC-fed cells (SI, Table S3), suggesting its invol-
vement in formaldehyde tolerance. For the conversion of 4HB to PCA, the
abundance of PobA was up to 3100-fold higher during feeding on COU or
4HB relative to SUC feeding; the corresponding change was up to 550-fold
higher in cells grown on FER or VAN (Fig. 3A; SI, Table S3).
Taken together, the increased abundance of the initial catabolic
enzymes across all substrates implied co-regulation in the utilization of the
different phenolic acid substrates. In fact, compared to growth on SUC, the
levels of enzymes (PcaHGBCDJIF) involved in the ortho-cleavage of PCA
via the β-ketoadipate pathway showed 40-fold to 500-fold increase during
growth on the four phenolic substrates (Fig.3A; SI, Table S3). Importantly,
the β-ketoadipate pathway generates SUC and acetyl-CoA as additional
carbon inﬂuxes into the TCA cycle compared to metabolism of SUC alone
(Fig. 3A). Next, we evaluated changes in protein abundances in the central
carbon metabolism (Fig. 3C).
Fluxes throughβ-ketoadipate pathway and enhanced
anaplerosis promote carbon retention in the TCA cycle
Only three nodes in central carbon metabolism showed greater than 2-fold
changes in protein abundances during growth on the phenolic substrates
relative to growth on SUC. First, we observed 2.5-fold to 6-fold more
abundant pyruvate carboxylase (Py c), which catalyzes the anaplerotic
reaction of pyruvate carboxylation to OAA, while there was little to no
change (<2-fold) in the abundance of p hosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase
(Ppc), which catalyzes the other anaplerotic reaction of PEP carboxylation,
suggesting a dominant role of Pyc during growth on the phenolic
acid compounds (Fig.3C; SI, Table S3). Second, the two enzymes (AceA and
GlcB) involved in the glyoxylate shunt were 2-fold to 30-fold more abundant
(Fig. 3C; SI, Table S3). Third, the abundance of AceE and AceF, which
catalyze pyruvate to acetyl-CoA, wasup to 6-fold lower in cells fed on FER or
COU, potentially due to the additional in ﬂux of acetyl-CoA from the
hydroxycinnamate substrates. To co rroborate the metabolic remodeling
inferred from the proteomics data, we performed kinetic
13C-proﬁling of P.
putida KT2440 cells switched from unlabeled substrates to 50%
phenyl-13C6-FER, phenyl-13C6-COU, phenyl-13C6-VAN, phenyl-13C6-4HB,
or U13C4-SUC (Fig. 4A).
The kinetic 13C-proﬁling of intracellular metabolites captured the
assimilation of substrate carbons in speciﬁc metabolic pathways. The slower
incorporation of 13C into the coniferyl branch relative to the p-coumaroyl
Fig. 2 | Resolved bottleneck nodes in initial catabolism and unfavorable cellular
energy state indicated by decreased energy charge values. ATargeted nodes in the
coniferyl branch for gene overexpression. Intracellular metabolite levels and energy
charge in the wild-type and mutant strains during feeding on B FER and C VAN.
D Targeted nodes in the p-coumaroyl branch for gene overexpression. Intracellular
metabolite levels and energy charge in the wild-type and mutant strains during
feeding on E COU and F 4HB. FER-CoA feruloyl-CoA, COU-CoA p-coumaroyl-
CoA. In B, C, and E, one-way ANOVA was performed followed by Tukey ’s HSD
post hoc test to determine the signi ﬁcance. In F, unpaired t-test was performed to
evaluate the signi ﬁcance. Statistically signi ﬁcant differences ( P < 0.05) are denoted
by a change in letter. Data in B, C, E, and F are shown as mean ± standard deviation
of four independent biological replicates ( n = 4).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3 Article
Communications Biology|          (2025) 8:1310 4
branch was consistent with up to 58% sl ower uptake rates of the respective
substrates (SI, Figs. S1 and S2). After 1 min, the 13C-labeled fractions of the
intracellular SUC were at up to 24% in cells grown on FER and VAN, but at
u pt o5 2 %i nc e l l sg r o w no nC O Ua n d4 H B( P < 0.001) (Fig. 4B). The
13C - l a b e l e df r a c t i o no fa c e t y l - C o Ai nc e l l sg r o w no nt h eh y d r o x y c i n n a m a t e s
( F E Ra n dC O U )w a su pt o5 0 %l o w e rt h a ni nc e l l sg r o w no nt h eh y d r o -
xybenzoates (VAN and 4HB) (P < 0.05), due to the production of unlabeled
acetyl-CoA via Ech-mediated reaction on the hydroxycinnamates (Fig.4B).
Fig. 3 | Co-regulation of initial catabolism and selective remodeling nodes in
central carbon metabolism.Log2 fold change in protein abundance in A the per-
ipheral pathways, B formaldehyde oxidation pathway, and C central carbon meta-
bolism during feeding on each phenolic acid substrate compared to SUC. In B, Only
NADH was reported to be produced during formaldehyde and formate oxidation
based on previous studies
92,93. HcnK hydroxycinnamic acid transporter, VanK
vanillate transporter, PcaK 4-hydroxybenzoate/protocatechuate transporter, Fcs
feruloyl-CoA synthase, Ech feruloyl-CoA hydratase-lyase, Vdh vanillin dehy-
drogenase, VanAB vanillate O-demethylase, PobA 4-hydroxybenzoate 3-mono-
oxygenase, PcaH protocatechuate 3,4-dioxygenase beta chain, PcaG
protocatechuate 3,4-dioxygenase alpha chain, PcaC 4-carboxymuconolactone dec-
arboxylase, PcaB 3-carboxy-cis,cis-muconate cycloisomerase, PcaD 3-oxoadipate
enol-lactonase, PcaIJ 3-oxoadipate CoA-transferase, PcaF betaketoadipyl-CoA
thiolase, FrmA formaldehyde dehydrogenase, FdhA formaldehyde dehydrogenase,
FmdEFGH formate dehydrogenase, FdhDE formate dehydrogenase, FdoHGI for-
mate dehydrogenase, Gor glutathione reductase, Fbp fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase,
Pgi glucose-6-phosphate isomerase, Fba fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase, TktA
transketolase, TpiA triosephosphate isomerase, Gap glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase, Eno enolase, Pgm phosphoglucomutase, Pyk pyruvate kinase, PpsA
phosphoenolpyruvate synthase, Ppc phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase, OACD
oxaloacetate decarboxylase, AceEF pyruvate dehydrogenase, PycAB Pyruvate car-
boxylase, MaeB malic enzyme, GltA citrate synthase, Acn aconitate hydratase, IDH
isocitrate dehydrogenase, SucAB oxoglutarate dehydrogenase, SucCD succinyl-CoA
ligase, FumC fumarate hydratase, Mqo malate:quinone oxidoreductase, Mdh malate
dehydrogenase, AceA isocitrate lyase, GlcB malate synthase. Metabolite abbrevia-
tions: G6P glucose-6-phosphate, F6P fructose-6-phosphate, FBP fructose-1,6-
bisphosphate, Xu5P xylulose-5-phosphate, GAP glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate,
DHAP dihydroxyacetone phosphate, 3PG 3-phosphoglycerate, PEP phosphoe-
nolpyruvate, PYR pyruvate, CIT citrate, ICIT isocitrate, AKG alpha-ketoglutarate,
FUM fumarate, MAL malate, OAA oxaloacetate. Only NADH is produced during
formaldehyde and formate oxidation based on previous studies
92,93. Data of the
protein abundances and metabolite levels from four independent biological repli-
cates ( n = 4) are provided in SI, Tables S3 and S4. The full dataset of proteomics is
provided in Supplementary Data 1.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3 Article
Communications Biology|          (2025) 8:1310 5
Furthermore, consistent with the additional acetyl-CoA inﬂux from the β-
ketoadipate pathway, 13C-labeled acetyl-CoA was predominantly doubly
13C-labeled (>90%) during growth on the phenolic substrates (Fig. 4B).
Despite similar substrate uptake rates, ¹³C-labeled fraction within 15 s was
up to 2-fold higher in 4HB-grown cells (P < 0.01), conﬁrming exceptionally
high TCA cycle ﬂux for 4HB assimilation (Fig. 4B). We further conﬁrmed
metabolic remodeling through carbon mapping combined with ¹³C-
metabolomics (Fig.4C– E).
Regarding metabolic remodeling th rough anaplerosis inferred from
changes of Pyc abundance, we determined the relative fraction of OAA
derived from pyruvate by tracking triply
13C-labeled OAA (via aspartate
labeling), which would be generated o nly from the carboxylation of triply
Fig. 4 | Kinetic13C-proﬁling and carbon mapping of metabolicﬂux partitioning
revealed metabolic remodeling nodes in the central carbon metabolism.
A Schematic illustration of kinetic isotope incorporation experiment using 50%
13C-labeled substrates. B Kinetic 13C-proﬁling of central carbon metabolites.
C Contribution from pyruvate versus malate to the oxaloacetate pool determined by
carbon mapping when cells were grown on 50% 13C-labeled phenolic substrates or
SUC. Isotopologues of TCA cycle intermediates predicted by carbon mapping when
assuming D 100% canonical TCA cycle and E 100% glyoxylate shunt. Kinetic
13C-proﬁling of dihydroxyacetone phosphate, PEP, alpha-ketoglutarate, and
sedoheptulose-7-phosphate are provided in SI, Fig. S5. We presented the data in B as
individual data points in three independent biological replicates ( n = 3), some of the
data points are invisible due to the highly reproducibility among replicates. Values of
individual data points for kinetic
13C-metabolomics are provided in Supplementary
Data 2. Asp aspartate, other abbreviations of metabolites are the same as shown
in Fig. 3.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3 Article
Communications Biology|          (2025) 8:1310 6
13C-labeled pyruvate by unlabeled CO 2 (Fig. 4C). At the plateau of the
kinetic13C data, we recorded 38% triply 13C-labeled pyruvate and 6% triply
13C-labeled aspartate in the SUC-fed cells (Fig. 4B), reﬂecting that 16% of
OAA was derived from pyruvate (Fig. 4C), consistent with previous ﬂux
analysis60. However, the isotopologue proﬁling in cells fed on the phenolic
substrates revealed 30– 45% of OAA derived from pyruvate (Fig. 4C), thus
highlighting the increase in Pyc-catalyzed pyruvate carboxylation to OAA
(i.e., anaplerosis) implied by the proteomics data.
To verify metabolic remodeling through the glyoxylate shunt, we
illustrated carbon mapping for two scenarios. In one scenario, the meta-
bolite SUC generated exclusively through the canonical TCA cycle with no
ﬂux through the glyoxylate shunt wou ld result in non-labeled, singly
13C-
labeled, triply 13C-labeled, and fully 13C-labeled SUC after one cycle of
carbon mapping (Fig. 4D); an additional cycle would generate the same
i s o t o p o l o g u e s( S I ,F i g .S 4 ) .I na n o t h e rs c e n a r i o ,t h eg l y o x y l a t es h u n ti nt h e
TCA cycle would generate doubly 13C-labeled SUC through isocitrate lyase
(AceA) (Fig. 4E). Detection of this doubly 13C-labeled isotopologue only in
the cells fed on the phenolic substrates con ﬁrmed the activation of the
glyoxylate shunt during the metabolism of these substrates (Fig.4B). Taken
collectively, the ﬁndings from both the proteomics data and the
13C-metabolomics data delineated the o perational metabolic network for
phenolic acid utilization. To gain quantitative insights into the carbon and
energy ﬂuxes through the metabolic network, we performed
13C-ﬂuxomics
to obtain the ﬂuxes through the different metabolic reactions and subse-
quently mapped out the cofactor balancing.
Remodeling of TCA cycle-associatedﬂuxes sustains required
cofactor balancing and ATP surplus
The algorithm for the 13C-ﬂuxomics of each of the four phenolic acid sub-
strates was constrained by biomass growth rates, substrate depletion rates,
metabolite secretion rates, intracellular metabolite levels, and kinetic
13C-proﬁling of metabolites (Fig. 5A– D). Relative to SUC metabolism, the
phenolic substrates generate inﬂuxes of acetyl-CoA from both the aromatic
cleavage through the β-ketoadipate pathway a nd the acryl group in the
hydroxycinnamates (FER and COU) (Fig. 1A). Consequently, the citrate
synthaseﬂux, which combines OAA with acetyl-CoA to form citrate, was up
to 2-fold higher for the catabolism of the hydroxycinnamate compounds
(FER and COU) than for the catabolism of the hydroxybenzoate com-
pounds (VAN and 4HB) (Fig. 5A– D). Accordingly, citrate and alpha-
ketoglutarate levels were up to 10-fold and 7-fold higher ( P <0 . 0 0 1 ) ,
respectively, in cells grown on phenolic substrates than on SUC, implying
high carbon ﬂux towards the high energy-producing side of the TCA cycle
(SI, Table S4). Notably,ﬂux through the glyoxylate shunt was determined to
be 2.5-fold to 13-fold higher during metabolism of the hydroxycinnamates
than the hydroxybenzoates (Fig. 5A– D), consistent with our proteomics
d a t ao nt h er e l a t i v ea b u n d a n c eo fA c e Ai nt h eg l y o x y l a t es h u n td u r i n g
growth on the different types of phenolic acid substrates (Fig. 3C; SI,
Table S3).
With respect to the ﬂux remodeling at the cataplerosis-anaplerosis
nodes, the cataplerotic ﬂux through malic enzyme was 1.4-fold to 2.5-fold
higher during phenolic substrate catabolism compared to SUC catabolism,
while there was noﬂux through OAA decarboxylase (Fig.5A– D ;S I ,F i g .S 6 ) .
In fact, our intracellular metabolom ics data revealed that intracellular
malate decreased by up to 70% ( P < 0.05), while PEP and
3-phosphoglycerate (3PG) increased 2-fold to 60-fold ( P < 0.01) during
phenolic substrate utilization, relative to SUC utilization, indicating strong
catapleroticﬂux from the TCA cycle towards intermediates in gluconeo-
genesis (SI, Table S4). Informed by the proteomics data, which highlighted
up to 6-fold increase in Pyc (pyruvate carboxylase) relative to less than 2-fold
increase in Ppc (PEP carboxylase) (P < 0.001) (Fig. 5), anaplerotic ﬂux was
constrained to occur only via Pyc, involving the carboxylation of pyruvate to
OAA, to replenish four-carbon intermediates in the TCA cycle. This
pyruvate-to-OAA anaplerotic ﬂux was 7-fold to 20-fold higher during
phenolic substrate utilization than SUC utilization (Fig. 5A– D; SI, Fig. S6),
in agreement with the 2-fold to 3-fold higher OAA production from
pyruvate inﬂux illustrated by the carbon mapping combined with kinetic
¹³C-metabolomics (Fig.4C). For resolving whether to include ﬂ
ux through
pyruvate dehydrogenase, we performed additional13C-ﬂuxomics with and
without the reaction of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA (SI, Table S5). The modelﬁt
was not statistically acceptable when we deactivated this reaction in FER and
COU (SI, Table S5), suggesting possible suf ﬁcient protein abundance to
support ﬂux or post-translational regulation 41,61. Therefore, pyruvate
dehydrogenase was considered active during the phenolic substrate cata-
bolism despite the observed decrease in the protein abundance (Fig. 3C).
We compared our high-resolution
13C-ﬂuxomics of the metabolic
network with the widely used approach ofﬂux balance analysis (FBA), which
is based only on substrate uptake and biomass growth rates and is thus
derived from a low-resolution algorithm (Fig.5A– D, Supplementary Data 4).
In both
13C-ﬂuxomics and FBA, sustenance of high TCA cycle ﬂux was
prioritized over gluconeogenic ﬂux during phenolic substrate catabolism
(Fig.5A– D; Supplementary Data 4). Speciﬁcally, the13C-ﬂuxomics predicted
that although the catapleroticﬂux through malic enzyme (i.e., from malate to
pyruvate) was substantial (60 – 80% of the carbon in ﬂux to malate), only
13– 16% of this cataplerotic ﬂux was invested towards gluconeogenic ﬂux
because 69– 77% was recycled back to the TCA cycle via both pyruvate
carboxylase (to replenish OAA) and pyruvate dehydrogenase (to generate
acetyl-CoA) (Fig.5A– D). The FBA still predicted 78 – 86% of carbon reten-
tion in the TCA cycle, but this was due to high malate dehydrogenase ﬂux
( f r o mm a l a t et oO A A ) ,w h i l et h ec a t a p l e r o t i cm a l i ce n z y m eﬂux was pre-
dicted to be low by the FBA. We attributed this difference between our
13C-ﬂuxomics and the FBA modeling to the low resolution of the
anaplerosis-cataplerosis node in the FBA algorithm (Supplementary Data 4).
With respect to relationships between our 13C-ﬂuxomics and pro-
teomics data, there was a general trend of positive correlation between
changes in protein abundances and changes in ﬂuxes in cataplerosis, ana-
plerosis, 4 reactions in gluconeogenesis, and at least 7 reactions in the TCA
cycle (Fig.5E). However, due to the discrepantm a g n i t u d e si nt h er e s p e c t i v e
protein abundance changes andﬂux changes, there was an overall poor 1:1
correlation (Pearson correlation,r = 0.11-0.35,P =0 . 0 8– 0.59) (Fig.5E). For
instance, although carbonﬂux through isocitrate dehydrogenase increased
5-fold to 8-fold during growth on th e phenolic acids compared to SUC,
there was less than 2-fold change in the enzyme abundance. Serine phos-
phorylation was previously implicated in modulatingﬂux through isocitrate
dehydrogenase in P. putidaKT2440 grown on a glucose:benzoate mixture
versus glucose alone
41. The discrepancy between changes in enzyme
abundance and metabolic ﬂuxes in our correlation matrices were thus
consistent with the proposal that metabolic ﬂuxes in central carbon meta-
bolism are driven primarily by th ermodynamic factors and post-
translational modiﬁcations41,61.
To examine consequences of the remodeled metabolic network on
cofactor balance, we determined the rates of production and consumption of
NADPH, NADH/UQH
2, and ATP during the catabolism of the phenolic
substrates compared to SUC, as a reference (Fig. 6A). Due to reported
absence ofﬂux through oxPPP during gluconeogenic growth48, as illustrated
in Fig. 1Aa n dc o nﬁrmed by our 13C-ﬂuxomics illustrated in Fig. 5A– D,
cofactor production through oxPPP was not a contributing factor in our
cofactor balancing for phenolic acid metabolism. Furthermore, water-
forming NADH oxidase was not includedin the cofactor balancing, based on
a previous report of its minimal to no impact on metabolic ﬂux distribution
in P. putidaKT2440
42.I n c r e a s e dﬂux through cataplerosis via malic enzyme
and through isocitrate dehydrogenase in the TCA cycle led to 1.2-fold to 2.5-
fold greater NADPH production in ce lls grown on phenolic substrates
compared to SUC-grown cells (Fig.6A). As a result, the NADPH production
was 24– 44% in excess of the NADPH demand for both biomass synthesis
and the peripheral pathway for aromatic substate catabolism, including
formaldehyde detoxiﬁcation; this NADPH surplus was routed to NADH
synthesis through transhydrogenase reactions (Fig. 6A). Due to the pro-
moted retention of carbonﬂux in the TCA cycle, NADH/UQH
2 production
was 1.4-fold to 2.7-fold higher durin g catabolism of phenolic substrates
relative to SUC utilization (Fig. 6A). The NADH surplus was
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3 Article
Communications Biology|          (2025) 8:1310 7
1.4-fold to 2.7-fold higher in phenolic substrate-fed cells than SUC-grown
cells, resulting in a corresponding fold increase in ATP production via
oxidative phosphorylation (Fig. 6A). In corroboration of the model-
predicted ATP surplus, absolute qu antitation of the intracellular ATP
content revealed up to 2-fold highe r ATP in cells fed with FER, COU, or
4 H Bt h a ni nt h eS U C - f e dc e l l s(P < 0.01); the lack of similar trend with VAN
implied unaccounted ATP demand, likely related to additional ATP needed
to cope with oxidative stress during VAN assimilation
62 (Fig. 6A, B). The
Fig. 5 | Quantitativeﬂux analysis of the reaction network in phenolic acid
metabolism revealed structure of the cataplerosis-anaplerosis nodes to sustain
high ﬂux in the TCA cycle.Metabolic ﬂux analysis of P. putidaKT2440 grown on
A FER, B COU, C VAN, and D 4HB as the sole carbon source constrained by
proteomics, metabolite pool sizes, and
13C metabolomics data. E Correlation
matrices of relative ﬂux changes versus relative protein abundance changes. All
ﬂuxes are normalized to the substrate uptake rate ( q). The weight of arrows is relative
to ﬂux magnitude. Relative ﬂux changes between cells grown on the phenolic
substrates and SUC are denoted by a blue-black-red color scheme. Increased ﬂux is
shown in shades of red, decreased ﬂux is shown in shades of blue, and black indicates
negligible differences in ﬂux values. The yellow arrows represent ﬂuxes that are
predicted to be only in phenolic acid catabolism. The gray arrow represents meta-
bolite secretion. Flux model of P. putidagrown on SUC is provided in SI, Fig. S6. The
complete ﬂux estimations are provided in Supplementary Data 3. Abbreviations of
metabolites are the same as shown in the main text.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3 Article
Communications Biology|          (2025) 8:1310 8
surplus of ATP predicted by the ﬂux model, which was con ﬁrmed by
independent measurements of intracellular ATP, was consistent with the
relatively higher energy charge valu es during processing of the phenolic
substrates compared to SUC (SI, Fig. S2), underscoring the optimization of
the carbon metabolism in P. putidato maintain a high-energy state during
phenolic substrate utilization.
Discussion
The catabolism of lignin-derived pheno lic substrates represents a critical
step in valorizing lignin using biotechnologically relevant microbes 2– 4.
Strains of P. putidaare extensively studied for t h i se n d e a v o rd u et ot h e i r
native ability to catabolize various aromatic compounds6. However, eluci-
dation of the native metabolic network in relation to cofactor balance in P.
putida during catabolism of phenolic substrates remains a knowledge gap.
Here, we performed a comprehensive quantitative analysis of the metabolic
underpinnings of carbon and energy ﬂuxes in P. putidaKT2440 during
conversion of two hydroxycinnamates and two hydroxybenzoates, which
represent common lignin-derived phenolic substrates.
To address metabolic bottlenecks during conversion of phenolic sub-
strates, increase in enzyme expression was shown to be a successful strategy
Fig. 6 | Quantitative mapping of metabolic reactions in cofactorﬂux balancing
during processing of four lignin-derived phenolic acid substrates compared to
succinate. AProduction (black) and consumption (orange) ﬂuxes
(mmol gCDW
−1 h−1) of NADPH, NADH/UQH 2, and ATP during growth on, from
top to bottom, SUC, FER, COU, VAN, and 4HB. B Quantiﬁed intracellular ATP pool
size (μmol g CDW
−1) in cells grown on the lignin-related phenolic substrates com-
pared to succinate. In A, the numbers of the pie chart indicate the ﬂux values (mmol
gCDW
−1h−1); the metabolic proteins and pathways involved in each reaction are
speciﬁed near the pie charts and in the color legends, respectively. In A, production
of ATP from NADH/UQH 2 was calculated using a phosphate to oxygen (P/O) ratio
of 1.5. Details of ﬂux data in ( A) were provided in SI, Table S6. Data in B are
expressed as mean ± standard deviation from four independent biological replicates
(n = 4) and one-way ANOVA was performed followed by Tukey ’s HSD post hoc test;
statistically signi ﬁcant differences ( P < 0.05) are denoted by a change in letter.
Detailed data in ( B) were provided in SI, Table S1.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3 Article
Communications Biology|          (2025) 8:1310 9
when an enzyme (i.e., VanA or VanB) exhibited a preference for NADH
over NADPH, but bottleneck was not alleviated for an enzyme (i.e., PobA)
with NADPH speciﬁcity due to cofactor de ﬁciency
17,21,29,32. The latter de ﬁ-
ciency was circumvented by substituting for an enzyme with broader
cofactor speciﬁcity (i.e., PraI) or by increasing NADPH supply through
substrate co-feeding30,32. Our quantitative ﬂux analysis determined that the
metabolicﬂuxes generated excess in both NADPH and NADH in P. putida
KT2440, but the NADH surplus was up to 6-fold higher than the NADPH
surplus. Thus, our ﬁndings implied that the native cofactor balance was
more amenable to buffering incre ased NADH demand than increased
NADPH demand from enzyme overexpression. These ﬁndings inform
rational design of metabolic engineering strategies, particularly when tar-
geting ﬂuxes through isoenzymes with similar catalytic functions but with
distinct cofactor preferences. The surplus of NAD(P)H can bene ﬁtb i o -
production of free fatty acids
63 and polyhydroxyalkanoates64,w h i l eA T P
overproduction can be employed in improving yield of biopolymers that
require energy input, such asε-Poly-L-lysine65. Predicted by our proteomics
data and con ﬁrmed by 13C-ﬂuxomics, we identi ﬁed key nodes of ﬂux
remodeling with important energeticconsequences during the metabolism
of the phenolic substrates. At the cataplerosis-anaplerosis nexus between the
TCA cycle and gluconeogenesis, we found thatP. putidaKT2440 exhibited
the speciﬁc cataplerotic routing of carbon ﬂuxes through malic enzyme (to
deplete malate and produce pyruvate) and anaplerotic routing through
pyruvate carboxylase (to replenish OAA). Notably, the enhanced carbon
ﬂux through malic enzyme was critical in sustaining the necessary NADPH
yield, but resulted in decreasing ﬂux to OAA through malate dehy-
drogenase. As a consequence, one important role of the anaplerotic carbon
recycling to the TCA cycle via pyruvate carboxylase was to satisfy OAA
demand for biosynthesis. This adapta tion of cataplerosis and anaplerosis
generated 50% of the NADPH yield and sustained high ﬂux through the
TCA cycle to produce over 70% of the NADH yield, which eventually fueled
oxidative phosphorylation for ATP production. A similar routing of carbon
ﬂuxes through the cataplerosis-anapl erosis nodes was noted in glucose-
grown P. putidato satisfy elevated cofactor demands in response to oxi-
dative and energetic stresses
41,47. For instance, in response to oxidative stress,
P. putidahas been shown to enhance carbon ﬂux from glucose catabolism
through the oxPPP to generate excess NADPH that exceeded 50% of the
biomass demand47. Moreover, when the conversion of NADH to ATP via
oxidative phosphorylation was uncoupled chemically in glucose-fed P.
putida, there was an increase in carbon ﬂux through the high-energy pro-
ducing side of the TCA cycle towards providing NAD(P)H and ATP pro-
duction to counterbalance the metabolic perturbation
42. Thus, we propose
that cofactor-driven metabolic reprogramming is a widespread phenom-
enon under different substrate utilization.
The ortho-cleavage pathway, the only known catabolic route for the
phenolic substrates inP. putida(particularly strain KT2440), generates SUC
a n da c e t y l - C o At of e e di n t ot h eT C Ac y c l e .T h e r ea r et w oo t h e rr e p o r t e d
aerobic PCA cleavage pathways: for example, the 2,3-metacleavage pathway
found in P. putidastrains mt-2 and H, and the 4,5- meta cleavage pathway
revealed in Comamonas testosteroniand Sphingobium sp.S Y K - 6
61,66– 69.T h e
2,3-meta cleavage route generates pyruvate and acetyl-CoA with the pro-
duction of NADH 66,69; the 4,5- meta cleavage route generates OAA and
pyruvate with the production of NADPH 61,68. The quantitative analysis
employed here to decode cofactor balance involved in the ortho-cleavage
pathway could be used to evaluate the metabolic routing of phenolic carbons
and cellular cofactor balance following the other cleavage pathways.
In sum, we unraveled quantitatively the interplay between carbon
metabolism and energy metabolism in P. putidaKT2440 grown on lignin-
derived phenolic acid substrates, fo cusing on the catabolism of hydro-
xycinnamates and hydroxybenzoates with PCA as the common catabolic
intermediate. Lignin-derived compounds can also constitute of other aro-
matic structures5, with different intermediates such as catechol and gallate6.
Moreover, sugar monomers and aliphatic acids often co-exist with phenolic
acids in hydrolysates of lignocellulosic feedstocks
70,71. Therefore, a valuable
next step is the investigation of the energy metabolism in P. putidaduring
co-utilization of different phenolic structures with sugars or aliphatic acids.
To this end, the current research ﬁndings provide a valuable quantitative
blueprint of the native metabolic network and its tuning of carbon and
energyﬂuxes for further interrogations and explorations of Pseudomonads
and other related bacterial platforms for lignocellulose valorization.
Methods
Bacterial cultivation
P. putida(strain KT2440) was obtained from the American Type Culture
Collection (ATCC) and stored in Lysogeny broth (Miller) nutrient-rich
medium with 25% glycerol at −80 °C. Cells were washed and inoculated
from frozen stocks into 20-mL glass tubes that contained 5 mL of pH-
adjusted (7.0) minimal nutrient medium with the same carbon-equivalent
concentration, 100 mM C, of each substrate as a sole source of carbon: FER,
COU, VAN, 4HB or SUC. The minimal nutrient medium contained
5.0 mM NaH
2PO4,2 0 m MK 2HPO4,3 7 m MN H 4Cl, 17 mM NaCl,
0.81 mM MgSO4·7H2O, and 34 μM CaCl2·2H2O. Addition of essential trace
metal nutrients and FeSO4 (30 μM) to the nutrient medium was done prior
to inoculation. After initial inoculation of the culture in glass tubes at 30 °C
with shaking at 220 rpm overnight in ani n c u b a t o r - s h a k e r( N e wB r u n s w i c k
Scientiﬁc, Edison, NJ)
48, the cells were harvested, washed and subsequently
transferred into 125-mL or 250-mL baf ﬂed ﬂasks. To optimize oxygen
transfer, only one-ﬁfth of the volume of the baf ﬂed ﬂask was ﬁlled with the
minimal nutrient medium with carbon source. Cell growth was monitored
by measuring the optical density at 600 nm (OD 600) using an Agilent Cary
UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Santa Clara, CA). Cell dry weight per gram
(gCDW) was measured by weighing the mass of lyophilized cell pellets col-
lected throughout the growth48. The conversion factor of OD 600 and gCDW
was calculated through linear regression with R2 coefﬁcient greater than
0.8048. All growth experiments were conducted in three biological replicates.
Mutant construction
Construction details for strains, oligonucleotides, and plasmids are detailed
in SI, Tables S7 – S9. In brief, all plasmids were synthesized and cloned by
Twist Biosciences. Ribosome binding sites were optimized for each nativeP.
putida KT2440 sequence
72. For the construction of P. putidastrains, the
parental strainP. putidaAG5577 containing a total of nine uniqueattBsites
was used 73.T h ep a r e n t a ls t r a i nP. putida AG5577 was con ﬁrmed to be
identical to the wild-type P. putidaKT2440 in phenolic acid utilization (SI,
Fig. S2). All integrations were achie ved by serine recombinase-assisted
genome engineering using either the BxB1 or TG1 recombinase 73,74.I n t e -
grations were con ﬁrmed using Oxford Nanopore sequencing at Plas-
midsaurus (https://www.plasmidsaurus.com).
Measuring extracellular substrate depletion
Aliquots of cell suspensions were collected and spanned at different time
points throughout biomass growth. Following ﬁltering during centrifuga-
tion (Costar Spin-X, 0.22-μm-pore-size ﬁlter), the ﬁltrates were stored at
−20 °C until analysis. The concentrat ion of each aromatic substrate was
determined using ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography
(UHPLC) with an Agilent ZORBAX Eclipse Plus C18 column
(4.6 × 100 mm with 5 μm particle size) and a UV detector at 210 nm for 4HB
and VAN detection, and 275 nm for FER and COU detection. The injection
volume was 10 μL and the column was maintained at 25 °C. The mobile
phase consisted of 0.1% formic acid (eluent A) and 80:10:10 acetonitrile:
methanol: H
2O (v/v) (eluent B) with a ﬂow rate of 0.9 mL·min −1.T h e
gradient of eluent B was set as 0 min, 6%; 6.5 min, 15%; 8.5 min, 25%;
10.75 min, 37.5%; 15.5 min, 65%; 16.25 min, 6%. Extracellular substrate
depletion rate, in mmol g
CDW
−1 h−1, was determined by regression analysis.
The rate of SUC depletion was obtained by Wilkes et al. 48.
Quantitative proteomics
P. putida KT2440 was cultured until mid-exponential phase
(OD600 =1 . 0– 1.2) using 100 mM C of FER, COU, VAN, 4HB, or SUC as the
sole carbon source in the nutrient minimal medium. After centrifugation of
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3 Article
Communications Biology|          (2025) 8:1310 10
2-mL cultures (10,000 × g f o r5m i na t4° C ) ,t h ec e l lp e l l e t sw e r ew a s h e d
twice with phosphate-buffered solution (pH = 7.4) within 10 min to remove
extracellular components followed by quenching with cold methanol (4 °C)
and incubated on ice for 30 min
75. Samples were kept on ice to minimize
protein change during the processing. The quenched cell suspensions were
centrifuged, and the pellets were resuspended in methanol and stored at
−80 °C until analysis.
The samples were processed with an on- ﬁlter in-cell (OFIC) digestion
approach
76.B r i eﬂy, after transferring the samples to E3 ﬁlters (CDS Analy-
tical, Oxford, PA), and centrifuging (400 ×g for 1 min), the ﬁlter was washed
once with methanol, and treated with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphi-
neand and 40 mM chloroacetamide (in 50 mM triethylammonium bicar-
bonate, TEAB), followed by incubating at 45 °C for 10 min. The sample-
containingﬁlters were spun to remove liquid, followed by washing once with
50 mM TEAB. Subsequently, the samples were digested with Trypsin/LysC
m i xa t3 7 ° Cf o r1 6– 18 h. After digestion, the peptides were eluted, pooled,
and dried in SpeedVac. The peptides were desalted with StageTips (CDS
Analytical, Oxford, PA), dried, and stored at−80 °C until further analysis.
The peptides were ﬁrst loaded onto a trap column (PepMap100 C18,
300 μm×2m mw i t h5 μm particle size; Thermo Scientiﬁc) then separated
through an analytical column (PepMap100 C18, 50 cm × 75 μmw i t h3 μm
particle size; Thermo Scientiﬁc) with eluents consisting of 0.1% formic acid
in water (v/v) (eluent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (v/v) (eluent B)
with a ﬂow rate of 250 nL·min
−1 using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system
with nano electrospray ionization f or liquid chromato graphy mass spec-
trometry analysis (LC-MS). The MS data were acquired on an Orbitrap
Eclipse mass spectrometer with FAIMS Pro Interface (Thermo Scientiﬁc) at
120 K resolution, followed by MS/MS acquisition in data-independent
mode following a FAIMS-DIA proteomic pipeline
77.
The mass spectrometry data were processed using Spectronaut soft-
ware (version 19.1) 78 and a library-free DIA analysis work ﬂow with
directDIA+ and the P. putidaKT2440 protein sequence (Uniprot 2024
release; 5950 sequences). In short, the settings for Pulsar and library gen-
eration included: Trypsin/P as speciﬁc enzyme; peptide length from 7 to 52
amino acids; allowing 2 missed cleavages; toggle N-terminal M turned on;
Carbamidomethyl on C asﬁxed modiﬁcation; Oxidation on M and Acetyl at
protein N-terminus as variable modi ﬁcations; FDRs at PSM, peptide and
protein level all set to 0.01; Quantity MS level set to MS2, and cross-run
normalization turned on. Bioinformatics analyses were performed using
Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3)
79. The full dataset of proteomics is pro-
vided in Supplementary Data 1.
Intracellular metabolite levels and isotope labeling kinetics
To proﬁle the intracellular metabolites o f each of the substrate condition
(100 mM C of FER, COU, VAN, 4HB, or SUC), cell suspensions (3 mL) of
P. putidaKT2440 during mid-exponential growth phase (OD
600 =1 . 0– 1.2)
were ﬁltered (0.22 μm nylon membranes; Whatman, 7402-004), then lysed
in a cold solvent (4 °C) containing methanol, acetonitrile, and water in a
2:2:1 (v/v) ratio. Metabolism was quenched by submerging the ﬁlter con-
taining the cells immediately in the cold solvent mixture, which lysed the
cells; there was less than 1 min between theﬁltering process and the transfer
of the ﬁlter to the cold solvent. This well-established protocol
80 for meta-
bolite extraction after quenching metabolism was illustrated previously by
the senior author41,48,60,61,81,82 and others83– 85. The suspensions with the lysed
cells were centrifuged (10,000 × g, 4 °C for 5 min) and aliquots (200 μL) of
the supernatants in 2 mL-tubes were dried under ultrapure nitrogen gas
followed by storage at −80 °C before further analysis. The dried samples,
collected from four biological replicates, were resuspended in 100 μL LC-MS
grade water before metabolomics analysis.
In preparation for kinetic
13C-labeling experiments, 3-mL exponen-
tially-growingP. putidaKT2440 cells (two transfers, three biological repli-
cates) on each unlabeled substrate( 1 0 0m MCo fF E R ,C O U ,V A N ,4 H B ,o r
SUC) were ﬁltered (0.22 μm nylon membranes; Whatman, 7402-004), and
the ﬁlters containing the cells were placed onto agar plates containing
100 mM C of the same substrate, followed by incubation at 30 °C until
exponential growth was resumed. To initiate 13C-labeling of intracellular
metabolites, cell-containingﬁlters were transferred onto fresh agar plates
with 50% of 13C-labeled substrate: 13C6-phenyl-FER, 13C6-phenyl-COU,
13C6-phenyl-VAN, 13C6-phenyl-4HB, or U 13C4-succinate. These labeled
substrates were purchased from Cambridge Isotopes (Tewksbury, MA) or
Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). At four different time points (15 s, 1 min,
5 min, and 15 min), cells adhered to the ﬁlter were quenched into the
aforementioned cold quenching solution (4 °C); data for time 0 were
obtained with cells directly quenched from the unlabeled plate. The quen-
ched cell suspensions were processed following the aforementioned nitro-
gen drying procedure and the extracted metabolites were stored at −80 °C
until metabolomics analysis.
Metabolomics analysis
Intracellular and extracellular metabolites were quanti ﬁed based on our
established metabolomics protocol using UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc
Dionex UltiMate 3000) coupled with hig h-resolution mass spectrometry
(Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc Q Exactive quadrupole-Orbitrap) operating in
negative mode48,81. The LC column, an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 Column
(particle size 1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 100 mm, Waters), was maintained at 25 °C
with an injection volume of 10 μL. The eluents contained 97:3 (v/v) LC-MS
grade water:methanol with 15 mM acetic acid and 10 mM tributylamine
(solvent A) and methanol (solvent B)
81.T h e ﬂow rate was set at
0.18 mL·min−181. The data was analyzed on the Thermo ScientiﬁcX C a l i b u r
software (v3.0) using a series of stan dard concentrations. The fraction of
different isotopomers was analyzed using the Metabolomic Analysis and
Visualization Engine software version 2011.6.1786; to correct for the natural
abundance of 13C, IsoCor v2.2.0 87 was used. The full dataset of kinetic
13C-metabolomics is provided in Supplementary Data 2.
13C-ﬂuxomics analysis
We employed both the levels and the kinetic isotopic pro ﬁling of intracel-
lular metabolites to perform an isotope non-steady state metabolic ﬂux
analysis (INST-MFA)37.Ac o r e P. putida metabolic network was con-
structed based on published resources with modi ﬁcations to supplement
aromatics utilization pathways46,49. The biomass yield equation was mod-
iﬁed from a previous genome scale model forP. putidaKT244088.T h eI N C A
software (v2.3) based on the Matlab platform 89 was used to simulate iso-
potomer balances when P. putidawas fed on different aromatic substrates
and succinate. The INST-MFA mode ls were constrained with growth,
substrate consumption and metabolite secretion rates, measured pool sizes
( C I T ,A K G ,S U C ,P Y R ,P E P ,3 P G ,G 6 P ,A c C o A )a n dk i n e t i ci s o t o p o m e r
distributions (CIT, AKG, SUC, OAA as aspartate, PEP, PYR, 3PG, DHAP,
G6P, S7P, AcCoA). Flux estimations were reiterated at least 50 times from
random initial values. At least three independent ﬂux estimations were
performed for each INST-MFA model to ensure the ﬂux estimations were
consistent. The estimates were considered as statistically acceptable ﬁts
when the results passed the χ
2 goodness-of-ﬁt test (cutoff 95% con ﬁdence
level), i.e., the minimized variance-weighted sum of squared residuals (SSR)
were within the expected range. The standard errors (95% con ﬁdence
intervals) of the ﬂux estimations for the reactions in the central carbon
metabolism were calculated through the Monte Carlo simulation module
associated with the INCA software 49,89. Complete ﬂux estimations are in
Supplementary Data 3. Cofactor balance was calculated from quanti ﬁed
ﬂuxes for metabolic reactions with production or consumption of NADPH,
NADH/UQH2, and ATP. Only NADH was included for vanillate O-
demethylase because VanB was shown to prefer NADH over NADPH 17.
Flux balance analysis
The most recent genome-scale model of P. putidaKT2440 (iJN1463) was
downloaded from the BIGG database ( http://bigg.ucsd.edu/)88.T h eF E R ,
VAN, and 4HB catabolic reactions are present in the original iJN1463
model. The COU uptake and initial cata bolic reactions to coumaroyl-CoA
were added manually to the model. The optimized ﬂux distribution pre-
dicted by FBA was performed using the COBRApy library (version 0.29.1)
90.
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3 Article
Communications Biology|          (2025) 8:1310 11
Substrate uptake rates for SUC, FER, COU, VAN, and 4HB wereﬁxed at the
experimentally determined values (in mmol/gCDW/h), which are 16.0, 6.7,
9.9, 8.2, and 15.9, respectively. For the4HB analysis, the PCA secretion rate
was ﬁxed at 1.2 mmol/gCDW/h as experimentally measured. Results for FBA
are in Supplementary Data 4.
Statistics and reproducibility
All experimentally measured data were expressed as mean ± standard
deviation of three or four biological replicates (as indicated in ﬁgure cap-
tions). Unpaired two-tailedt-test was applied to evaluate the signiﬁcance of
differences between two groups. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA)
was used to evaluate differences among three or more conditions. Tukey ’s
honestly signiﬁcant difference post hoc test was performed for pairwise
comparison in addition to one-way ANOVA. The P value threshold for
statistically signiﬁcant difference was set at 0.05.
Reporting summary
Further information on research designis available in the Nature Portfolio
Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
Proteomics MS data are freely available via ProteomeXchange server
(https://www.proteomexchange.org/) under accession PXD067246 and the
MassIVE repository ( https://massive.ucsd.edu/) under accession
MSV000098800. Metabolomics MS data ar e available through the Meta-
boLights depository (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/metabolights/) under accession
number MTBLS11484. All source data for the ﬁgures were provided in
Supplementary Data 5, and all other data are available from the corre-
sponding author on reasonable request.
Code availability
Custom code for FBA analysis can be accessed through GitHub repository
(https://github.com/nqzhou/Aromatics_fba) and Zenodo repository
(https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16793025).
Received: 23 April 2025; Accepted: 13 August 2025;
References
1. Ragauskas, A. J. et al. Lignin valorization: improving lignin processing
in the bioreﬁnery. Science 344, 1246843 (2014).
2. Beckham, G. T., Johnson, C. W., Karp, E. M., Salvachúa, D. & Vardon,
D. R. Opportunities and challenges in biological lignin valorization.
Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.42,4 0– 53 (2016).
3. Kamimura, N. et al. Bacterial catabolism of lignin-derived aromatics:
new ﬁndings in a recent decade: update on bacterial lignin catabolism.
Environ. Microbiol. Rep.9, 679– 705 (2017).
4. Becker, J. & Wittmann, C. Aﬁeld of dreams: lignin valorization into
chemicals, materials, fuels, and health-care products.Biotechnol.
Adv. 37, 107360 (2019).
5. Schutyser, W. et al. Chemicals from lignin: an interplay of
lignocellulose fractionation, depolymerisation, and upgrading.Chem.
Soc. Rev.47, 852– 908 (2018).
6. Jiménez, J. I., Miñambres, B., García, J. L. & Díaz, E. Genomic analysis
of the aromatic catabolic pathways fromPseudomonas putida
KT2440. Environ. Microbiol.4, 824– 841 (2002).
7. Nikel, P. I. & de Lorenzo, V.Pseudomonas putidaas a functional
chassis for industrial biocatalysis: from native biochemistry totrans-
metabolism. Metab. Eng.50, 142– 155 (2018).
8. Schwanemann, T., Otto, M., Wierckx, N. & Wynands, B.
Pseudomonas as versatile aromatics cell factory.Biotechnol. J.15,
1900569 (2020).
9. de Lorenzo, V., Pérez-Pantoja, D. & Nikel, P. I.Pseudomonas putida
KT2440: the long journey of a soil-dweller to become a synthetic
biology chassis.J. Bacteriol.0, e00136– 24 (2024).
10. Silva, M., Donati, S. & Dvořák, P. Advances in engineering substrate
scope ofPseudomonas cell factories.Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.92,
103270 (2025).
11. Kim, G. B., Kim, H. R. & Lee, S. Y. Comprehensive evaluation of the
capacities of microbial cell factories.Nat. Commun.16, 2869 (2025).
12. Ravi, K., García-Hidalgo, J., Gorwa-Grauslund, M. F. & Lidén, G.
Conversion of lignin model compounds byPseudomonas putida
KT2440 and isolates from compost.Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.101,
5059– 5070 (2017).
13. Wada, A. et al. Characterization of aromatic acid/proton symporters in
Pseudomonas putidaKT2440 toward efﬁcient microbial conversion of
lignin-related aromatics.Metab. Eng.64, 167– 179 (2021).
14. Salvachúa, D. et al. Outer membrane vesicles catabolize lignin-
derived aromatic compounds inPseudomonas putidaKT2440. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA117, 9302– 9310 (2020).
15. Erickson, E. et al. Critical enzyme reactions in aromatic catabolism for
microbial lignin conversion.Nat. Catal.5,8 6– 98 (2022).
16. Nichols, N. N. & Harwood, C. S. PcaK, a high-afﬁnity permease for the
aromatic compounds 4-hydroxybenzoate and protocatechuate from
Pseudomonas putida. J. Bacteriol.179, 5056– 5061 (1997).
17. Bleem, A. C. et al. Evolution and engineering of pathways for aromatic
O-demethylation inPseudomonas putidaKT2440. Metab. Eng.84,
145– 157 (2024).
18. Linger, J. G. et al. Lignin valorization through integrated biological
funneling and chemical catalysis.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA111,
12013– 12018 (2014).
19. Graf, N. & Altenbuchner, J. Genetic engineering ofPseudomonas
putida KT2440 for rapid and high-yield production of vanillin from
ferulic acid.Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.98, 137– 149 (2014).
20. Vardon, D. R. et al. Adipic acid production from lignin.Energy Environ.
Sci. 8, 617– 628 (2015).
21. Salvachúa, D. et al. Bioprocess development for muconic acid
production from aromatic compounds and lignin.Green. Chem.20,
5007– 5019 (2018).
22. Kohlstedt, M. et al. From lignin to nylon: cascaded chemical and
biochemical conversion using metabolically engineered
Pseudomonas putida. Metab. Eng.47, 279– 293 (2018).
23. Johnson, C. W. et al. Innovative chemicals and materials from
bacterial aromatic catabolic pathways.Joule 3, 1523– 1537 (2019).
24. Salvachúa, D. et al. Metabolic engineering ofPseudomonas putidafor
increased polyhydroxyalkanoate production from lignin.Micro
Biotechnol. 13, 290– 298 (2020).
25. Zhou, Y. et al. Development of a CRISPR/Cas9n-based tool for
metabolic engineering of Pseudomonas putida for ferulic acid-to-
polyhydroxyalkanoate bioconversion.Commun. Biol.3,1 – 13 (2020).
26. Almqvist, H. et al. Muconic acid production using engineered
Pseudomonas putidaKT2440 and a guaiacol-rich fraction derived
from kraft lignin.ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng.9, 8097– 8106 (2021).
27. Eng, T. et al. EngineeringPseudomonas putidafor efﬁcient aromatic
conversion to bioproduct using high throughput screening in a
bioreactor. Metab. Eng.66, 229– 238 (2021).
28. Valencia, L. E. et al. EngineeringPseudomonas putidaKT2440 for
chain length tailored free fatty acid and oleochemical production.
Commun. Biol.5,1 – 12 (2022).
29. Werner, A. Z. et al. Lignin conversion toβ-ketoadipic acid by
Pseudomonas putidavia metabolic engineering and bioprocess
development. Sci. Adv.9, eadj0053 (2023).
30. Liu, H. et al. EngineeringPseudomonas putidafor lignin bioconversion
into cis-cis muconic acid.Chem. Eng. J.495, 153375 (2024).
31. Banerjee, D. et al. Addressing genome scale design tradeoffs in
Pseudomonas putidafor bioconversion of an aromatic carbon source.
npj Syst. Biol. Appl.11,1 – 13 (2025).
32. Kuatsjah, E. et al. Debottlenecking 4-hydroxybenzoate hydroxylation
in Pseudomonas putidaKT2440 improves muconate productivity
from p-coumarate.Metab. Eng.70,3 1– 42 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3 Article
Communications Biology|          (2025) 8:1310 12
33. Gómez-Álvarez, H. et al. Bioconversion of lignin-derived aromatics into the
building block pyridine 2,4-dicarboxylic acid by engineering recombinant
Pseudomonas putidastrains.Bioresour. Technol.346, 126638 (2022).
34. Johnson, C. W. et al. Eliminating a global regulator of carbon
catabolite repression enhances the conversion of aromatic lignin
monomers to muconate inPseudomonas putidaKT2440. Metab. Eng.
Commun. 5,1 9– 25 (2017).
35. Wiechert, W. 13C Metabolicﬂux analysis.Metab. Eng.3, 195– 206
(2001).
36. Wiechert, W. & Nöh, K. Isotopically non-stationary metabolicﬂux
analysis: complex yet highly informative.Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.24,
979– 986 (2013).
37. Jazmin, L. J. & Young, J. D. Isotopically nonstationary 13C metabolic
ﬂux analysis.Methods Mol. Biol.985, 367– 390 (2013).
38. Hollinshead, W. D., Henson, W. R., Abernathy, M., Moon, T. S. & Tang,
Y. J. Rapid metabolic analysis of Rhodococcus opacus PD630 via
parallel 13C-metaboliteﬁngerprinting. Biotechnol. Bioeng.113,
91– 100 (2016).
39. Sacco, S. A. & Young, J. D. 13C metabolicﬂux analysis in cell line and
bioprocess development.Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng.34, 100718 (2021).
40. Antoniewicz, M. R. A guide to metabolicﬂux analysis in metabolic
engineering: methods, tools and applications.Metab. Eng.63,2 – 12
(2021).
41. Kukurugya, M. A. et al. Multi-omics analysis unravels a segregated
metabolicﬂux network that tunes co-utilization of sugar and aromatic
carbons inPseudomonas putida. J. Biol. Chem.294,8 4 6 4– 8479 (2019).
42. Ebert, B. E., Kurth, F., Grund, M., Blank, L. M. & Schmid, A. Response
of Pseudomonas putidaKT2440 to Increased NADH and ATP
Demand. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.77, 6597– 6605 (2011).
43. Chavarría, M., Kleijn, R. J., Sauer, U., Pﬂüger-Grau, K. & de Lorenzo, V.
Regulatory tasks of the phosphoenolpyruvate-phosphotransferase
system ofPseudomonas putidain central carbon metabolism.mBio
3,
https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.00028-12 (2012).
44. Nikel, P. I., Chavarría, M., Fuhrer, T., Sauer, U. & de Lorenzo, V.
Pseudomonas putidaKT2440 strain metabolizes glucose through a
cycle formed by enzymes of the Entner-Doudoroff, Embden-
Meyerhof-Parnas, and Pentose Phosphate pathways.J. Biol. Chem.
290, 25920– 25932 (2015).
45. Sasnow, S. S., Wei, H. & Aristilde, L. Bypasses in intracellular glucose
metabolism in iron-limitedPseudomonas putida. MicrobiologyOpen
5,3 – 20 (2016).
46. Kohlstedt, M. & Wittmann, C. GC-MS-based 13C metabolicﬂux
analysis resolves the parallel and cyclic glucose metabolism of
Pseudomonas putidaKT2440 and Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1.
Metab. Eng.54,3 5– 53 (2019).
47. Nikel, P. I. et al. Reconﬁguration of metabolicﬂuxes inPseudomonas
putida as a response to sub-lethal oxidative stress.ISME J.15,
1751– 1766 (2021).
48. Wilkes, R. A., Waldbauer, J. & Aristilde, L. Analogous metabolic
decoupling inPseudomonas putidaand Comamonas testosteroni
implies energetic bypass to facilitate gluconeogenic growth.mBio 12,
e03259– 21 (2021).
49. Czajka, J. J. et al. Tuning a high performing multiplexed-CRISPRi
Pseudomonas putidastrain to further enhance indigoidine
production. Metab. Eng. Commun.15, e00206 (2022).
50. Vogeleer, P. et al. Metabolic impact of heterologous protein
production inPseudomonas putida: insights into carbon and energy
ﬂux control.Metab. Eng.81,2 6– 37 (2024).
51. Dvořák, P. et al. Synthetically-primed adaptation ofPseudomonas putida
t oan o n - n a t i v es u b s t r a t eD - x y l o s e .Nat. Commun.15, 2666 (2024).
5 2 . S u d a r s a n ,S .e ta l .D y n a m ics of benzoate metabolism inPseudomonas
putida KT2440. Metab. Eng. Commun.3,9 7–110 (2016).
53. Bonora, M. et al. ATP synthesis and storage.Purinergic Signal8,
343– 357 (2012).
54. Owen, O. E., Kalhan, S. C. & Hanson, R. W. The key role of anaplerosis
and cataplerosis for citric acid cycle function.J. Biol. Chem.277,
30409– 30412 (2002).
55. Belda, E. et al. The revisited genome ofPseudomonas putidaKT2440
enlightens its value as a robust metabolic chassis.Environ. Microbiol
18, 3403– 3424 (2016).
56. Koendjbiharie, J. G., van Kranenburg, R. & Kengen, S. W. M. The PEP-
pyruvate-oxaloacetate node: variation at the heart of metabolism.
FEMS Microbiol. Rev.45, fuaa061 (2021).
57. Roca, A., Rodríguez-Herva, J. J. & Ramos, J. L. Redundancy of
enzymes for formaldehyde detoxiﬁcation inPseudomonas putida. J.
Bacteriol. 191, 3367– 3374 (2009).
58. Ramos, J. L. et al. Mechanisms of solvent tolerance in gram-negative
bacteria. Annu. Rev. Microbiol.56, 743– 768 (2002).
59. Basler, G., Thompson, M., Tullman-Ercek, D. & Keasling, J. A
Pseudomonas putidaefﬂux pump acts on short-chain alcohols.
Biotechnol. Biofuels11, 136 (2018).
60. Mendonca, C. M. et al. Hierarchical routing in carbon metabolism
favors iron-scavenging strategy in iron-deﬁcient soilPseudomonas
species. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA117, 32358– 32369 (2020).
61. Wilkes, R. A. et al. Complex regulation in aComamonas platform for
diverse aromatic carbon metabolism.Nat. Chem. Biol.1– 12 https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41589-022-01237-7 (2023).
62. Tiffert, T., Garcia-Sancho, J. & Lew, V. L. Irreversible ATP depletion
caused by low concentrations of formaldehyde and of calcium-
chelator esters in intact human red cells.Biochim. et. Biophys.
Acta773, 143– 156 (1984).
63. Javidpour, P. et al. Biochemical and structural studies of NADH-
dependent FabG used to increase the bacterial production of fatty
acids under anaerobic conditions.Appl. Environ. Microbiol.80,
497– 505 (2014).
64. Xu, Z. et al. Enhancement of polyhydroxyalkanoate production by co-
feeding lignin derivatives with glycerol in Pseudomonas putida
KT2440. Biotechnol. Biofuels14, 11 (2021).
65. Yang, H. et al. Engineering streptomyces albulus to enhanceε-poly-L-
lysine production by introducing a polyphosphate kinase-mediated
ATP regeneration system.Microb. Cell Fact.22, 51 (2023).
66. Harayama, S. & Rekik, M. The meta cleavage operon of TOL
degradative plasmid pWWO comprises 13 genes.Mol. Gen. Genet.
221, 113– 120 (1990).
67. Kamimura, N. & Masai, E. The protocatechuate 4,5-cleavage
pathway: overview and newﬁndings. inBiodegradative Bacteria: How
Bacteria Degrade, Survive, Adapt, and Evolve(eds Nojiri, H., Tsuda,
M., Fukuda, M. & Kamagata, Y.) 207– 226 (Springer, 2014).
68. Varman, A. M. et al. Decoding how a soil bacterium extracts building
blocks and metabolic energy from ligninolysis provides road map for
lignin valorization.Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA113, E5802– E5811
(2016).
69. Borrero-de Acuña, J. M. et al. Channelling carbonﬂux through
the meta-cleavage route for improved poly(3-hydroxyalkanoate)
production from benzoate and lignin-based aromatics in
Pseudomonas putida H.Micro. Biotechnol.14, 2385– 2402 (2021).
70. Salvachúa, D., M. Karp, E., Nimlos, T. & R. Vardon, C. D. & T. Beckham,
G. Towards lignin consolidated bioprocessing: simultaneous lignin
depolymerization and product generation by bacteria.Green. Chem.
17, 4951– 4967 (2015).
71. Karp, E. et al. Quantiﬁcation of acidic compounds in complex
biomass-derived streams.Green. Chem.18, 4750– 4760 (2016).
72. Cetnar, D. P. & Salis, H. M. Systematic quantiﬁcation of sequence and
structural determinants controlling mRNA stability in bacterial
operons. ACS Synth. Biol.10, 318– 332 (2021).
73. Schmidt, M. et al. Maximizing heterologous expression of engineered
Type I polyketide synthases: investigating codon optimization
strategies. ACS Synth. Biol.12, 3366– 3380 (2023).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3 Article
Communications Biology|          (2025) 8:1310 13
74. Elmore, J. R. et al. High-throughput genetic engineering of nonmodel
and undomesticated bacteria via iterative site-speciﬁc genome
integration. Sci. Adv.9, eade1285 (2023).
75. Elsayyid, M., Tanis, J. E. & Yu, Y. Simple in-cell processing enables
deep proteome analysis of low-input caenorhabditis elegans.Anal.
Chem. 97, 9159– 9167 (2025).
76. Martin, K. R. et al. Development of an efﬁcient, effective, and
economical technology for proteome analysis.Cell Rep. Methods4,
100796 (2024).
77. Reilly, L. et al. A fully automated FAIMS-DIA mass spectrometry-
based proteomic pipeline.Cell Rep. Methods3, 100593 (2023).
78. Bruderer, R. et al. Extending the limits of quantitative proteome
proﬁling with data-independent acquisition and application to
acetaminophen-treated three-dimensional liver microtissues.Mol.
Cell Proteom.14, 1400– 1410 (2015).
79. Tyanova, S. et al. The Perseus computational platform for
comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data.Nat. Methods13,
731– 740 (2016).
80. Bennett, B. D., Yuan, J., Kimball, E. H. & Rabinowitz, J. D. Absolute
quantitation of intracellular metabolite concentrations by an isotope
ratio-based approach.Nat. Protoc.3, 1299– 1311 (2008).
81. Aristilde, L. et al. Glyphosate-induced speciﬁc and widespread
perturbations in the metabolome of soil pseudomonas species.Front.
Environ. Sci.5, https://doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2017.00034 (2017).
82. Mendonca, C. M., Zhang, L., Waldbauer, J. R. & Aristilde, L.
Disproportionate carbon dioxide efﬂux in bacterial metabolic
pathways for different organic substrates leads to variable
contribution to carbon-use efﬁciency. Environ. Sci. Technol.https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.4c01328 (2024).
83. Munger, J. et al. Systems-level metabolicﬂux proﬁling identiﬁes fatty
acid synthesis as a target for antiviral therapy.Nat. Biotechnol.26,
1179– 1186 (2008).
84. Park, J. O. et al. Metabolite concentrations,ﬂuxes and free energies
imply efﬁcient enzyme usage.Nat. Chem. Biol.12, 482–
489 (2016).
85. Pisithkul, T. et al. Metabolic remodeling during bioﬁlm development of
Bacillus subtilis. mBio 10, https://doi.org/10.1128/mbio.00623-19
(2019).
86. Clasquin, M. F., Melamud, E. & Rabinowitz, J. D. LC-MS data
processing with maven: a metabolomic analysis and visualization
engine. Curr. Protoc. Bioinform.https://doi.org/10.1002/
0471250953.bi1411s37 Unit14.11 (2012).
87. Millard, P. et al. IsoCor: isotope correction for high-resolution MS
labeling experiments.Bioinformatics 35, 4484– 4487 (2019).
88. Nogales, J. et al. High-quality genome-scale metabolic modelling of
Pseudomonas putidahighlights its broad metabolic capabilities.
Environ. Microbiol.22, 255– 269 (2020).
89. Young, J. D. INCA: a computational platform for isotopically non-
stationary metabolicﬂux analysis.Bioinformatics 30, 1333– 1335
(2014).
90. Ebrahim, A., Lerman, J. A., Palsson, B. O. & Hyduke, D. R. COBRApy:
COnstraints-based reconstruction and analysis for python.BMC
Syst. Biol.7, 74 (2013).
91. Volke, D. C., Olavarría, K. & Nikel, P. I. Cofactor speciﬁcity of glucose-
6-phosphate dehydrogenase isozymes inPseudomonas putida
Reveals a general principle underlying glycolytic strategies in bacteria.
mSystems 6, https://doi.org/10.1128/msystems.00014-21 (2021).
92. Tanaka, N., Kusakabe, Y., Ito, K., Yoshimoto, T. & Nakamura, K. T.
Crystal structure of formaldehyde dehydrogenase from
Pseudomonas putida: the structural origin of the tightly bound
cofactor in nicotinoprotein dehydrogenases.J. Mol. Biol.324,
519– 533 (2002).
93. Zobel, S., Kuepper, J., Ebert, B., Wierckx, N. & Blank, L. M. Metabolic
response ofPseudomonas putidato increased NADH regeneration
rates. Eng. Life Sci.17,4 7– 57 (2017).
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of
Energy (DOE), Ofﬁce of Science, Ofﬁce of Biological and Environmental
Research, Genomic Science Program under Award Number DE-
SC0022181. This work was authored in part by the National Renewable
Energy Laboratory, operated by Alliance for Sustainable Energy, LLC, for the
U.S. DOE under Contract No. DE-AC36-08GO28308. We thank Jeffrey
Czajka at Paciﬁc Northwest National Laboratory and Shawn Xiao at
Washington University in St. Louis for helpful advice during
13C-ﬂuxomics
modeling using the INCA software. The views expressed in the article do not
necessarily represent the views of the DOE or the U.S. Government. The U.S.
Government retains, and the publisher, by accepting the article for pub-
lication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a nonexclusive,
paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the pub-
lished form of this work, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government
purposes.
Author contributions
N.Z., R.A.W., X.C., K.P.T., J.A.B., and Y.Y. performed research. G.T.B. and
A.Z.W. provided resources. N.Z. and L.A. designed research, analyzed data,
and wrote manuscript. L.A. supervised research.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary informationThe online version contains
supplementary material available at
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3
.
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Ludmilla Aristilde.
Peer review informationCommunications Biologythanks Yinjie Tang,
Suresh Sudarsan and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution
to the peer review of this work. Primary Handling Editors: Haichun Gao and
David Favero. A peer reviewﬁle is available.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open AccessThis article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed material. You
do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material
derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material
is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use,
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To
view a copy of this licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/
.
© The Author(s) 2025
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-025-08723-3 Article
Communications Biology|          (2025) 8:1310 14