cells
Article
Overexpression of an Agave Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxylase
Improves Plant Growth and Stress Tolerance
Degao Liu 1,2,† , Rongbin Hu 1,†
 , Jin Zhang 1,2
 , Hao-Bo Guo 3, Hua Cheng 1
 , Linling Li 1,
Anne M. Borland 1,4
 , Hong Qin 3, Jin-Gui Chen 1,2 , Wellington Muchero 1,2 , Gerald A. T uskan1,2
and Xiaohan Yang 1,2, *
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Liu, D.; Hu, R.; Zhang, J.;
Guo, H.-B.; Cheng, H.; Li, L.; Borland,
A.M.; Qin, H.; Chen, J.-G.; Muchero,
W.; et al. Overexpression of an Agave
Phosphoenolpyruvate Carboxylase
Improves Plant Growth and Stress
Tolerance. Cells 2021, 10, 582.
https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10030582
Academic Editor:
Suleyman Allakhverdiev
Received: 2 February 2021
Accepted: 18 February 2021
Published: 6 March 2021
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1 Biosciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA;
liudegao909@gmail.com (D.L.); rhu1@utk.edu (R.H.); zhang007jin@163.com (J.Z.);
chenghua1437@126.com (H.C.); lilinling1437@126.com (L.L.); anne.borland@newcastle.ac.uk (A.M.B.);
chenj@ornl.gov (J.-G.C.); mucherow@ornl.gov (W.M.); tuskanga@ornl.gov (G.A.T.)
2 The Center for Bioenergy Innovation (CBI), Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN 37831, USA
3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, SimCenter, University of Tennessee Chattanooga,
Chattanooga, TN 37403, USA; guohaobo@gmail.com (H.-B.G.); hong-qin@utc.edu (H.Q.)
4 School of Natural and Environmental Science, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE1 7RU, UK
* Correspondence: yangx@ornl.gov; Tel.: +1-865-241-6895; Fax: +1-865-576-9939
† These authors contribute equally to this work.
Abstract: It has been challenging to simultaneously improve photosynthesis and stress tolerance in
plants. Crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) is a CO2-concentrating mechanism that facilitates plant
adaptation to water-limited environments. We hypothesized that the ectopic expression of a CAM-
speciﬁc phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC), an enzyme that catalyzes primary CO2 ﬁxation in
CAM plants, would enhance both photosynthesis and abiotic stress tolerance. To test this hypothesis,
we engineered a CAM-speciﬁc PEPC gene (named AaPEPC1) from Agave americana into tobacco.
In comparison with wild-type and empty vector controls, transgenic tobacco plants constitutively
expressing AaPEPC1 showed a higher photosynthetic rate and biomass production under normal
conditions, along with signiﬁcant carbon metabolism changes in malate accumulation, the carbon
isotope ratio δ13C, and the expression of multiple orthologs of CAM-related genes. Furthermore,
AaPEPC1 overexpression enhanced proline biosynthesis, and improved salt and drought tolerance
in the transgenic plants. Under salt and drought stress conditions, the dry weight of transgenic
tobacco plants overexpressing AaPEPC1 was increased by up to 81.8% and 37.2%, respectively, in
comparison with wild-type plants. Our ﬁndings open a new door to the simultaneous improvement
of photosynthesis and stress tolerance in plants.
Keywords: Agave americana; crassulacean acid metabolism; genetic engineering; Nicotiana sylvestris;
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase; photosynthesis; drought tolerance; salt tolerance
1. Introduction
Human population increases, global climate changes and natural resources reductions
could seriously impact food and energy security in the future [1–8]. The drylands, with
precipitation amounts that are inadequate for most present-day food and bioenergy crops,
covers approximately 40% of the world’s land [9,10]. Moreover, around 20% of irrigated
areas in the world are under salt stress which has become a big constraint limiting agricul-
tural production [11–13]. In addition, the phytotoxic effects of nanoparticles could impact
plant growth [14,15]. To address these challenges, tremendous efforts have been put into
improving photosynthesis, drought tolerance and salt tolerance in crop plants through
breeding and genetic engineering over the past 50 years, though there has been limited
success in simultaneously enhancing both biomass production and stress tolerance [16].
One common problem shared by previous breeding and genetic engineering approaches
Cells 2021, 10, 582. https://doi.org/10.3390/cells10030582 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/cells
Cells 2021, 10, 582 2 of 20
is that they have focused on drought- or salt-responsive genes in C3 or C4 species, with
narrow genetic diversity for the tolerance of abiotic stresses.
A potential solution to this problem can be obtained from the desert plants that
employ crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) for photosynthesis (e.g., Agave americana),
as these plants maximize water-use efﬁciency (WUE) by shifting all or part of their net
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) uptake to the nighttime, when the evapotranspiration
rates are generally lower than that in the daytime [ 1,2,8,9,17]. The nocturnal CO 2 taken
up in CAM plants is intracellularly ﬁxed, usually leading to the generation of C4 organic
acid (e.g., malate) as storage intermediates, which accumulate in the vacuole during the
dark period before being gradually catabolized during the day [2,9]. High rates of malate
decarboxylation behind closed stomata during the day can concentrate CO 2 from 2- to
60-fold around ribulose-1–5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (Rubisco) [9,18]. This
effectively creates a ‘CO2 pump’ that can strongly favor the carboxylase activity of Rubisco
and potentially suppress photorespiration, a process that can reduce photosynthesis by up
to 40% in C3 photosynthesis plants [1,2,9,19–21]. In addition, as an obligate CAM species,
Agave americana is highly tolerant to salinity with an electrical conductivity (EC) level of
9.4 dS m−1 [22]. Additionally, A. americana has been reported to achieve high biomass
productivity and drought tolerance when grown as a crop on arid and semi-arid lands [23].
CAM photosynthesis can be divided into nocturnal and day-time reactions [24–27]:
At night atmospheric CO2 is taken up through open stomata and primary ﬁxation of CO2
(as HCO3−) by phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase (PEPC) produces oxaloacetate (OAA)
that is subsequently converted to malate by malate dehydrogenase (MDH). Malate is
transported by tonoplast-localized aluminum-activated malate transporter (ALMT) into
the vacuole, where it is stored as malic acid throughout the dark period. During the
light period, Rubisco ﬁxes the CO 2 released from NAD(P)-malic enzyme (ME)- or PEP
carboxykinase (PEPCK)-mediated malate decarboxylation when stomata are closed [9,19].
It has been shown that PEPC is a highly abundant enzyme in leaves of A. americana and
its transcript level and protein abundance are correlated with CAM [28]. In this study, we
identiﬁed a CAM-isoform PEPC through genome-wide analysis of the PEPC gene family in
A. americana, as well as protein structure modeling analysis and molecular dynamics (MD)
simulation studies. We then determined the impacts of the overexpression of the Agave
PEPC on the photosynthetic carbon metabolism, and abiotic stress tolerance in the model
C3 plant tobacco.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Genome-Wide Analysis of the PEPC Gene Family
Arabidopsis thaliana PEPC sequences (AT1G68750.1, AT1G53310.1, AT3G14940.1, and
AT2G42600.2) were retrieved and used as queries in BLAST searches againstAgave ameri-
cana transcriptomics data [28] to identify potential PEPC genes. An expectation (E) value
of <1 × 10−10 was used to obtain the homologous protein sequences of the predicted PEPC
family members. The expression data of the Agave PEPCs were also obtained from the
A. americana transcriptomics data [28]. For gene expression patterns of Agave PEPC, the
log10 transformed FPKM values and z-score normalized relative expression were used for
heatmap analysis.
2.2. Phylogenetic Analysis
Multiple alignment of PEPC proteins was performed using the MAFFT online ser-
vice [29]. The maximum likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree was constructed using W-IQ-
TREE [30]. The sequences used for the analysis were: foxtail millet (AY491400), foxtail
millet C4 (AF495586), maize C3 (X61489), maize C4 (X15642), maize root (AB012228), rice
C3 (Os08g0366000, Os09g0315700, and Os01g0758300), rice root (Os02g0244700), sorghum
C4 (X63756), sugarcane C3 (M86661), sugarcane C4 (AY135709), and wheat (AJ007705) [31].
The bootstrap values were calculated as percentages for 1000 replications.
Cells 2021, 10, 582 3 of 20
2.3. Structural Modeling and Molecular Dynamics Simulation
The A. americana PEPC model was constructed using the I-TASSER v. 5.1 protein struc-
ture modeling toolkit [32]. Structure averaging from multiple MD simulations or a single
long time-scale MD simulation could effectively reﬁne the predicted structures [33]. Here,
starting with the best I-TASSER model, the rotamer states of Asn, Gln, and His residues
as well as protonation states of titratable residues were validated by MolProbity [34]. The
HBUILD module in CHARMM [35] was employed to add missing hydrogen atoms to the
model. A water box with the size of 118 × 106 × 102 Å3 (at least 15 Å to the edge of the
protein) was used, and sodium and chloride ions were added to neutralize the net charge.
The ﬁnal model contained 120,210 atoms with 34,893 water molecules. NAMD [ 36] was
used to perform the MD simulations with the CHARMM protein force ﬁeld [37] and TIP3P
water model [38]. Using the SHAKE algorithm to ﬁx all bond lengths involving hydrogen
atoms, a time step of 2-fs was applied to all MD simulations. A 50k-step energy minimiza-
tion was conducted, followed by a “natural” heating to 300 K with the rate of 0.001 K/step
for 300 k steps. An NPT ensemble maintained by Langevin piston controls was used in
the MD simulations with a system pressure of 1 atm and a temperature of 300 K. A cutoff
switching between 9 and 11 Å was applied for non-bonded interactions. The particle mesh
Ewald (PME) summation was applied for long-range electrostatic interactions with a grid
spacing of 1.35 Å. MD simulation was performed for 200 ns, and analysis was carried out
on the ﬁnal 50 ns of the MD trajectory. The PDBsum online tool [39] was used to plot the
cartoon topology of the protein structure.
2.4. Plasmid Construction
A 2943-bp DNA fragment containing the coding sequence ofAaPEPC1 (Aam080248) [28]
fused to two FLAG epitope tags [40] was chemically synthesized by Integrated DNA Tech-
nology (Coralville, IA, USA) and used to produce a chimeric gene construct, p35S:FLAG-
AaPEPC1/pNOS: nptII. The vector contains the CaMV35S promoter which drives FLAG-
AaPEPC1, and the nopaline synthase (NOS) promoter which drives the nptII gene for
kanamycin resistance as a selection marker. The vector was delivered into the GV3101
Agrobacterium tumefaciens strain via the freeze-thaw method [41] for plant transformation.
2.5. Plant Transformation
A tobacco ( Nicotiana sylvestris) cultivar (USNGC TW136, PI555569) was used for
genetic transformation. The generation and culturing of transgenic plants were carried out
as previously described [42]. The transgenic lines were based on single copy lines with
a segregation ratio of approximately 3:1 (kanamycin resistance vs. sensitivity) in the T1
generation, and homozygous lines were presumed if there was no segregation in the T2
and T3 generations (n > 100).
2.6. Measurement of Photosynthesis
The photosynthetic rates of leaves of transgenic and wild-type (WT) plants that were
well-watered and grown in pots for 6 weeks was measured as previously described [11].
Mature leaves from 3 individual replicate plants were used for gas exchange analysis
by an LI-COR Portable Photosynthesis System (LI-COR Inc., Lincoln, NE, USA). The
relative chlorophyll content (SPAD value in fresh leaves) was analyzed using an SPAD-502
Chlorophyll Meter (Minolta, Japan) [11].
2.7. Analysis of Malate, Glucose and Proline Content
Mature leaves were sampled and frozen in liquid nitrogen at the indicated times and
stored at −80 ◦C until use. The leaf samples were ground to a ﬁne powder and assayed
for malate and glucose content using the standard enzyme-linked spectrophotometric
methods according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO,
USA), respectively.
The proline content was measured as described by He, et al. [43].
Cells 2021, 10, 582 4 of 20
2.8. Carbon Isotope Ratio Analysis
Plants were well watered throughout the growing period. Mature leaves were har-
vested from 6-week-old plants and dried for 1 week at 50 ◦C. Finely ground dry powder
was placed in capsules and then analyzed at the University of California Davis Stable
Isotope Facility (http://stableisotopefacility.ucdavis.edu, accessed on 25 February).
2.9. Salt and Drought Stress Treatment
For salt tolerance analysis, the transgenic plants and controls were watered with
200 mM NaCl solution every other day for 4 weeks as previously described [ 11]. For
drought tolerance analysis, the transgenic and WT plants were exposed to progressive
drought stress by withholding water until a nearly lethal effect of dehydration was observed
on the WT. A recovery study was carried out for plants under drought stress by re-irrigating
with water [44]. After salt or drought treatment, all plants were dried for 48 h in an oven at
80 ◦C and weighed [11]. All treatments were performed in triplicate.
2.10. Expression Levels Analysis of the Related Genes
The expression levels of related genes in the transgenic and WT plants were analyzed
by qRT-PCR as previously described [11]. Total leaf RNA was extracted from transgenic
and WT plants using the Spectrum Plant Total RNA Kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO,
USA). RNA samples were reverse-transcribed using a High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Tran-
scription Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The cDNA solution was used
as a template for qPCR ampliﬁcation using SYBR Green Master Mix (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA, USA) with the speciﬁc primers designed for each gene (Supplemen-
tary Table S1). The tobacco actin gene was used as an internal control (Supplementary
Table S1). The quantiﬁcation of the gene expression level was performed with comparative
CT method [45].
2.11. Statistical Analysis
The data presented as the mean ± SD were analyzed by a one-way ANOVA analysis
with post-hoc Tukey honestly signiﬁcant difference (HSD) test. p-values of <0.05 or <0.01
were considered to be statistically signiﬁcant.
3. Results
3.1. CAM-Speciﬁc PEPC in Agave americana
Through a tBLASTn search against A. americana transcriptomics data [ 28], using
the PEPC protein sequences of Arabidopsis thaliana as queries, we identiﬁed a total of
21 transcripts encoding PEPC in A. americana. Several types of PEPC are present in plants,
including plant-type PEPCs (PTPCs) and one bacterial-type PEPC (BTPC) [ 46,47]. The
plant-type PEPCs studied so far have been classiﬁed into four groups: C3, C4, and CAM-
types from photosynthetic tissues and root-type from non-photosynthetic tissue [31]. In
order to gain insight into the evolutionary relationships among PTPCs, we constructed a
phylogenetic tree using the 21 predicted Agave PEPC transcripts and the C3-, C4-, CAM-
and root-type PEPCs from rice (Oryza sativa), maize (Zea mays), wheat (Triticum aestivum),
sugarcane (Saccharum spp.), sorghum (Sorghum bicolor), foxtail millet (Setaria italica) and
orchid (Phalaenopsis equestris) [24,31]. A phylogenetic analysis of the plant-type PEPCs indi-
cated that Aam080248 [28] (named AaPEPC1) belongs to CAM-type PEPC (Figure 1a). Our
results also showed the CAM- and C4-type PEPCs belong to different clades, suggesting
that these two PEPC types evolved independently.
Cells 2021, 10, 582 5 of 20
Cells 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 21 
5 
 
 
Figure 1. Identification of the crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM)-isoform of phosphoenolpy-
ruvate carboxylases (PEPC) in Agave americana. (a) Phylogenetic relationships of PEPCs in A. ameri-
cana and plant-type PEPCs from other monocot plants. Bootstrap values are shown at nodes. The 
sources for the PEPC sequences (as well as species abbreviations, etc.) are provided in ‘Materials 
and Methods’. (b) Diel transcript expression of the PEPC genes in A. americana. The Z-score is de-
fined as (xi-μi)/σi, where xi is the FPKM of gene i, μi is the mean and σi is the standard deviation of 
all 15 columns. White and black bars indicate daytime (12 h) and nighttime (12 h), respectively. 
Mleaf: mature leaf; Yleaf: young leaf. 
Using the quantitative gene transcript abundance data obtained from the transcrip-
tome analysis of 15 tissues, including mature leaves sampled over a diel cycle (eight time-
points) and, young leaves (three time-poi nts), meristem, stem, root and rhizome in A. 
americana [28], we obtained the transcript pattern of the 21 PEPC transcripts (Figure 1b), 
Among which Aam080248  was the most abundant transcript in mature leaves, with a 
transcript abundance peak during the late afte rnoon just before the start of the dark pe-
riod. These results supported the above comp utational phylogenetic prediction (Figure 
1a) that the Aam080248 gene encodes the CAM-specific PEPC in A. americana. 
Figure 1. Identiﬁcation of the crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM)-isoform of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylases (PEPC)
in Agave americana. ( a) Phylogenetic relationships of PEPCs in A. americana and plant-type PEPCs from other monocot
plants. Bootstrap values are shown at nodes. The sources for the PEPC sequences (as well as species abbreviations, etc.)
are provided in ‘Materials and Methods’. (b) Diel transcript expression of the PEPC genes in A. americana. The Z-score is
deﬁned as (xi − µi)/σi, where xi is the FPKM of gene i, µi is the mean and σi is the standard deviation of all 15 columns.
White and black bars indicate daytime (12 h) and nighttime (12 h), respectively. Mleaf: mature leaf; Yleaf: young leaf.
Using the quantitative gene transcript abundance data obtained from the transcrip-
tome analysis of 15 tissues, including mature leaves sampled over a diel cycle (eight
time-points) and, young leaves (three time-points), meristem, stem, root and rhizome in
A. americana [28], we obtained the transcript pattern of the 21 PEPC transcripts (Figure 1b),
Among which Aam080248 was the most abundant transcript in mature leaves, with a
transcript abundance peak during the late afternoon just before the start of the dark period.
Cells 2021, 10, 582 6 of 20
These results supported the above computational phylogenetic prediction (Figure 1a) that
the Aam080248 gene encodes the CAM-speciﬁc PEPC in A. americana.
3.2. AaPEPC1 Binds to Phosphoenolpyruvate
Phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) is the substrate for PEPC enzymes [48,49]. To understand
whether AaPEPC1 binds to PEP , we developed a protein structural model using I-TASSER
(v.5.1) accompanied by a 200 ns MD simulation (Figure 2a–c). The last 50 ns of the MD
trajectory were taken to reﬁne the AaPEPC1 structure. The root mean square deviation
(RMSD) of the α-carbon atoms of all residues was approximately 2.0 Å (Figure 2c), which
is reasonable for ﬂuctuations of the 964 amino acids (AA) protein. From the last 50 ns
MD trajectory, the snapshot that was closest to the average structure (with RMSD = 0.8 Å)
was selected as the ﬁnal model (Figure 2a,b). Since the crystal structures of bacterial
(Escherichia coli) PEPC (PDB entry 1JQN) and Z. mays C4-type PEPC (PDB entry 5VYJ) are
well-characterized [48–50], we compared the protein structure of AaPEPC1 with the E. coli
PEPC and Z. mays C4-type PEPC. In line with E. coli PEPC and Z. mays C4-type PEPC, the
AaPEPC1 model was found to be dominated by α-helix regions (546 AAs, 57.7%). The
Ramachandran plot of the AaPEPC1 structure was found to have 93.4% (804 AAs) in the
most favorable regions, compared to 92.6% for the E. coli PEPC and 90.5% for the Z. mays
C4-type PEPC (Figure 2d–f). In addition, 5.2% (45 AAs) of AaPEPC1 were found to be in
the additional allowed regions (7.1% for E. coli PEPC and 8.7% for Z. mays C4-type PEPC),
1.2% (10 AAs) were found to be in the generously allowed regions (0.1% for E. coli PEPC
and 0.2% for Z. mays C4-type PEPC) and 0.2% (2 AAs) were found to be in disallowed
regions (0.1% for E. coli PEPC and 0.3% for Z. mays C4-type PEPC). The N-terminus of
AaPEPC1 was found to contain the plant-speciﬁc serine residue (S9) (Figure 2a), which
is located in the middle of an α-helix ﬂanked by a long loop region. The plant-speciﬁc
Ser residue near the N-terminus of PEPC is well-known in C4 plant species [48,51]. This
serine residue, however, was absent in bacterial PEPC (e.g., E. coli PEPC, PDB entry 1JQN)
(Figure 2a,b). The AaPEPC1 model suggested that the AaPEPC1 can efﬁciently bind to PEP ,
which is bound by H171 and R640, where R640 is located at a GRGGXXGR 640GG motif
(Figure 2a) and is overlapped with R647 in the Z. mays C4-type PEPC, whereas H171 is
overlapped with H177 in theZ. mays C4-type PEPC, hence both H171 and R640 in AaPEPC1
may directly participate in the carboxylation reaction as proposed in the C4-type PEPC [48].
In addition, based on the PEP-AaPEPC1 complex model, R449 (R456 in Z. mays C4-type
PEPC) may also be involved in PEP binding and PEPC catalysis.
Cells 2021, 10, 582 7 of 20
Cells 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 21 
7 
 
 
Figure 2. AaPEPC1 binds to phosphoenolpyruvate (PEP) substrate. (a) Left: AaPEPC1 structure 
selected from 200 ns molecular dynamics (MD) simulation that is closest to the average structure 
of the whole trajectory (root mean square deviation RMSD = 0.8 Å). The protein structure is shown 
in cartoons with helices in red, strands in yellow and coils/turns in white. A PEP substrate that 
binds to the β-barrel (yellow) active site is shown in sticks and spheres. The plant-specific N-termi-
nal serine residue (S9) is also shown. The binding position of the PEP substrate was obtained from 
the Escherichia coli PEPC–PEP complex (PDB entry 1JQN) 
[50]. (b) A cartoon representation of the 
topology of AaPEPC1 structure. The cylinders represent alpha-helices. (c) The RMSD (Å) profile of 
the final 50 ns of the MD simulation. The deviations of all snapshots to the average MD structure 
are 1.4 ± 0.2 Å (not shown). (d–f) Ramachandran plot of the E. coli (PDB entry 1JQN) PEPC, Zea 
mays C4-type PEPC (PDB entry 5VYJ) [49], and AaPEPC1 (the final snapshot of the 200 ns MD 
trajectory), respectively. 
3.3. Development of Transgenic Tobacco Lines Overexpressing AaPEPC1 
After we identified the CAM-isoform of PEPC from A. americana, we wanted to de-
termine the impact of overexpressing this Agave gene on the photosynthetic carbon me-
tabolism and abiotic stress tolerance in Nicotiana sylvestris (tobacco), which is a C 3 plant 
species. The AaPEPC1 coding sequence was cloned into binary vector pBI121, down-
stream of the cauliflower mosaic virus 35S (CaMV35S) promoter, to yield p35S::AaPEPC1 
for transformation into N. sylvestris (Supplementary Figure S1a). The p35S::AaPEPC1 vec-
tor and empty vector (pBI121) were transferred into tobacco via A. tumefaciens-mediated 
genetic transformation [42]. Transformants ha rboring a single copy of transgene were 
Figure 2. AaPEPC1 binds to phospho enolpyruvate (PEP) substrate. ( a) Left: AaPEPC1 structure selected from 200 ns
molecular dynamics (MD) simulation that is closest to the average structure of the whole trajectory (root mean square
deviation RMSD = 0.8 Å). The protein structure is shown in cartoons with helices in red, strands in yellow and coils/turns
in white. A PEP substrate that binds to the β-barrel (yellow) active site is shown in sticks and spheres. The plant-speciﬁc
N-terminal serine residue (S9) is also shown. The binding position of the PEP substrate was obtained from theEscherichia coli
PEPC–PEP complex (PDB entry 1JQN) [ 50]. ( b) A cartoon representation of the topology of AaPEPC1 structure. The
cylinders represent alpha-helices. ( c) The RMSD (Å) proﬁle of the ﬁnal 50 ns of the MD simulation. The deviations of
all snapshots to the average MD structure are 1.4 ± 0.2 Å (not shown). ( d–f) Ramachandran plot of the E. coli (PDB
entry 1JQN) PEPC, Zea mays C4-type PEPC (PDB entry 5VYJ) [ 49], and AaPEPC1 (the ﬁnal snapshot of the 200 ns MD
trajectory), respectively.
3.3. Development of Transgenic Tobacco Lines Overexpressing AaPEPC1
After we identiﬁed the CAM-isoform of PEPC from A. americana , we wanted to
determine the impact of overexpressing this Agave gene on the photosynthetic carbon
metabolism and abiotic stress tolerance in Nicotiana sylvestris (tobacco), which is a C3 plant
species. The AaPEPC1 coding sequence was cloned into binary vector pBI121, downstream
of the cauliﬂower mosaic virus 35S (CaMV35S) promoter, to yield p35S::AaPEPC1 for
transformation into N. sylvestris (Supplementary Figure S1a). The p35S::AaPEPC1 vector
and empty vector (pBI121) were transferred into tobacco viaA. tumefaciens-mediated genetic
Cells 2021, 10, 582 8 of 20
transformation [42]. Transformants harboring a single copy of transgene were identiﬁed
from the segregation ratio for kanamycin resistance. Two T2 transgenic homozygous lines
(p35S::AaPEPC1_OE1 and p35S::AaPEPC1_OE2) exhibiting different expression levels
of the AaPEPC1 (Supplementary Figure S1b) were selected as representative lines for
subsequent phenotypic characterization.
3.4. Overexpression of AaPEPC1 Increases Photosynthetic Rate and Changes Stable Carbon
Isotope Ratio
We determined whether the constitutive overexpression of AaPEPC1 affected or inﬂu-
enced the photosynthetic rate in the transgenic tobacco plants, along with empty vector
(EV) and WT control plants, grown under normal conditions (12 h light/12 h dark pho-
toperiod; without drought- or salt-stress) at four time points (i.e., 3, 9, 15 and 21 h after
the beginning of the light period). The transgenic plants overexpressing AaPEPC1 showed
signiﬁcantly higher photosynthetic rates than the WT and EV controls in the light period
(Figure 3a). A carbon isotope ratio δ13C is a broadly accepted indicator of the extent to
which the biomass is derived from PEPC-mediated CO2 ﬁxation in plants, because PEPC
discriminates less against 13C than Rubisco which is responsible for most CO2 ﬁxation in
C3 plants during the light period [52]. The positive correlation between the δ13C values and
CAM activity has been demonstrated to be a simple and reliable method for determining
the type of photosynthesis, including that of C3, C3-CAM intermediate and CAM [52–54].
In this study, we found that the δ13C values were signiﬁcantly increased (i.e., became
less negative) in the transgenic line (OE2), in which the expression level of AaPEPC1 was
7.74-fold higher than that in the other transgenic line (OE1) (Supplementary Figure 1b),
in comparison with the controls (Figure 3b), thus indicating that this transgenic line was
using PEPC for photosynthetic carbon assimilation and production of biomass.
3.5. The Impact of AaPEPC1 Overexpression on the Accumulation of Malate and Glucose
PEPC functions in the production of OAA, thus leading to synthesis of malate/malic
acid, which is a key intermediate of the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle that links lipids and
glucose metabolisms with photosynthesis in C3 plants [47,55]. The diel ﬂuctuation in malate
content represents a central biochemical correlate of the CAM photosynthesis pathway [9].
Additionally, the glycolytic breakdown of glucose provides substrate for the primary
carboxylation reaction at night whilst the day-time recovery of glucose via gluconeogenesis
is an important sink for C released from malate decarboxylation [ 9,56]. To determine
the impact of AaPEPC1 overexpression on malate and glucose production in transgenic
tobacco, the malate and glucose contents were measured at four time points (i.e., 3, 9, 15
and 21 h after the beginning of the light period). The transgenic plants overexpressing
AaPEPC1 showed higher malate and glucose contents than the WT and EV controls at all
four time points during the day and night (Figure 3c,d). Furthermore, the transgenic plants
expressing AaPEPC1 showed a signiﬁcant increase in malate content at 15 h compared to
that at 9 h after the beginning of the light period, while no signiﬁcant difference was found
between the malate contents at 15 and 9 h in the control plants (Figure 3c). The rewired diel
malate accumulation–depletion pattern suggested that AaPEPC1 overexpression affects
primary carboxylation in transgenic plants. Additionally, we found that higher amounts
of glucose were broken down in the early night (at 15 h after the beginning of the dark
period) in the transgenic plants overexpressing AaPEPC1 compared with control plants
(Figure 3d), suggesting that the overexpression of the AaPEPC1 enhances glycolysis and
consequently supplies more substrates for primary carboxylation.
Cells 2021, 10, 582 9 of 20
Cells 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 21 
9 
 
 
Figure 3. Impact of overexpressing AaPEPC1 on photosynthetic rate (a), carbon isotope ratio δ13C 
(b), malate content (c), and glucose content (d) in tobacco. OE1 and OE2: the transgenic plants 
expressing AaPEPC1. EV: empty vector control. WT: wild-type plants. White and black bars indi-
cate the light period (12 h) and the dark period (12 h), respectively. X-axis represents the time after 
the beginning of the light period at 00:00 h. Values represent means ± SD (n = 3 individual repli-
cate plants). * and ** indicated significant difference from that of WT at P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, re-
spectively, by one-way ANOVA analysis with a post-hoc Tukey honestly significant difference 
(HSD) test. ns = non-significant. 
3.6. CAM-related Genes were Up-regulated by AaPEPC1 Overexpression 
To test whether the re-programed changes in diel malate and glucose content led to 
feedback regulation of CAM pathway genes, the transcript abundance of the orthologs of 
CAM genes in the transgenic and WT plants was analyzed using qRT-PCR (Figure 4a). 
The expression of carbonic anhydrase (NsyCA), an ortholog of CA that is responsible for 
rapid interconversion of CO2 and HCO3− in CAM, was more increased in transgenic plants 
expressing AaPEPC1 compared with that in the controls at 9, 15 and 21 h after the begin-
ning of the light period (Figure 4b). The expression levels of malate dehydrogenase 
(NsyMDH) (an ortholog of MDH that is responsible for catalyzing the oxidation of malate 
to OAA in CAM) and tonoplast aluminum-activated malate transporter ( NsyALMT) (an 
ortholog of ALMT that is responsible for transporting malate into vacuole in CAM) in the 
transgenic plants expressing AaPEPC1 were higher than those in the controls at the early 
night period (15 h after the beginning of the light period)(Figure 4c,d). The expression of 
tonoplast dicarboxylate transporter (NsyTDT) (an ortholog of TDT that may be responsi-
ble for transporting malic acid out of vacuole in CAM) was up-regulated in transgenic 
plants expressing AaPEPC1 at the early morning period (3  h after the beginning of the 
light period) (Figure 4e). The expression level of malic enzyme ( NsyME) (an ortholog of 
ME that may be responsible for the decarboxylation of malate in CAM species) in trans-
genic AaPEPC1 plants was increased during  the light period (Figure 4f). These results 
Figure 3. Impact of overexpressing AaPEPC1 on photosynthetic rate (a), carbon isotope ratio δ13C (b), malate content (c),
and glucose content (d) in tobacco. OE1 and OE2: the transgenic plants expressing AaPEPC1. EV: empty vector control.
WT: wild-type plants. White and black bars indicate the light period (12 h) and the dark period (12 h), respectively. X-axis
represents the time after the beginning of the light period at 00:00 h. Values represent means± SD (n = 3 individual replicate
plants). * and ** indicated signiﬁcant difference from that of WT at p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, respectively, by one-way ANOVA
analysis with a post-hoc Tukey honestly signiﬁcant difference (HSD) test. Ns = non-signiﬁcant.
3.6. CAM-Related Genes Were Up-Regulated by AaPEPC1 Overexpression
To test whether the re-programed changes in diel malate and glucose content led to
feedback regulation of CAM pathway genes, the transcript abundance of the orthologs
of CAM genes in the transgenic and WT plants was analyzed using qRT-PCR (Figure 4a).
The expression of carbonic anhydrase (NsyCA), an ortholog of CA that is responsible
for rapid interconversion of CO2 and HCO3− in CAM, was more increased in transgenic
plants expressing AaPEPC1 compared with that in the controls at 9, 15 and 21 h after the
beginning of the light period (Figure 4b). The expression levels of malate dehydrogenase
(NsyMDH) (an ortholog of MDH that is responsible for catalyzing the oxidation of malate
to OAA in CAM) and tonoplast aluminum-activated malate transporter (NsyALMT) (an
ortholog of ALMT that is responsible for transporting malate into vacuole in CAM) in the
transgenic plants expressing AaPEPC1 were higher than those in the controls at the early
night period (15 h after the beginning of the light period)(Figure 4c,d). The expression of
tonoplast dicarboxylate transporter (NsyTDT) (an ortholog of TDT that may be responsible
for transporting malic acid out of vacuole in CAM) was up-regulated in transgenic plants
expressing AaPEPC1 at the early morning period (3 h after the beginning of the light period)
(Figure 4e). The expression level of malic enzyme (NsyME) (an ortholog of ME that may
be responsible for the decarboxylation of malate in CAM species) in transgenic AaPEPC1
Cells 2021, 10, 582 10 of 20
plants was increased during the light period (Figure 4f). These results demonstrated that
the overexpression of the AaPEPC1 up-regulates the expression of the orthologs of CAM
pathway genes in transgenic plants.
Cells 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 21 
10 
 
demonstrated that the overexpression of the AaPEPC1 up-regulates the expression of the 
orthologs of CAM pathway genes in transgenic plants. 
 
Figure 4. Relative expression level of the orthologs of CAM pathway genes in AaPEPC1-overex-
pressing tobacco plants. (a) Diagram of the CAM pathway in malic enzyme (ME) subtype [24]. 
CA: carbonic anhydrase; PEPC: phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase; OAA: oxaloacetate; MDH: mal-
ate dehydrogenase; ALMT: aluminum-activated malate transporter; TDT: tonoplast dicarboxylate 
transporter; CBB: Calvin-Benson-Bassham. (b–f) Relative expression level of Nicotiana sylvestris CA 
(NsyCA, XM_009805732.1), NsyMDH (XM_009784202.1), NsyALMT (XM_009797046.1), NsyTDT, 
(XM_009797970.1) and NsyME (XM_009781546.1), respectively. The actin gene (XM_009774717.1) 
was used as an internal control. The values were normalized to expression in the wild-type plants 
(WT) at the 3 h light time-point. White and black bars indicate daytime (12 h) and nighttime (12 h), 
respectively. X-axis represents the time after the beginning of the light period. Values represent 
means ± SD (n = 3). 
3.7. Impact of AaPEPC1 Overexpression on Biomass Production 
Based on the above, we speculated that the higher photosynthetic rates, glucose con-
tent and carbon isotope ratio δ13C measured in transgenic plants overexpressing AaPEPC1 
may result in improved biomass production. To test this, we examined the growth of the 
transgenic plants overexpressing AaPEPC1, along with the EV and WT control plants, in 
Figure 4. Relative expression level of the orthologs of CAM pathway genes in AaPEPC1-overexpressing tobacco plants.
(a) Diagram of the CAM pathway in malic enzyme (ME) subtype [24]. CA: carbonic anhydrase; PEPC: phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxylase; OAA: oxaloacetate; MDH: malate dehydrogenase; ALMT: aluminum-activated malate transporter; TDT:
tonoplast dicarboxylate transporter; CBB: Calvin-Benson-Bassham. (b–f) Relative expression level of Nicotiana sylvestris CA
(NsyCA, XM_009805732.1), NsyMDH (XM_009784202.1), NsyALMT (XM_009797046.1), NsyTDT, (XM_009797970.1) and
NsyME (XM_009781546.1), respectively. The actin gene (XM_009774717.1) was used as an internal control. The values were
normalized to expression in the wild-type plants (WT) at the 3 h light time-point. White and black bars indicate daytime
(12 h) and nighttime (12 h), respectively. X-axis represents the time after the beginning of the light period. Values represent
means ± SD (n = 3).
Cells 2021, 10, 582 11 of 20
3.7. Impact of AaPEPC1 Overexpression on Biomass Production
Based on the above, we speculated that the higher photosynthetic rates, glucose con-
tent and carbon isotope ratio δ13C measured in transgenic plants overexpressing AaPEPC1
may result in improved biomass production. To test this, we examined the growth of the
transgenic plants overexpressing AaPEPC1, along with the EV and WT control plants, in
growth chambers under well-water conditions. After six weeks of growth, the transgenic
AaPEPC1 plants exhibited larger physical size than the WT and EV controls (Figure 5a).
The dry weight of the transgenicAaPEPC1 plants was signiﬁcantly increased in comparison
with the control plants (Figure 5b), demonstrating that AaPEPC1 overexpression increases
biomass production in transgenic plants under normal conditions.
Cells 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 21 
11 
 
growth chambers under well-water conditions. After six weeks of growth, the transgenic 
AaPEPC1 plants exhibited larger physical size than the WT and EV controls (Figure 5a). 
The dry weight of the transgenic AaPEPC1 plants was significantly increased in compari-
son with the control plants (Figure 5b), demonstrating that AaPEPC1 overexpression in-
creases biomass production in transgenic plants under normal conditions. 
 
Figure 5. Growth characteristics of transgenic tobacco plants expressing AaPEPC1. (a) Phenotypes 
of transgenic plants expressing AaPEPC1 (OE1 and OE2) as well as empty vector (EV), and wild-
type plants (WT), grown in pots for 6 weeks under well-watered conditions. (b) Dry weight (shoot 
and root) of transgenic plants and WT. Values represent means ± SD (n = 3). * and ** indicate sig-
nificant difference from that of WT at P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively, by one-way ANOVA 
analysis with post-hoc Tukey HSD. 
3.8. Impact of AaPEPC1 Overexpression on Salt and Drought Tolerance 
Most crop plants are susceptible to salinity. The NaCl stress at concentrations of 100–
200 mM can inhibit or even completely prevent plant growth, resulting in their death 
[57,58]. To investigate whether the overexpression of AaPEPC1 enhanced salt tolerance in 
transgenic plants, the transgenic AaPEPC1 plants as well as the EV and WT controls were 
grown in pots and irrigated with 200 mL of 200 mM NaCl solution once every two days 
for four weeks. The salt-stress treatment caused the death of the WT and EV control plants, 
while the transgenic plants overexpressing AaPEPC1 maintained growth (Figure 6a). The 
dry weight of the transgenic plants overexpressing AaPEPC1 was significantly increased 
compared to the controls (Figure 6b), establishing that the overexpression of AaPEPC1 
significantly enhanced tolerance to salt stress in transgenic tobacco plants. 
 
Figure 5. Growth characteristics of transgenic tobacco plants expressing AaPEPC1. ( a) Phenotypes of transgenic plants
expressing AaPEPC1 (OE1 and OE2) as well as empty vector (EV), and wild-type plants (WT), grown in pots for 6 weeks
under well-watered conditions. (b) Dry weight (shoot and root) of transgenic plants and WT. Values represent means± SD
(n = 3). * and ** indicate signiﬁcant difference from that of WT at p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, respectively, by one-way ANOVA
analysis with post-hoc Tukey HSD.
3.8. Impact of AaPEPC1 Overexpression on Salt and Drought Tolerance
Most crop plants are susceptible to salinity. The NaCl stress at concentrations of
100–200 mM can inhibit or even completely prevent plant growth, resulting in their
death [57,58]. To investigate whether the overexpression of AaPEPC1 enhanced salt tol-
erance in transgenic plants, the transgenic AaPEPC1 plants as well as the EV and WT
controls were grown in pots and irrigated with 200 mL of 200 mM NaCl solution once
every two days for four weeks. The salt-stress treatment caused the death of the WT and
EV control plants, while the transgenic plants overexpressing AaPEPC1 maintained growth
(Figure 6a). The dry weight of the transgenic plants overexpressing AaPEPC1 was signiﬁ-
cantly increased compared to the controls (Figure 6b), establishing that the overexpression
of AaPEPC1 signiﬁcantly enhanced tolerance to salt stress in transgenic tobacco plants.
To investigate whether overexpression of AaPEPC1 enhanced drought tolerance in
transgenic plants, the transgenic AaPEPC1 plants, and EV and WT controls, were subjected
to drought stress in growth chamber condition. After 15 days without watering, all WT
and EV control plants displayed severe wilting (all leaves were severely curled and most
leaves had turned yellow/or were dead), whereas the growth of transgenic tobacco plants
expressing AaPEPC1 was less affected and their youngest leaves were still green and ex-
panded (Figure 7a). Three days after re-watering, all WT and EV controls were nearly dead,
whereas all transgenic lines expressingAaPEPC1 survived and started to regrow (Figure 7b).
Dry weight of the transgenic plants expressing AaPEPC1 was also signiﬁcantly increased
Cells 2021, 10, 582 12 of 20
compared to the WT and EV controls (Figure 7c), providing evidence that overexpression
of AaPEPC1 improved the drought tolerance in the transgenic tobacco plants.
Cells 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 21 
11 
 
growth chambers under well-water conditions. After six weeks of growth, the transgenic 
AaPEPC1 plants exhibited larger physical size than the WT and EV controls (Figure 5a). 
The dry weight of the transgenic AaPEPC1 plants was significantly increased in compari-
son with the control plants (Figure 5b), demonstrating that AaPEPC1 overexpression in-
creases biomass production in transgenic plants under normal conditions. 
 
Figure 5. Growth characteristics of transgenic tobacco plants expressing AaPEPC1. (a) Phenotypes 
of transgenic plants expressing AaPEPC1 (OE1 and OE2) as well as empty vector (EV), and wild-
type plants (WT), grown in pots for 6 weeks under well-watered conditions. (b) Dry weight (shoot 
and root) of transgenic plants and WT. Values represent means ± SD (n = 3). * and ** indicate sig-
nificant difference from that of WT at P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively, by one-way ANOVA 
analysis with post-hoc Tukey HSD. 
3.8. Impact of AaPEPC1 Overexpression on Salt and Drought Tolerance 
Most crop plants are susceptible to salinity. The NaCl stress at concentrations of 100–
200 mM can inhibit or even completely prevent plant growth, resulting in their death 
[57,58]. To investigate whether the overexpression of AaPEPC1 enhanced salt tolerance in 
transgenic plants, the transgenic AaPEPC1 plants as well as the EV and WT controls were 
grown in pots and irrigated with 200 mL of 200 mM NaCl solution once every two days 
for four weeks. The salt-stress treatment caused the death of the WT and EV control plants, 
while the transgenic plants overexpressing AaPEPC1 maintained growth (Figure 6a). The 
dry weight of the transgenic plants overexpressing AaPEPC1 was significantly increased 
compared to the controls (Figure 6b), establishing that the overexpression of AaPEPC1 
significantly enhanced tolerance to salt stress in transgenic tobacco plants. 
 
Figure 6. Responses of the AaPEPC1-overexpressing tobacco plants under salt stress. (a) Phenotypes of transgenic plants
expressing AaPEPC1 (OE1, OE2) or empty vector (EV), and wild-type plants (WT) grown in pots under 200 mM NaCl
stress. The plants were irrigated with 200 mM NaCl solution once every 2 days for 4 weeks. (b) Dry weight of transgenic
plants and WT. Values represent means± SD (n = 3). ** signiﬁcant difference from that of WT p < 0.01, by one-way ANOVA
analysis with post-hoc Tukey HSD.
Cells 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 21 
13 
 
 
Figure 7. Cont.
Cells 2021, 10, 582 13 of 20
Cells 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 21 
13 
 
 
Figure 7. Responses of the AaPEPC1-overexpressing tobacco plants under drought stress. Phenotypes of transgenic plants
expressing AaPEPC1 (OE1 and OE2) or as well as empty vector (EV), and wild-type plants (WT) grown in pots under
drought stress (a) and after re-watering (b). Transgenic and WT were grown in soil for 15 days without watering. (c) Dry
weight of transgenic and WT plants. Values represent means ± SD (n = 3). * and ** indicate signiﬁcant difference from that
of WT at p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, respectively, by one-way ANOVA analysis with post-hoc Tukey HSD.
3.9. Proline Biosynthesis Is Enhanced by AaPEPC1 Overexpression
PEPC plays a crucial role in nitrogen metabolism in Arabidopsis [47] and loss-of-
function of both PEPC1 and PEPC2 decreased the levels of glutamate in Arabidopsis. Glu-
tamate can be converted into proline through pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase (P5CS)
and pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase (P5CR) [11]. Proline plays important roles in stress
tolerance, e.g., drought and salt stress tolerance, by regulating osmotic balance, activating
the ROS scavenging system, protecting membrane integrity and photosynthesis [ 11,59].
We hypothesized that overexpression of AaPEPC1 could enhance proline biosynthesis, and
consequently increase the drought and salt stress tolerance in the transgenic plants. To test
this hypothesis, proline content was analyzed in the transgenicAaPEPC1 plants, along with
the WT and EV controls. The proline contents in the transgenic plants expressing AaPEPC1
Cells 2021, 10, 582 14 of 20
were signiﬁcantly higher than that in the WT and EV controls (Figure 8a). Furthermore, the
expression levels of two key proline biosynthesis genesNsyP5CS and NsyP5CR were signiﬁ-
cantly higher in the transgenic AaPEPC1 plants in comparison with the WT and EV controls
(Figure 8b,c), supporting our hypothesis that the overexpression of AaPEPC1 increased
drought and salt stress tolerance through the enhancement of proline biosynthesis.
Cells 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 21 
15 
 
 
Figure 8. Changes in proline biosynthesis in AaPEPC1-overexpressing tobacco plants. (a) Proline 
content in the leaves of transgenic plants expressing AaPEPC1 (OE1 and OE2) as well as empty 
vector (EV), and wild-type plants (WT). (b) and (c) Relative expression level of the proline biosyn-
thesis genes pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase (P5CS) and pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase 
(P5CR) in the AaPEPC1-overexpressing tobacco plants. Values represent means ± SD (n = 3). * and 
** indicate significant difference from that of WT at P < 0.05 and P < 0.01, respectively, by one-way 
ANOVA analysis with post-hoc Tukey HSD. 
4. Discussion 
The engineering of the water-conserving CO2-concentrating mechanism of CAM has 
been proposed as a potential strategy for improving photosynthetic CO2 fixation and abi-
otic stress tolerance in C3 plants [1,2,9]. In this study, we found that the overexpression of 
one single CAM gene AaPEPC1 enhanced the performance of transgenic plants in multiple 
ways, including photosynthesis , biomass production, drought tolerance and salt toler-
ance, which yet not be reported. We determined the impacts of the ectopic expression of 
the AaPEPC1 on C 3-toward-CAM progression. Specifically, we identified a CAM-type 
PEPC (AaPEPC1) in A. americana and transformed the AaPEPC1 gene into C3 plant tobacco. 
Compared with the WT and EV controls, the transgenic plants expressing AaPEPC1 
showed several interesting traits: 1) a higher malate content at the onset of the dark period, 
2)  higher leaf carbon isotope ratios (δ13C values), and 3) upregulated expression levels of 
the orthologs of several putative key CAM pathway genes (Figures  3–4). These changes 
in photosynthetic carbon metabolism driven by AaPEPC1 improved photosynthetic CO2-
Figure 8. Changes in proline biosynthesis in AaPEPC1-overexpressing tobacco plants. (a) Proline
content in the leaves of transgenic plants expressingAaPEPC1 (OE1 and OE2) as well as empty vector
(EV), and wild-type plants (WT). ( b) and (c) Relative expression level of the proline biosynthesis
genes pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase (P5CS) and pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase (P5CR) in the
AaPEPC1-overexpressing tobacco plants. Values represent means ± SD (n = 3). * and ** indicate
signiﬁcant difference from that of WT at p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, respectively, by one-way ANOVA
analysis with post-hoc Tukey HSD.
4. Discussion
The engineering of the water-conserving CO2-concentrating mechanism of CAM has
been proposed as a potential strategy for improving photosynthetic CO 2 ﬁxation and
abiotic stress tolerance in C 3 plants [1,2,9]. In this study, we found that the overexpres-
sion of one single CAM gene AaPEPC1 enhanced the performance of transgenic plants
in multiple ways, including photosynthesis, biomass production, drought tolerance and
Cells 2021, 10, 582 15 of 20
salt tolerance, which yet not be reported. We determined the impacts of the ectopic ex-
pression of the AaPEPC1 on C3-toward-CAM progression. Speciﬁcally, we identiﬁed a
CAM-type PEPC (AaPEPC1) in A. americana and transformed the AaPEPC1 gene into C3
plant tobacco. Compared with the WT and EV controls, the transgenic plants expressing
AaPEPC1 showed several interesting traits: (1) a higher malate content at the onset of the
dark period, (2) higher leaf carbon isotope ratios (δ13C values), and (3) upregulated expres-
sion levels of the orthologs of several putative key CAM pathway genes (Figures 3 and 4).
These changes in photosynthetic carbon metabolism driven by AaPEPC1 improved pho-
tosynthetic CO2-ﬁxation, biomass production and tolerance to drought and salt stresses
(Figure 9). These traits are not necessarily associated with CAM. Recently, Boxall, et al. [60]
silenced PEPC1 in a CAM plant species Kalanchoë laxiﬂora and found that the very low
level of PEPC activity in the RNAi transgenic line was associated with the reﬁxation of
respiratory CO2 and malate accumulation. Daloso, et al. [61] reported that tobacco guard
cells ﬁx CO2 by both Rubisco and PEPC. The photosynthetic carbon metabolism changes
in our study could be explained by PEPC-mediated CO2 ﬁxation during the light period
or the reﬁxation of respiratory CO 2, or an enhanced anaplerotic role for PEPC as in C 3
plants. A CO2 labeled assay and metabolites analysis could be used to test this hypothesis
and to identify the possible secondary products arising from PEPC overexpression in the
future. Metabolite (e.g., glucose) sensing and signaling play important roles in regulating
gene expression and controlling plant development [62,63]. We hypothesize that AaPEPC1
overexpression perturbated the expression levels of metabolite signaling genes which sub-
sequently caused the phenotypic changes (e.g., drought stress tolerance) in the transgenic
tobacco plants. We found that the glucose, malate and proline contents were increased,
and a few CAM-related genes were upregulated in the transgenic plants overexpressing
AaPEPC1. Glucose, as a reducing sugar, is only ever present in modest concentrations,
thus representing the partitioning of primary photosynthate or trafﬁcking of reserves. A
full starch–glucan–sucrose digestion could be performed to comprehensively evaluate
the carbohydrate status in transgenic plants, and an integrative analysis of metabolomics,
transcriptomics and proteomics could help to test this hypothesis in the future. This initial
success provides a solid foundation for future effort to achieve a complete switch from
C3 to CAM photosynthesis by engineering additional CAM-related genes involved in
carboxylation, decarboxylation, stomatal movement, the glycolytic-gluconeogenic pathway
and carbohydrate turnover modules [1,2,9].
It is interesting that AaPEPC1 overexpression increased the transcript abundance of
several other CAM-related genes, including CA, MDH, ALMT, TDT and ME (Figure 4). As
a CO2-ﬁxation enzyme, AaPEPC1 is not able to directly regulate the expression of other
genes at the transcription level. We hypothesize that the change in cellular metabolic status
caused by the AaPEPC1 overexpression resulted in a rewiring of the regulatory network.
This hypothesis can be tested through the transcriptomic and metabolomic analysis of gain-
of-function and loss-of-function AaPEPC1 mutants in the future. It was recently reported
that phosphorylation of PEPC is essential for core circadian clock operation in the obligate
CAM species Kalanchoë fedtschenkoi [20]. Therefore, it would be interesting to investigate the
impact of AaPEPC1 overexpression on the circadian rhythm in the transgenic plants in the
future. In addition, on the premise of the coordinated regulation of multiple CAM-related
genes by overexpressing one key gene such as AaPEPC1, we can argue that there is no
need to transfer all the CAM pathway genes into C3 species; consequently, we just need to
focus on the engineering of a small number of “master” genes like AaPEPC1, which can
upregulate the expression of multiple other CAM-related genes.
Cells 2021, 10, 582 16 of 20
Cells 2021, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 21 
16 
 
fixation, biomass production and tolerance to drought and salt stresses (Figure 9). These 
traits are not necessarily associated with CAM. Recently, Boxall, et al. [60] silenced PEPC1 
in a CAM plant species Kalanchoë laxiflora and found that the very low level of PEPC ac-
tivity in the RNAi transgenic line was associated with the refixation of respiratory CO 2 
and malate accumulation. Daloso, et al. [61] reported that tobacco guard cells fix CO 2 by 
both Rubisco and PEPC. The photosynthetic carbon metabolism changes in our study 
could be explained by PEPC-mediated CO2 fixation during the light period or the refixa-
tion of respiratory CO2, or an enhanced anaplerotic role for PEPC as in C 3 plants. A CO2 
labeled assay and metabolites analysis could be used to test this hypothesis and to identify 
the possible secondary products arising from PEPC overexpression in the future. Metab-
olite (e.g., glucose) sensing and signaling play important roles in regulating gene expres-
sion and controlling plant development [62,63]. We hypothesize that AaPEPC1 overex-
pression perturbated the expression levels of metabolite signaling genes which subse-
quently caused the phenotypic changes (e.g., drought stress tolerance) in the transgenic 
tobacco plants. We found that the glucose, malate and proline contents were increased, 
and a few CAM-related genes were upregulated in the transgenic plants overexpressing 
AaPEPC1. Glucose, as a reducing sugar, is only  ever present in modest concentrations, 
thus representing the partitioning of primar y photosynthate or trafficking of reserves. A 
full starch–glucan–sucrose digestion could be performed to comprehensively evaluate the 
carbohydrate status in transgenic plants, an d an integrative analysis of metabolomics, 
transcriptomics and proteomics could help to test this hypothesis in the future. This initial 
success provides a solid foundation for future effort to achieve a complete switch from C
3 
to CAM photosynthesis by engineering addi tional CAM-related genes involved in car-
boxylation, decarboxylation, stomatal move ment, the glycolytic-gluconeogenic pathway 
and carbohydrate turnover modules [1,2,9]. 
 
Figure 9. Regulation of photosynthetic CO2-fixation and abiotic stress tolerance in the ‘turbocharg-
ing’ plants with the AaPEPC1. Overexpression of the AaPEPC1, a highly abundant enzyme cata-
lyzing the primary fixation of CO2 in CAM plants, increases photosynthetic CO2-fixation, and re-
wires the diel accumulation-depletion pattern of malate and glucose. The re-programed malate-
dependent carboxylation leads to the feedback up-regulation of the orthologs of key CAM path-
way genes, i.e., nocturnal carboxylation and diurnal decarboxylation modules. The increased mal-
ate content up-regulates pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase (P5CS) and pyrroline-5-carboxylate re-
ductase (P5CR), which results in higher proline accumulation. Proline accumulation enhances the 
salt and drought tolerance of the transgenic plants expressing AaPEPC1. Additionally, a higher 
glucose content produced from the photosynthetic source is transported as sucrose or glucose to 
sink tissues and organs to promote cell proliferation, elongation, and expansion, as well as to 
maintain energy and metabolic homeostasis, resulting in improved biomass production [64,65]. 
Figure 9. Regulation of photosynthetic CO2-ﬁxation and abiotic stress tolerance in the ‘turbocharging’
plants with the AaPEPC1. Overexpression of the AaPEPC1, a highly abundant enzyme catalyzing
the primary ﬁxation of CO2 in CAM plants, increases photosynthetic CO2-ﬁxation, and rewires the
diel accumulation-depletion pattern of malate and glucose. The re-programed malate-dependent
carboxylation leads to the feedback up-regulation of the orthologs of key CAM pathway genes,
i.e., nocturnal carboxylation and diurnal decarboxylation modules. The increased malate content
up-regulates pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthase (P5CS) and pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase (P5CR),
which results in higher proline accumulation. Proline accumulation enhances the salt and drought
tolerance of the transgenic plants expressing AaPEPC1. Additionally, a higher glucose content
produced from the photosynthetic source is transported as sucrose or glucose to sink tissues and
organs to promote cell proliferation, elongation, and expansion, as well as to maintain energy and
metabolic homeostasis, resulting in improved biomass production [64,65]. The up arrows indicate
up-regulation of expression of genes coding these enzymes or content. CA: carbonic anhydrase;
OAA: oxaloacetate; MDH: malate dehydrogenase; ALMT: aluminum-activated malate transporter;
TDT: tonoplast dicarboxylate transporter; ME: malic enzyme; PEP: phosphoenolpyruvate; and CBB:
Calvin–Benson–Bassham.
Although PEPC is well-known as a key enzyme for CO2 ﬁxation, its role in conferring
resistance to salt stress in plants is not well deﬁned [66]. In this study, we demonstrated
that the overexpression of AaPEPC1 signiﬁcantly increased the salt tolerance in transgenic
tobacco plants (Figure 6), likely a result of enhanced biosynthesis of proline (Figure 8),
which plays important roles in regulating osmotic balance, activating ROS scavenging
system, protecting membrane integrity and photosynthesis [11]. C4-type PEPC and C3-type
PEPC have also been reported to be involved in drought tolerance improvement [67,68], but
the mechanism is unclear. Thus far, the role of CAM-type PEPC in drought tolerance has not
been reported yet. In this study, we found that overexpression of theAaPEPC1 signiﬁcantly
increased the drought tolerance in the transgenic tobacco plants (Figure 7). Our results
suggested that the improvement of photosynthetic carbon metabolism in the transgenic
AaPEPC1 plants enhanced proline metabolism pathway, which results in improved drought
tolerance (Figure 9). In addition, compared to the previously published work for C4-type
PEPC or C3-type PEPC overexpression in plants [67–70], this is the ﬁrst time it has been
shown that overexpression of one singlePEPC gene enables the simultaneous improvement
of photosynthesis and stress tolerance in plants.
Cells 2021, 10, 582 17 of 20
Recently, photosynthesis and plant growth were signiﬁcantly improved in tobacco
plants by introducing a faster Rubisco of cyanobacterial origin [71], accelerating recovery
from photoprotection [72], or engineering synthetic glycolate metabolism pathways [ 5].
However, none of these approaches enhanced tolerance to drought or salt stresses. In addi-
tion, previous genetic engineering efforts have reported progress in creating genetically-
modiﬁed plants with enhanced tolerance to either drought stress [73,74] or salt stress[75–77],
with limited success in conferring tolerance to both drought stress and salt stress in a single
transgenic line. In this study, we created genetically modiﬁed tobacco plants that had en-
hanced performance in multiple aspects: photosynthesis, plant growth, drought tolerance,
and salt tolerance. As such, we have provided new insights into the concept that the coor-
dinated regulation of photosynthesis can increase biomass and stress tolerance [78]. These
pleiotropic effects of AaPEPC1-overexpression open a new door to genetic improvement
of crops for sustainable bioenergy and food production on marginal lands to alleviate the
challenge caused by human population growth, urbanization, and global climate change.
In conclusion, we report the ﬁrst successful effort of the engineering of a CAM pathway
gene to improve photosynthetic CO2 ﬁxation and abiotic stress tolerance in tobacco, the
model C3 plant species. These ﬁndings have important implications for ultimate aspirations
to engineer CAM into non-CAM crops as a means of improving productivity, and abiotic
stress tolerance.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4
409/10/3/582/s1, Figure S1: Development of transgenic lines of tobacco overexpressing Agave
americana PHOSPHOENOLPYRUVATE CARBOXYLASE (AaPEPC1); Figure S2: Chlorophyll relative
content in the leaves of transgenic plants expressing Agave americana PHOSPHOENOLPYRUVATE
CARBOXYLASE (AaPEPC1) (OE1, OE2) or empty vector (EV), and wild-types (WT) grown in pots
under normal growth conditions. Table S1: Primers used in this study.
Author Contributions: X.Y. conceived, designed and supervised the project, as well as edited
the manuscript. D.L. conceived, designed and performed the experiments, as well as wrote the
manuscript. R.H. designed and constructed the AaPEPC1 binary vector, performed molecular
identiﬁcation of transgenic plants and screened homozygous lines. J.Z. performed genome-wide
analysis of the PEPC gene family and phylogenetic analysis. H.-B.G. and H.Q. performed structural
modeling and molecular dynamics simulation analysis. H.C. performed the experiments. L.L.
interpreted the data. G.A.T., A.M.B., J.-G.C. and W.M. reviewed and edited the manuscript. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research is supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Ofﬁce of Science,
Genomic Science Program under Award Number DE-SC0008834, and the Center for Bioenergy
Innovation (CBI), which is a DOE Bioenergy Research Center supported by the Biological and
Environmental Research program in the DOE Ofﬁce of Science. Oak Ridge National Laboratory
is managed by UT-Battelle, LLC for the DOE under Contract Number DE-AC05–00OR22725. HG
and HQ also acknowledge the support of NSF Career award #1453078 (transferred to #1720215), BD
Spoke #1761839, and internal funding of University of Tennessee at Chattanooga.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Data presented in this study are contained in this article, or available
upon request to the corresponding author.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
Additional Information: This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LLC under Contract
No. DE-AC05–00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States Government
retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United
States Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish
or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for United States
Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public access to these results of
federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan (http://energy.gov/
downloads/doe-public-access-plan).
Cells 2021, 10, 582 18 of 20
References
1. Yang, X.; Cushman, J.C.; Borland, A.M.; Edwards, E.J.; Wullschleger, S.D.; Tuskan, G.A.; Owen, N.A.; Grifﬁths, H.; Smith, J.A.C.;
De Paoli, H.C. A roadmap for research on crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) to enhance sustainable food and bioenergy
production in a hotter, drier world. New Phytol. 2015, 207, 491–504. [CrossRef]
2. Liu, D.; Palla, K.J.; Hu, R.; Moseley, R.C.; Mendoza, C.; Chen, M.; Abraham, P .E.; Labb é, J.L.; Kalluri, U.C.; Tschaplinski, T.J.
Perspectives on the basic and applied aspects of crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) research. Plant Sci. 2018, 274, 394–401.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Hanjra, M.A.; Qureshi, M.E. Global water crisis and future food security in an era of climate change. Food Policy 2010, 35, 365–377.
[CrossRef]
4. Godfray, H.C.J.; Beddington, J.R.; Crute, I.R.; Haddad, L.; Lawrence, D.; Muir, J.F.; Pretty, J.; Robinson, S.; Thomas, S.M.; Toulmin,
C. Food security: The challenge of feeding 9 billion people. Science 2010, 327, 812–818. [CrossRef]
5. South, P .F.; Cavanagh, A.P .; Liu, H.W.; Ort, D.R. Synthetic glycolate metabolism pathways stimulate crop growth and productivity
in the ﬁeld. Science 2019, 363, eaat9077. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Salesse-Smith, C.E.; Sharwood, R.E.; Busch, F.A.; Kromdijk, J.; Bardal, V .; Stern, D.B. Overexpression of Rubisco subunits with
RAF1 increases Rubisco content in maize. Nat. Plants 2018, 4, 802. [CrossRef]
7. Hibberd, J.M.; Sheehy, J.E.; Langdale, J.A. Using C4 photosynthesis to increase the yield of rice—Rationale and feasibility. Curr.
Opin. Plant Biol. 2008, 11, 228–231. [CrossRef]
8. Shameer, S.; Baghalian, K.; Cheung, C.M.; Ratcliffe, R.G.; Sweetlove, L.J. Computational analysis of the productivity potential of
CAM. Nat. Plants 2018, 4, 165. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Borland, A.M.; Hartwell, J.; Weston, D.J.; Schlauch, K.A.; Tschaplinski, T.J.; Tuskan, G.A.; Yang, X.; Cushman, J.C. Engineering
crassulacean acid metabolism to improve water-use efﬁciency. Trends Plant Sci. 2014, 19, 327–338. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Mahmood, T.; Khalid, S.; Abdullah, M.; Ahmed, Z.; Shah, M.K.N.; Ghafoor, A.; Du, X. Insights into drought stress signaling in
plants and the molecular genetic basis of cotton drought tolerance. Cells 2019, 9, 105. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Liu, D.; He, S.; Zhai, H.; Wang, L.; Zhao, Y.; Wang, B.; Li, R.; Liu, Q. Overexpression of IbP5CR enhances salt tolerance in
transgenic sweetpotato. Plant Cell. Tissue Organ Cult. 2013, 117, 1–16. [CrossRef]
12. Zhai, H.; Wang, F.; Si, Z.; Huo, J.; Xing, L.; An, Y.; He, S.; Liu, Q. A myo-inositol-1-phosphate synthase gene,IbMIPS1, enhances
salt and drought tolerance and stem nematode resistance in transgenic sweet potato. Plant Biotechnol. J. 2016, 14, 592–602.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Ahmed, I.M.; Nadira, U.A.; Qiu, C.-W.; Cao, F.; Chen, Z.-H.; Vincze, E.; Wu, F. The barley S-adenosylmethionine synthetase 3
gene HvSAMS3 positively regulates the tolerance to combined drought and salinity stress in Tibetan wild barley.Cells 2020, 9,
1530. [CrossRef]
14. Movafeghi, A.; Khataee, A.; Abedi, M.; Tarrahi, R.; Dadpour, M.; Vafaei, F. Effects of TiO2 nanoparticles on the aquatic plant
Spirodela polyrrhiza: Evaluation of growth parameters, pigment contents and antioxidant enzyme activities. J. Environ. Sci. 2018,
64, 130–138. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Tarrahi, R.; Khataee, A.; Movafeghi, A.; Rezanejad, F.; Gohari, G. Toxicological implications of selenium nanoparticles with
different coatings along with Se4+ on Lemna minor. Chemosphere 2017, 181, 655–665. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Turbat, A.; Rakk, D.; Vigneshwari, A.; Kocsubé, S.; Thu, H.; Szepesi, Á.; Bakacsy, L.; D Škrbi´ c, B.; Jigjiddorj, E.-A.; Vágvölgyi, C.
Characterization of the plant growth-promoting activities of endophytic fungi isolated from Sophora ﬂavescens. Microorganisms
2020, 8, 683. [CrossRef]
17. Ehleringer, J.R.; Monson, R.K. Evolutionary and ecological aspects of photosynthetic pathway variation. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst.
1993, 24, 411–439. [CrossRef]
18. Lüttge, U. CO 2-concentrating: consequences in crassulacean acid metabolism. J. Exp. Bot. 2002, 53, 2131–2142. [CrossRef]
19. Owen, N.A.; Grifﬁths, H. A system dynamics model integrating physiology and biochemical regulation predicts extent of
crassulacean acid metabolism (CAM) phases. New Phytol. 2013, 200, 1116–1131. [CrossRef]
20. Boxall, S.F.; Dever, L.V .; Knerova, J.; Gould, P .D.; Hartwell, J. Phosphorylation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase is essential
for maximal and sustained dark CO2 ﬁxation and core circadian clock operation in the obligate crassulacean acid metabolism
species Kalanchoë fedtschenkoi. Plant Cell 2017, 29, 2519–2536. [CrossRef]
21. Eisenhut, M.; Weber, A.P . Improving crop yield. Science 2019, 363, 32–33. [CrossRef]
22. Miyamoto, S. Salt Tolerance of Landscape Plants Common to the Southwest; Texas Water Resources Institute: El Paso, TX, USA, 2008.
23. Davis, S.C.; Kuzmick, E.R.; Niechayev, N.; Hunsaker, D.J. Productivity and water use efﬁciency ofAgave americana in the ﬁrst
ﬁeld trial as bioenergy feedstock on arid lands. GCB Bioenergy 2016, 9, 314–325. [CrossRef]
24. Yang, X.; Hu, R.; Yin, H.; Jenkins, J.; Shu, S.; Tang, H.; Liu, D.; Weighill, D.A.; Yim, W.C.; Ha, J.; et al. The Kalanchoë genome
provides insights into convergent evolution and building blocks of crassulacean acid metabolism. Nat. Commun. 2017, 8, 1899.
[CrossRef]
25. Black, C.C.; Osmond, C.B. Crassulacean acid metabolism photosynthesis: 'Working the night shift'. Photosynth. Res. 2003, 76,
329–341. [CrossRef]
26. Klavsen, S.K.; Madsen, T.V .; Maberly, S.C. Crassulacean acid metabolism in the context of other carbon-concentrating mechanisms
in freshwater plants: A review. Photosynth. Res. 2011, 109, 269–279. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Cells 2021, 10, 582 19 of 20
27. Silvera, K.; Neubig, K.M.; Whitten, W.M.; Williams, N.H.; Winter, K.; Cushman, J.C. Evolution along the crassulacean acid
metabolism continuum. Funct. Plant Biol. 2010, 37, 995–1010. [CrossRef]
28. Abraham, P .E.; Yin, H.; Borland, A.M.; Weighill, D.; Lim, S.D.; De Paoli, H.C.; Engle, N.; Jones, P .C.; Agh, R.; Weston, D.J.; et al.
Transcript, protein and metabolite temporal dynamics in the CAM plant Agave. Nat. Plants 2016, 2, 16178. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Katoh, K.; Rozewicki, J.; Yamada, K.D. MAFFT online service: Multiple sequence alignment, interactive sequence choice and
visualization. Brief. Bioinform 2019, 20, 1160–1166. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30. Triﬁnopoulos, J.; Nguyen, L.-T.; von Haeseler, A.; Minh, B.Q. W-IQ-TREE: A fast online phylogenetic tool for maximum likelihood
analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016, 44, W232–W235. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. Masumoto, C.; Miyazawa, S.-I.; Ohkawa, H.; Fukuda, T.; Taniguchi, Y.; Murayama, S.; Kusano, M.; Saito, K.; Fukayama, H.;
Miyao, M. Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase intrinsically located in the chloroplast of rice plays a crucial role in ammonium
assimilation. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2010, 107, 5226–5231. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Roy, A.; Kucukural, A.; Zhang, Y. I-TASSER: A uniﬁed platform for automated protein structure and function prediction.Nat.
Protoc. 2010, 5, 725–738. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Mirjalili, V .; Noyes, K.; Feig, M. Physics-based protein structure reﬁnement through multiple molecular dynamics trajectories and
structure averaging. Proteins 2014, 82, 196–207. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Chen, V .B.; Arendall, W.B.; Headd, J.J.; Keedy, D.A.; Immormino, R.M.; Kapral, G.J.; Murray, L.W.; Richardson, J.S.; Richardson,
D.C. MolProbity: All-atom structure validation for macromolecular crystallography.Acta Crystallogr. D 2010, 66, 12–21. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
35. Brooks, B.R.; Brooks, C.L.; Mackerell, A.D.; Nilsson, L.; Petrella, R.J.; Roux, B.; Won, Y.; Archontis, G.; Bartels, C.; Boresch, S.; et al.
CHARMM: The biomolecular simulation program. J. Comput. Chem. 2009, 30, 1545–1614. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Phillips, J.C.; Braun, R.; Wang, W.; Gumbart, J.; Tajkhorshid, E.; Villa, E.; Chipot, C.; Skeel, R.D.; Kale, L.; Schulten, K. Scalable
molecular dynamics with NAMD. J. Comput. Chem. 2005, 26, 1781–1802. [CrossRef]
37. Best, R.B.; Zhu, X.; Shim, J.; Lopes, P .E.M.; Mittal, J.; Feig, M.; MacKerell, A.D. Optimization of the additive CHARMM all-atom
protein force ﬁeld targeting improved sampling of the backbone phi, psi and Side-Chain chi(1) and chi(2) dihedral angles. J.
Chem. Theory Comput. 2012, 8, 3257–3273. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Jorgensen, W.L.; Chandrasekhar, J.; Madura, J.D.; Impey, R.W.; Klein, M.L. Comparison of simple potential functions for
simulating liquid water. J. Chem. Phys. 1983, 79, 926–935. [CrossRef]
39. Laskowski, R.A.; Jablonska, J.; Pravda, L.; Varekova, R.S.; Thornton, J.M. PDBsum: Structural summaries of PDB entries. Protein
Sci. 2018, 27, 129–134. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40. Terpe, K. Overview of tag protein fusions: from molecular and biochemical fundamentals to commercial systems. Appl. Microbiol.
Biot. 2003, 60, 523–533. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41. Höfgen, R.; Willmitzer, L. Storage of competent cells for Agrobacterium transformation. Nucleic Acids Res. 1988, 16, 9877.
[CrossRef]
42. Zhang, L.; Jia, J.; Xu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Hao, J.; Li, T. Production of transgenic Nicotiana sylvestris plants expressing melatonin
synthetase genes and their effect on UV-B-induced DNA damage. Vitr. Cell. Dev. Biol. Plant 2011, 48, 275–282. [CrossRef]
43. He, S.; Han, Y.; Wang, Y.; Zhai, H.; Liu, Q.In vitro selection and identiﬁcation of sweetpotato (Ipomoea batatas (L.) Lam.) plants
tolerant to NaCl. Plant Cell. Tissue Organ Cult. 2008, 96, 69–74. [CrossRef]
44. Xia, Z.; Wei, Y.; Sun, K.; Wu, J.; Wang, Y.; Wu, K. The maize AAA-type protein SKD1 confers enhanced salt and drought stress
tolerance in transgenic tobacco by interacting with Lyst-interacting protein 5. PLoS ONE 2013, 8, e69787. [CrossRef]
45. Schmittgen, T.D.; Livak, K.J. Analyzing real-time PCR data by the comparative CT method. Nat. Protoc. 2008, 3, 1101–1108.
[CrossRef]
46. O’Leary, B.; Park, J.; Plaxton, W.C. The remarkable diversity of plant PEPC (phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase): Recent insights
into the physiological functions and post-translational controls of non-photosynthetic PEPCs. Biochem. J. 2011, 436, 15–34.
[CrossRef]
47. Shi, J.; Yi, K.; Liu, Y.; Xie, L.; Zhou, Z.; Chen, Y.; Hu, Z.; Zheng, T.; Liu, R.; Chen, Y.; et al. Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase in
Arabidopsis leaves plays a crucial role in carbon and nitrogen metabolism. Plant Physiol. 2015, 167, 671–681. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Kai, Y.; Matsumura, H.; Izui, K. Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase: Three-dimensional structure and molecular mechanisms.
Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2003, 414, 170–179. [CrossRef]
49. González-Segura, L.; M újica-Jiménez, C.; Ju árez-Díaz, J.A.; Güemez-Toro, R.; Mart ínez-Castilla, L.P .; Muñoz-Clares, R.A.
Identiﬁcation of the allosteric site for neutral amino acids in the maize C4-isozyme of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase: The
critical role of Ser-100. J. Biol. Chem. 2018, 293, 9945–9957. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Matsumura, H.; Xie, Y.; Shirakata, S.; Inoue, T.; Yoshinaga, T.; Ueno, Y.; Izui, K.; Kai, Y. Crystal structures of C4 form maize and
quaternary complex of E. coli phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylases. Structure 2002, 10, 1721–1730. [CrossRef]
51. Kai, Y.; Matsumura, H.; Inoue, T.; Terada, K.; Nagara, Y.; Yoshinaga, T.; Kihara, A.; Tsumura, K.; Izui, K. Three-dimensional
structure of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase: A proposed mechanism for allosteric inhibition. 1999, 96, 823–828. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 1999, 96, 823–828. [CrossRef]
52. Winter, K.; Holtum, J.A. How closely do theδ13C values of crassulacean acid metabolism plants reﬂect the proportion of CO2
ﬁxed during fay and night? Plant Physiol. 2002, 129, 1843–1851. [CrossRef]
Cells 2021, 10, 582 20 of 20
53. Zhang, L.; Chen, F.; Zhang, G.Q.; Zhang, Y.Q.; Niu, S.; Xiong, J.-S.; Lin, Z.; Cheng, Z.M.; Liu, Z.J. Origin and mechanism of
crassulacean acid metabolism in orchids as implied by comparative transcriptomics and genomics of the carbon ﬁxation pathway.
Plant J. 2016, 86, 175–185. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Holtum, J.A.; Aranda, J.; Virgo, A.; Gehrig, H.H.; Winter, K.δ13C values and crassulacean acid metabolism in Clusia species from
Panama. Trees2004, 18, 658–668. [CrossRef]
55. Nunes-Nesi, A.; Araújo, W.L.; Fernie, A.R. Targeting mitochondrial metabolism and machinery as a means to enhance photosyn-
thesis. Plant Physiol. 2010, 155, 101–107. [CrossRef]
56. Bräutigam, A.; Schlüter, U.; Eisenhut, M.; Gowik, U. On the evolutionary origin of CAM photosynthesis. Plant Physiol. 2017, 174,
473–477. [CrossRef]
57. Munns, R.; Termaat, A. Whole-plant responses to salinity. Funct. Plant Biol. 1986, 13, 143–160. [CrossRef]
58. Acosta-Motos, J.R.; Ortuño, M.F.; Bernal-Vicente, A.; Diaz-Vivancos, P .; Sanchez-Blanco, M.J.; Hernandez, J.A. Plant responses to
salt stress: Adaptive mechanisms. Agronomy 2017, 7, 18. [CrossRef]
59. Patel, M.K.; Kumar, M.; Li, W.; Luo, Y.; Burritt, D.J.; Alkan, N.; Tran, L.-S.P . Enhancing salt tolerance of plants: From metabolic
reprogramming to exogenous chemical treatments and molecular approaches. Cells 2020, 9, 2492. [CrossRef]
60. Boxall, S.F.; Kadu, N.; Dever, L.V .; Knerova, J.; Waller, J.L.; Gould, P .D.; Hartwell, J. Kalanchoë PPC1 is essential for crassulacean
acid metabolism and the regulation of core circadian clock and guard cell signaling genes. Plant Cell 2020, 32, 1136–1160.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
61. Daloso, D.M.; Antunes, W.C.; Pinheiro, D.P .; Waquim, J.P .; AraÚJo, W.L.; Loureiro, M.E.; Fernie, A.R.; Williams, T. Tobacco guard
cells ﬁx CO 2 by both Rubisco and PEP case while sucrose acts as a substrate during light-induced stomatal opening. Plant Cell
Environ. 2015, 38, 2353–2371. [CrossRef]
62. Li, L.; Sheen, J.J. Dynamic and diverse sugar signaling. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 2016, 33, 116–125. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Wang, Y.-P .; Lei, Q.-Y. Metabolite sensing and signaling in cell metabolism.Signal Transduct. Target. Ther.2018, 3, 1–9. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
64. Xiong, Y.; McCormack, M.P .; Li, L.; Hall, Q.; Xiang, C.; Sheen, J. Glucose–TOR signalling reprograms the transcriptome and
activates meristems. Nat. Cell Biol. 2013, 496, 181–186. [CrossRef]
65. Sheen, J. Master regulators in plant glucose signaling networks. J. Plant Biol. 2014, 57, 67–79. [CrossRef]
66. Kandoi, D.; Mohanty, S.; Tripathy, B.C. Towards efﬁcient photosynthesis: Overexpression of Zea mays phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxylase in Arabidopsis thaliana. Photosynth. Res. 2016, 130, 47–72. [CrossRef]
67. Zhang, C.; Li, X.; He, Y.; Zhang, J.; Yan, T.; Liu, X. Physiological investigation of C4-phosphoenolpyruvate-carboxylase-introduced
rice line shows that sucrose metabolism is involved in the improved drought tolerance. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2017, 115, 328–342.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
68. Qian, B.; Li, X.; Liu, X.; Chen, P .; Ren, C.; Dai, C. Enhanced drought tolerance in transgenic rice over-expressing of maize C4
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase gene via NO and Ca2+. J. Plant Physiol. 2015, 175, 9–20. [CrossRef]
69. Ku, M.S.; Agarie, S.; Nomura, M.; Fukayama, H.; Tsuchida, H.; Ono, K.; Hirose, S.; Toki, S.; Miyao, M.; Matsuoka, M. High-level
expression of maize phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase in transgenic rice plants. Nat. Biotechnol. 1999, 17, 76–80. [CrossRef]
70. Ding, Z.-S.; Huang, S.-H.; Zhou, B.-Y.; Sun, X.-F.; Zhao, M. Over-expression of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase cDNA from C4
millet (Seteria italica) increase rice photosynthesis and yield under upland condition but not in wetland ﬁelds. Plant Biotechnol.
Rep. 2013, 7, 155–163. [CrossRef]
71. Lin, M.T.; Occhialini, A.; Andralojc, P .J.; Parry, M.A.J.; Hanson, M.R. A faster Rubisco with potential to increase photosynthesis in
crops. Nat. Cell Biol. 2014, 513, 547–550. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. Kromdijk, J.; Głowacka, K.; Leonelli, L.; Gabilly, S.T.; Iwai, M.; Niyogi, K.K.; Long, S.P . Improving photosynthesis and crop
productivity by accelerating recovery from photoprotection. Science 2016, 354, 857–861. [CrossRef]
73. Singha, D.L.; Tuteja, N.; Boro, D.; Hazarika, G.N.; Singh, S. Heterologous expression ofPDH47 confers drought tolerance in indica
rice. Plant Cell. Tissue Organ Cult. 2017, 130, 577–589. [CrossRef]
74. Wang, L.; Zhao, R.; Li, R.; Yu, W.; Yang, M.; Sheng, J.; Shen, L. Enhanced drought tolerance in tomato plants by overexpression of
SlMAPK1. Plant Cell. Tissue Organ Cult. 2018, 133, 27–38. [CrossRef]
75. Roy, S.J.; Negr ão, S.; Tester, M. Salt resistant crop plants.Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2014, 26, 115–124. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Li, R.; Kang, C.; Song, X.; Yu, L.; Liu, D.; He, S.; Zhai, H.; Liu, Q. A ζ-carotene desaturase gene, IbZDS, increases β-carotene and
lutein contents and enhances salt tolerance in transgenic sweetpotato. Plant Sci. 2017, 262, 39–51. [CrossRef]
77. Liu, D.; He, S.; Song, X.; Zhai, H.; Liu, N.; Zhang, D.; Ren, Z.; Liu, Q. IbSIMT1, a novel salt-induced methyltransferase gene from
Ipomoea batatas, is involved in salt tolerance. Plant Cell. Tissue Organ Cult. 2015, 120, 701–715. [CrossRef]
78. Ambavaram, M.M.; Basu, S.; Krishnan, A.; Ramegowda, V .; Batlang, U.; Rahman, L.; Baisakh, N.; Pereira, A. Coordinated
regulation of photosynthesis in rice increases yield and tolerance to environmental stress. Nat. Commun. 2014, 5, 1–14. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]