From Bulk to Binding: Decoding the Entry of
PET into Hydrolase Binding Pockets
Anna Jäckering,†,‡ Frederike Göttsch,¶ Moritz Schäffler,†,‡ Mark Doerr,¶ Uwe T.
Bornscheuer,¶ Ren Wei,¶ and Birgit Strodel∗,†,‡
†Institute of Theoretical and Computational Chemistry, Heinrich Heine University,
Düsseldorf, Universitätsstr. 1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany
‡Institute of Biological Information Processing: Structural Biochemistry (IBI-7),
Forschungszentrum Jülich, Wilhelm-Johnen-Straße, 52428 Jülich, Germany
¶Department of Biotechnology & Enzyme Catalysis, Institute of Biochemistry, University
of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Str. 4, 17487 Greifswald, Germany
E-mail: b.strodel@fz-juelich.de
Abstract
Plastic-degradingenzymesholdpromiseforbiocatalyticrecyclingofpoly(ethylenetereph-
thalate) (PET), a key synthetic polymer. Despite their potential, the current activity of
PET hydrolases is not sufficient for industrial use. To unlock their full potential, a deep
mechanistic understanding followed by protein engineering is required. Using cutting-
edge molecular dynamics simulations and free energy analysis methods, we uncover the
entire pathway from the initial binding of two PET hydrolases – the thermophilic leaf-
branch compost cutinase (LCC) and polyester hydrolase 1 (PES-H1) – to an amorphous
PET material to a PET chain entering the active site and adopting a hydrolyzable ge-
ometry. Our results reveal the initial PET binding and elucidate its non-specific nature
driven by electrostatic and hydrophobic forces. Upon PET entry into the active site, we
1
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
uncover that this process can occur via one of three key pathways and detect barriers
to it arising from both PET–PET and PET–enzyme interactions, with specific residues
identified byin silico and in vitro mutagenesis. These insights not only advance our
understanding of PET degradation mechanisms and pave the way for targeted enzyme
enhancement strategies, but also offer an innovative approach applicable to enzyme
studies across disciplines.
1 Introduction
The plastic consumption of our society exhibits an escalating trajectory with each pass-
ing year, accompanied by a commensurate escalation in the volume of plastic waste that
necessitates recycling.1 However, the efficiency of plastic recycling remains suboptimal, in
particular for composite materials. But even when dealing with a high degree of homogeneity
in a given plastic, the employed recycling methodologies are invariably accompanied by sig-
nificant greenhouse gas emissions.2 For this reason, the quest for an environmentally-friendly
enzymatic depolymerization process of plastic waste that allow for the monomer recovery
has attracted attention, especially for the widely used polymer poly(ethylene terephthalate)
(PET).3–6
PET is an aromatic, semicrystalline thermoplastic that can be enzymatically degraded
into monomeric and oligomeric building blocks including 2-hydroxyethylterephthalic acid
(MHET), which can then be further hydrolyzed into its monomers terephthalic acid (TPA)
and ethylene glycol (EG) by the same or different enzymes.4,7–9 The monomers can be re-
covered to synthesize high quality virgin PET (Fig.1).3,10 In 2005, enzymatic degradation of
low-crystallinity PET, which resulted in a significant mass loss, has been reported for the first
time with aThermobifida fusca hydrolase.11 Afterwards, many other ester hydrolases (EC
3.1.1.x) were found to be capable of degrading PET, which were assigned to the novel sub-
class for PETases (EC 3.1.1.101).12 A milestone in microbial PET degradation was achieved
eleven years later with the discovery ofIdeonella sakaiensis, which features a two-enzyme
2
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
system for the depolymerization of PET and its degradation products as the main source
of carbon and energy for the bacterial growth.13 However, the activity and thermostabil-
ity of wild-type (WT) PET hydrolases are often insufficient for their industrial application.
To this end, diverse PET hydrolases such as the leaf-branch-compost cutinase (LCC) and
the polyester hydrolase 1 (PES-H1) have been recently engineering yielding two of the cur-
rently most active and thermostable PET hydrolases, the LCC F243I/D238C/S283C/Y127G
(ICCG) variant3 and the PES-H1 L92F/Q94Y (FY) variant.14 In particular, the develop-
ment of LCCICCG by the French company Carbios enabled the launch of a first enzymatic
PET recycling demonstration plant, initiating the evaluation of its pre-industrial-scale recy-
cling process, which involves 100tons of pretreated PET waste per year.3,15,16 The increased
thermal stability of LCCICCG allowed for its application in the temperature range of 68-72°C,
where the PET polymers gain high mobility and are easily accessible to the enzymes.3,4,17–19
At the same time, amorphous PET can recrystallize quickly in the aqueous milieu at tem-
peratures above 72°C, necessitating rapid kinetics of enzymatic PET degradation when used
in this temperature range, which remains a significant challenge for enzyme engineering.3
To make further progress here, a deeper understanding of the entire PET degradation
process is required. This process consists of initial adsorption of the enzyme to the PET
bulk, followed by a single PET chain from this bulk entering the active site of the PET
hydrolase and assuming a binding position productive for subsequent hydrolysis. It was
suggested that the PET hydrolases adsorb non-specifically on the surface of the PET bulk,
resulting in either a productive complex that enables PET degradation by binding close to
the active site, or in an unproductive complex that cannot hydrolyze PET.20,21 Therefore,
previous engineering studies have focused on modifying general surface properties such as
charge, polarity and hydrophobicity of the PET hydrolases to improve PET adsorption.22
Increased PET adsorption was observed after the introduction of positive charges23,24 and
increased hydrophobicity of the enzyme surface.25–28 However, according to the Sabatier
principle, optimal catalysis occurs when interactions between catalyst and substrate are of
3
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
intermediary strength. For LCC it was demonstrated that its activity increased when its
substrate affinity is weakened due to addition of a cationic surfactant.29 Thus, the optimal
balance between binding affinity and activity of PET hydrolases remains unclear, necessitat-
ing a thorough examination of the initial PET adsorption process and the transition from
non-specific adsorption to a productive PET binding mode at the active site. Therefore, it is
not yet clear how to optimize the relationship between binding affinity and activity of PET
hydrolases, which requires a detailed analysis of the initial PET adsorption and transition
from adsorption far from the active site to productive PET binding.
Most design approaches target the formation of the substrate–enzyme complex that takes
place in the catalytic binding cleft to enhance the activity of PET hydrolases. Many studies
have introduced substitutions inspired by comparing the amino acid composition of different
PET hydrolases in the active site, resulting in the PES-H1FY variant, which was motivated
by the thermostable DuraPETase.14,30 Computational methods offer insights into the impor-
tance of specific residues in the binding site, which complements the limited high-resolution
crystal structures of PET hydrolase with small ligands reported recently.9,14,23,31–35 Based
on the analysis of these structural complexes, it was hypothesized that widening the bind-
ing cleft would increase the accessibility of the active site and consequently the enzyme’s
activity,36–39 while narrowing the binding site could enable specific interactions with PET
that promote substrate binding and enzyme activity.40 Since PET is an aromatic, mostly
hydrophobic polymer that can form hydrogen bonds, it has been shown that the introduc-
tion of aromatic, hydrophobic or hydrogen bond-forming residues also has a positive effect
on the efficiency of PET hydrolases.37,39,41,42 A highly conserved tryptophan that flanks
the binding cleft and appears to be crucial for enabling PET degradation deserves special
mention. Its flexibility diverges between mesophilic and thermophilic enzymes that harbor
different amino acids in the neighborhood of the tryptophan, which influences its ’wobbling’
capacity.35,43–45 Nevertheless, not all results are consistent with respect to the factors that
promote productive PET binding, indicating that further analysis is needed to identify con-
4
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
sistent characteristics that support productive binding. Furthermore, the computational
methods in the previous studies comprise mainly docking3,35,36,46,47 in combination with
short molecular dynamics (MD) simulations.14,40,48–51 However, the dynamics of the binding
process, which is composed of the flexibility of the binding site itself and the PET as well
as the process of PET entry into the active site, cannot be adequately described by these
methods, yet they have been suggested to be important factors for PET complexation and
thus degradation.4,48,49,52–54
To fill this knowledge gap, we performed thorough computational simulations in combi-
nation with experimental studies on two metagenome-derived thermophilic PET hydrolases,
LCC (catalytic triad: S165, D210, H242) and PES-H1 (catalytic triad: S130, D176, H208).
To be precise, we subjected both enzymes to extensive MD as well as Hamiltonian replica
exchange MD (HREMD) simulations to elucidate their adsorption to a PET bulk, tracking
PET entry into the active site until PET binds in a productive mode to allow for hydrol-
ysis. PET entry is analyzed using a free energy surface-based approach to reveal residues
that affect the energy barrier during the entry process, whereupon residue substitutions are
predicted and then evaluatedin vitro. Our approach is the first to show how PET reaches
the active site, uncovering important information about the dynamics of both the enzyme
and PET, as well as the interactions between polymer and enzyme.
2 Results and discussion
To investigate the entire interfacial biocatalysis process, starting with the enzymes LCC and
PES-H1 binding to a PET bulk and ending with a PET chain in the active site ready for
hydrolysis, we began our study by placing both LCC and PES-H1 in random orientations
and at least 10Å away from an amorphous PET bulk. The structure of the PET bulk was
based on Cruz-Chuet al.55 including 100 PET-9mers(Fig.1). Subsequently, we conducted a
total of 10.5µs of MD simulations for each enzyme. In these simulations, we observed enzyme
5
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Figure 1: Representative starting structure for the MD simulations of enzyme adsorption
on amorphous PET (without water and ions being shown). The system comprises one PET
hydrolase, which is shown as cartoon and with the catalytic triad highlighted in green. The
enzyme was randomly oriented and placed at least 10Å away from the PET bulk, which is
shown as brown surface and consists of 100 PET-9mers. The chemical structure of PET is
shownatthebottomandthedegradationproductsofPET,terephthalicacid(TPA),ethylene
glycol (EG), and 2-hydroxyethyl terephthalic acid (MHET), are shown on the right.
adsorption on the PET surface at sites proximal and distal to the binding cleft during 75% of
the simulation time, but the PET failed to enter into the active site. Therefore, we continued
the simulations by applying the enhanced-sampling HREMD method (accumulating further
43.47µs of sampling per enzyme). We used only one single PET chain closest to the binding
cleft allowing PET to enter the active site and adopt productive binding poses. The results
of these two sets of simulations are discussed in detail below along with the wet lab studies
to consolidate ourin silicofindings.
2.1 PET adsorption to the surface of the enzyme
Both enzymes readily adsorb to PET, but without a strong preference for the
binding cleft Adsorption to the PET bulk was sampled in all six of the 1.5µs simulations
6
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
for both LCC and PES-H1. In addition, the initial enzyme–PET interactions of considerable
strength with energies below−10 kcal·mol-1 were established early in the simulations (PES-
H1: 2.0–40.2ns; LCC:0.8–15.0ns)andabundantcontacts(definedbasedontheresidue–PET
distance requirement≤3Å) were observed at the surfaces of LCC and PES-H1, suggesting
that initial binding is based on general features such as charge and polarity rather than
specific recognition sites.56–58 These initial contacts occurred almost everywhere on the sur-
face of both enzymes and can be divided into proximal and distal binding, depending on
whether PET was located within 12Å of the catalytic serine or not. These contact areas
are colored blue and red in Fig.2A, respectively, and the regions where distal and proxi-
mal areas overlap are indicated in purple. To follow the progression of the contacts during
the simulations, we compared the contact areas during the first 50ns and the remaining
simulation time. However, only limited reorientations of the enzymes on the PET surface
were observed (shown in yellow for newly explored surface and in brown for overlaps with
only distal or proximal in Fig.2A); most contacts remained unchanged for 75% or more of
the simulation time. In the case of proximal binding at the end of the simulations, we ex-
tended the corresponding simulations to 2µs to see if further PET progression towards the
active site would occur. The general findings for both, simulations lasting for 1.5µs and the
elongated simulations lasting for 2µs, are that when the initial contacts were established in
proximal regions, the PET contact area remained close to the active site (PES-H1: 2 of 6;
LCC: 4 of 6 simulations). In cases where the initial contacts were in distal areas, negligible
progression towards the active site was observed. Only in one of the PES-H1 simulations,
proximal contacts could be established starting from distal ones (highlighted in yellow and
overlaps with regions establishing distal or proximal contact only in orange in Fig.2A). The
observed contact progression towards proximal binding in one of the PES-H1 simulations
might contribute to the high activity of this enzyme.
If this is the case, a promising way to achieve accelerated and productive PET binding
could be to facilitate enhanced proximal binding while attenuating PET interactions at distal
7
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
sites of the enzyme surfaces. To test this hypothesis, we first analyzed the physicochemical
nature of the initial enzyme–PET contacts and then made rationally motivated mutations,
which are studiedin silicoand in vitro.
Negative surface charges impede PET adsorption LCC has a net charge of +5,
while PES-H1 has a net charge of −5, which is reflected in their electrostatic potential
surface (EPS, shown in Fig.2B). The EPS of LCC is mostly neutral and positive (shown in
white and blue, respectively), while PES-H1 features large surface patches that are strongly
negative (shown in red). For PES-H1 in particular, the negative regions overlap with those
that do not have pronounced PET contacts. In addition, we visualized the EPS of the PET
bulk used to construct the initial enzyme–PET systems. A mostly hydrophobic surface is
revealed, with predominantly convex and exposed areas being partially negatively charged,
while stronger positive or negative potentials can be found in concave and buried regions
(Fig.S2). We therefore assume that negative charges at the surface discourage PET binding,
which could open up the possibility of preventing distal binding to PET by introducing
negatively charged residues there. This idea is consistent with the results of Nakamura
et al., who demonstrated accelerated binding to PET surfaces with higher positive charge
density at the enzyme surface of PET2.23 In addition, Sagonget al.found that changes in the
electrostatic potential surface of a loop close to the active site increases PET degradation
activity of Rhizobacter gummiphilus PETase (RgPETase), especially when increasing the
negative surface charge.59 In order to transfer this finding from proximal regions to distal
ones, they mutated four distal surface-exposed arginine to alanine and glutamate, which also
increases the PET degradation activity.
8
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Figure 2: Analysis of LCC (left) and PES-H1 (right) adsorption on amorphous PET. (A)
Residues contacting PET are highlighted on enzyme surfaces, using all six simulations per
enzyme with a 3Å PET–residue distance cutoff. Contacts during initial 50ns (left) and
stable contacts present for at least 75% of the full duration (right) are distinguished, with
proximal (blue) and distal (rose) binding sites. Overlapping areas are colored violet. Some
simulations show enzyme reorientation on PET bulk, with limited progression from distal
to proximal binding, except in one PES-H1 simulation (highlighted in yellow). Overlaps
with proximal or distal contact areas highlighted in brown. The position of the catalytic
triad is denoted by an arrow. (B) Electrostatic potential surface (EPS) for LCC (left, net
charge: +5) and PES-H1 (right, net charge:−5). (C) PET interaction energiesEint with
amino acid types in LCC and PES-H1 are shown relative to the number of the corresponding
residues within 3Å, averaged over all simulations. Energies for amino acid types with the
same physicochemical characteristics are summed up, with standard error of the mean (SEM)
shown as error bars.
9
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
This effect was more pronounced when introducing glutamate, from which they conclude
that a negative surface charge is favorable for the PET degradation activity ofRgPETase.
Moreover, Thomsenet al. observed that PES-H1 creates craters on the PET surface, unlike
other enzymes such as LCC exhibiting a uniform degradation.21 They ascribe this distinct
behavior in PES-H1 to its the distal negative surface patch influencing enzyme positioning
and processivity after the initial contact due to repulsion with the negatively charged PET
termini. We thus conclude that positive regions enhance overall PET adsorption and lead
to prolonged PET retention in distal regions when present there, which in turn hinders the
process of PET binding in a productive conformation at the active site.
Apolar residues contribute most to PET adsorption of PES-H1To identify the
amino acids most favored by PET, we calculated the interaction energyEint between PET
and each amino-acid type for all six simulations of both enzymes. We then scaled the result-
ing energy values by the number of residues of the corresponding amino-acid type that were
in contact with PET during each simulation and took the average of the six values. These
results are shown in Fig.2C, where we grouped the amino acids according to their physico-
chemical property. The scaling by the contact residues accounts for the fact that more polar
than apolar residues are exposed in both enzymes, making them more accessible to PET than
apolar residues. The overall interaction with PET (i.e., the sum of all scaledEint values) is
stronger for LCC than for PES-H1, with polar residues contributing most to LCC binding
and apolar contributing most to PES-H1 binding. Charged amino acids contribute the least
to PET binding for both enzymes, followed by the aromatic ones. Given the progression
from distal to proximal binding observed for PES-H1 but not for LCC in this study, we
propose that modification of the surface of LCC to make it more similar to that of PES-H1
could increase proximal PET binding for LCC and thus its enzymatic activity. Based on
our research findings, it appears that the PET binding is excessively strong, which leads
to extended retention in unproductive adsorption orientations. Consequently, our mutation
10
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
strategy aims to diminish the interactions between PET and LCC. This adjustment should
facilitate the enzyme’s reorientation following its initial attachment to the PET surface. The
goal is to promote closer and more favorable binding without excessively compromising the
overall adsorption capability. This should be achieved by eliminating strong PET interac-
tions with polar LCC residues and by promoting weaker interactions with apolar residues.
This design strategy gains support from previous studies that revealed that enhanced activ-
ity of PET hydrolases is associated with increased enzyme hydrophobicity.25–27 In addition,
a reduction in the hydrophobicity of LCC in proximal areas has been demonstrated to re-
duce the binding to a PET surface, resulting in increased enzyme activity due to increased
conversion of degradation intermediates and consequently elevated TPA production.60
Distal introduction of alanine and negative charge reduces local interaction with
PET To verify this assumption, we generated threein silico variants per enzyme, each
containing three mutations. The mutations were incorporated into the highly active variants
LCC F243I/Y127G (IG) (from LCCICCG3) and PES-H1 L92F/Q94Y (FY),14 which replace
the WT enzymes investigated up to this point. In LCCICCG there are two other mutations
which we do not consider in this part of the study. The reason for this is that removing the
negative charge by replacing D238 with cysteine for one of the mutations would change the
surfacechargesomuchthatitwouldbedifficulttoassesstheinfluenceoftheothermutations.
Before proceeding with the mutations, we analyzed the behavior of the LCCICCG (studied
further below), LCCIG and PES-H1FY variants in solution through 100ns MD simulation
each. Comparison of their root mean square deviation and fluctuation (RMSD and RMSF)
to the corresponding WT enzyme confirms their stability and similar dynamics (Fig.S1).
The mutations we selected mainly involved polar and positively charged residues, which
we replaced by apolar and negatively charged residues of similar size. The aim is to increase
the overall mobility on thePET surfaceso thatproximal bindingbecomesmore likely. Hence,
by replacing positively charged residues, we intend to avoid stabilizing electrostatic interac-
11
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
tions with negative charges at the PET chain ends and the negatively charged regions on the
PET bulk surface, as can be seen in the EPS of PET in Fig.S2. Moreover, to induce a strong
local effect, three mutation sites in close proximity to each other were selected, where prefer-
ence was given to residues that were in contact with PET in distal areas for at least 75% in
one or more of our initial simulations (Fig.2A). For each enzyme, two triple mutants were de-
signed to change theEint ratio of polar and apolar residues (PES-H1FY: T11V/S13A/S14A,
Q26L/T27V/T28V; LCCIG: L66A/S67A/S69A, T211V/S216A/N239L) and a third triple
mutant was created with the aim to to specifically influence the enzyme’s EPS (PES-H1FY:
S13A/R19E/R75E, LCCIG: R143E/S145A/R151E). The LCCIG T211V/S216A/N239L mu-
tations are the only ones located near the active site. We have observed a dominant PET
residency in this region, which may impede PET progression from this site to the biding
cleft. For the modification of the EPS in PES-H1FY, it was not possible to identify at least
two positively charged residues that i) are in close proximity to each other, ii) were in last-
ing contact with PET in the simulations of PES-H1 and iii) whose replacement would not
affect protein stability due to their involvement in intra-protein salt bridges. Therefore,
R75 was included in the corresponding variant, PES-H1FY S13A/R19E/R75E, even though
it did not make contact with PET for more than 75% of the simulation time. For LCCIG
L66A/S67A/S69A, we deviated from the strategy of mutating polar and positive residues,
as L66 appeared to favor PET binding, with more than 75% retention time in two of the
six simulations. It should be mentioned that among the hydrophobic residues, leucine was
always the strongest mediator for PET interactions. For LCC, L66 had the strongest effect
in this regard, and due to its proximity to S67 and S69, we included it in the corresponding
mutation.
For each of the LCCIG and PES-H1FY variants, we performed 100ns MD simulations in
triplicate starting from the snapshot of previous simulations where LCC or PES-H1 had the
lowest distance between the PET bulk and the three mutation sites.
12
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Figure3: Resultsforthe in silicomutationofsurfaceresiduesforLCC IG (left)andPES-H1 FY
(right). (Top) The interaction energies (Eint) between PET and the residues at mutation
sites are shown for the parent enzyme IG or FY (gray) and the three triple mutants (TMs)
per enzyme (dark blue for LCCIG, light blue for PES-H1FY). The mutations are given at
the top, the TMs are separated by vertical dotted lines and the TMs, which were evaluated
experimentally are highlighted in bold. TheEint values are averages over three simulations
with the SEM given by error bars. (Bottom) The EPS of the TMs are shown. The locations
of the mutations are denoted by black circles and the catalytic site is indicated by an arrow.
The simulations were analyzed with respect toEint and the possible reorientation of the
enzyme at the PET surface. While the latter could not be observed in the simulations,
we were able to alterEint and also the EPS (Fig.3). For both enzymes a reduction in their
interaction with PET was achieved, i.e., theEint values have become less negative. The most
significant Eint changes occurred for the LCCIG variants, which is consistent with our design
strategy of making the LCC (IG) surface more similar to that of PES-H1 (FY) to facilitate
13
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
the reorientation of the enzyme on the PET surface. The introduction of negatively charged
residues successfully changed the EPS in this region from positive or neutral to negative and
significantly increasedEint for the corresponding LCCIG mutations (R143E, R151E) and to a
lesser extent for the PES-H1FY mutation R19E. The latter can be explained by the fact that
the PES-H1FY surface was already rather negative before this mutation, which reduces the
mutation effect. PET did not interact with position 75 in any of the simulations with PES-
H1FY and PES-H1FY S13A/R19E/R75E. This is probably because the starting structure
chosen for the simulations had the residue 75 farthest from PET among the three mutation
sites. Therefore, the effect of the R75E mutation cannot be quantified. The implementation
of apolar residues, especially alanine, at the expense of polar residues also significantly
increased Eint (e.g., S145A in LCCIG, S13A in PES-H1FY), while larger apolar residues such
as valine or leucine yielded no significant changes or even made the interaction at these
sites more favorable (e.g., T211V and N239L in LCCIG; Q26L and T28V in PES-H1FY). In
conclusion, local PET binding was successfully reduced in our simulations by introducing
small apolar alanine or negatively charged residues. This is hypothesized to promote the
progression of the enzyme–PET contact area towards the binding cleft, thereby enhancing
PET binding and hydrolysis.
Distal mutations have a major influence on PET degradation activityTo test our
hypotheses derived from thein silico studies, two of the triple mutants were subjected to
in vitro analysis: PES-H1FY T11V/S13A/S14A with increased hydrophobicity and LCCIG
R143E/S145A/R151E with increased negative charge. PES-H1FY and the LCCICCG variant
were used as reference enzymes. The latter was used instead of LCCIG to allow for a better
comparison to published results.3,14 The PET degradation activity was determined with
amorphous PET films under specific reaction conditions favored for each enzyme.14 For PES-
H1FY, 1M potassium phosphate buffer has ensured the most efficient hydrolysis rates, which
was presumably attributed to its stabilizing effect.14,61,62 For an optimal comparison with
14
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
FY, LCCICCG, which is not as salt-dependent as PES-H1FY,3 was also investigated in 1M
reaction buffer. Unfortunately, the LCCICCG triple mutant could not be expressed, possibly
due to the altered surface charge, which could introduce repulsive forces that interfere with
native folding.
The percentage weight loss of the PET films after 24h was determined to evaluate the
enzymatic PET degrading activity. As shown in Fig.4 the substitution of three residues in
PES-H1FY far away from the binding site led to greatly reduced activity. This observation
does not fully agree with our hypothesis that decreasing the surface polarity far away from
the PET binding site should encourage proximal PET binding and thus increase the PET
degrading activity. On the other hand, thein vitro results confirmed our hypothesis that
the initial binding to the PET surface plays an important role for the enzymatic activity.
This binding occurs far away from the active site, ruling out any direct interference with the
hydrolysis reaction, as shown with the current PES-H1FY variant T11V/S13A/S14A (Fig.3).
Therefore, future studies should thoroughly investigate mutations on the LCC and PES-H1
surface that enhance PET degradation.
Figure 4: Results from the in vitro testing of the original and variants of LCC ICCG
(ICCG, left, blue) and PES-H1FY (FY, right, light blue). The variants include five single-
point mutations per enzyme, given as axis labels, and the PES-H1FY triple mutant (TM)
T11V/S13A/S14A. Variants are ordered according to the percentage weight loss of PET films
upon degradation, which serves as a measure for the PET degradation activity. Depolymer-
ization of 60mg PET film was conducted for 24h at 70°C in 1M potassium phosphate buffer
(pH 8) with 60µg of respective purified enzyme variants. Reactions were performed in du-
plicate for PES-H1FY L175A and LCCICCG T211G and for all others at least in triplicate.
15
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
2.2 Entry of PET into the binding site
The energy barrier associated with PET entry can be overcome by enhanced
sampling, leading to productive binding poses Since the entry of PET into the
binding cleft was not observed with conventional MD simulations, our hypothesis is that a
considerable energy barrier must be overcome for this to occur. Therefore, we performed
HREMD simulations to increase the sampling of the conformational space of PET. In these
simulations, the energy function of PET is changed in a way that the energy barriers for
its conformational changes become smaller. We applied these changes to five of the six
replicas we considered per HREMD simulation, with the height of the barriers decreasing
with increasing replica number. The changes applied to the energy function correspond to
increased simulation temperatures, which we will use in the following discussion. For the
starting structures of these HREMD simulations, we extracted three conformations from
the previous 2µs MD simulations, in which the binding of the enzyme to a PET bulk was
investigated, with the selection criterion of a distance between the catalytic serine and PET
of at most 5Å. In addition, we retained only the PET-9mer closest to the enzyme and
removed four units from it, leaving a PET-5mer closest to the catalytic serine (Fig.5A). This
resulted in different starting structures for both enzymes, which were submitted to HREMD
simulations with 115ns per replica. For LCC we performed five HREMD simulations and
four for PES-H1 (Tab.S1). In these simulations, and later in the simulations for LCCIG and
PES-H1FY, we found that one of these three starting structures (designated 4thL) had the
highest number of PET-5mer entry events. Therefore, for the later HREMD simulations
of the enzyme variants, this particular starting structure was preferentially used, unless the
mutation site was significantly closer to the PET-5mer in another starting structure, which
was then used instead. These HREMD simulations enabled to observe several entry events
of the PET-5mer into the active site and how this led to the formation of productive binding
states, which we distinguish into pro-S and pro-R states (Fig.5B). A productive state is
16
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
present when the distances between the carbon of the nearest PET-5mer ester and theγ-
oxygen of the catalytic serine (SER–C distance) and between the carbonyl oxygen of the
same ester and the two amino hydrogens of the oxyanion hole scaffold are sufficiently small
to allow hydrolysis. As distance cutoff we defined≤4Å here. Pro-S and pro-R are defined
as PET poses that promote the formation of an S- and R-type tetrahedral intermediate,
respectively.63 An example of the PET-5mer entry into the binding cleft is shown in Fig.5C.
Here, 12ns of one of the HREMD simulations of LCC can be seen, where the SER–C distance
is initially above 6Å (the outer phase) and drops to below 4Å (inner phase) within≈2ns
(entry phase).
Figure 5: Setup for HREMD simulations and PET-5mer entry results. (A) An exemplary
HREMD starting structure is shown to demonstrate the initial distance between the PET-
9mer and the enzyme. (B) PET-5mer entry into the active site resulted in pro-S and pro-R
poses, for which representative snapshots are shown. (C) The entry of the PET-5mer to
the active site was monitored by the evolution of the SER–C distance. Here, a repre-
sentative entry is shown for LCC. The entry was facilitated by the replicas at high ener-
gies/temperatures (colored in orange to red), while conformations from replicas simulated
at low energies/temperatures are colored in shades of blue (see color key for exact values).
The dotted lines indicate the boundaries for the outside, entry, and inside phases, which are
defined by the distance criteria (horizontal lines) and resulting times (vertical lines).
17
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Importantly, entry is enabled by exchanging low-energy replicas (corresponding to low tem-
peratures, shown in blue) for high energy replicas (corresponding to high-temperatures,
shown in red) immediately before and during entry. Once the entry is complete, the system
remains in low-energy replicas. This observation explains why PET entry did not occur in the
earlier conventional MD simulations and confirms our assumption that this process involves
a significant energy barrier that must be overcome. Since the current results could be due to
the changes we made to the system, i.e., removing the PET bulk, we performed conventional
115ns MD simulations for the three HREMD starting structures (two LCC and one PES-H1
simulations) to see if PET-5mer entry still occurs. However, this was not the case and no
productive PET state were sampled. Additional MD simulations were conducted at 343K,
a temperature recently proposed as optimal for enzymatic PET hydrolysis.4,64 These simu-
lations are crucial for surpassing the energy barrier for PET entry. The simulations resulted
in pro-R and pro-S states for PES-H1 and LCC when simulated with a single PET-5mer.
One of the LCC simulations that encompassed the entire PET bulk yielded a pro-S state.
In order to decipher the source of this energy barrier, we conducted further analyses
and defined specific criteria for the identification of productive PET-5mer entries and their
corresponding outside, entry, and inside phases: (1) An entry leading to the adoption of
a productive state, either pro-S or pro-R, must have taken place and involve a decrease
in the SER–C distance from >6Å (outside phase) to <4Å (inside phase). (2) The entry
phase must last at least 100ps and a maximum of 5ns to minimize noise through in and out
movements. (3) The inside and outside phases must each last at least 1ns. The inside phase
ends when the SER–C distance exceeds 6Å and the outside phase ends when this distance
falls below 4Å, or, in the case of more gradual changes, when the SER–C distance exceeds
4Å on average over the entire inside phase and falls below 6Å on average over the entire
outer phase. Based on these criteria, we identified 29 productive entries for LCC and 15
for PES-H1, corresponding to 4.35% and 6.49% of the corresponding MD frames. Of these
entries, 13 and 7 resulted in pro-S poses for LCC and PES-H1, respectively, while the others
18
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
led to pro-R poses. The pro-R pose was identified via docking studies performed by Tournier
et al.,3 but others later found in QM/MM studies that the pro-S pose is energetically more
favorable63,65 and that robust binding of a state unfavorable for hydrolysis could inhibit
PET degradation activity.66 Thus, although several pro-R poses were sampled in our study,
hydrolysis is expected to occur mainly via pro-S poses. Our analysis of the PET-5mer
binding events further shows that the two units that share the ester bond to be hydrolyzed
are tightly bound to the enzyme, which is required for the reaction to proceed, while the
other PET units interact rather loosely with the enzyme and remain flexible. This finding is
evidenced by the different snapshots in Figs.5B, S3 and S5, which show the conformational
freedom of PET units that do not interact directly with the active site. This finding is in
contrast to earlier assumptions about a long binding cleft that has several subsites to bind
several PET units simultaneously.46,67
FromtheanalysisthusfaritcanbeconcludedthatPEThastoovercomeanenergybarrier
for entry into the active site to adopt productive conformations. This energy barrier could
be driven by conformational changes of PET to fit into the binding cleft. This is supported
by recent studies suggesting that a ’wrapped’ PET conformation is energetically favored in
solution, while a ’W-shaped’ extended conformation, which is crucial for productive binding
poses, is observed in association with the enzyme at elevated temperatures.68 Such confor-
mational changes, and thus the associated energy barrier, could be influenced by PET–PET
and residue–PET interactions, which is investigated next by analyzing intramolecular PET
interactions and intermolecular PET–enzyme interactions during productive PET entries.
Intramolecular PET interactions hinder necessary conformational changes for
entry into the binding cleftFor successful PET binding in the active site of the enzyme,
a polymer chain or a part of it has to detach from the amorphous or crystalline PET bulk,
which means that nonbonded interactions such as hydrogen bonds andπ-interactions within
the same chain and with other PET chains must be resolved, in addition to meeting sterical
19
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
requirements. To assess the impact of the intramolecular PET-5mer interactions on the
energy barrier during entry to the binding cleft, we calculatedEint between PET units during
productive entries. In several instances, we observed robust interactions between multiple
PET units prior to entry, suggesting an inhibitory effect (Fig.S3A). Conversely, individual
energy peaks corresponding to favorable intramolecular interactions were detected shortly
before or during entry, which probably facilitate the necessary structural rearrangements and
interrupt the inhibitory interactions (Fig.S3B). In addition, in some cases, entry-promoting
effects were found due to newly formed interactions between two units during and/or after
entry (Fig.S3C).
To more comprehensively assess the predominant interactions throughout all simulations
ofbothLCCandPES-H1, asopposedtofocusingonindividualentryevents, weconcatenated
the HREMD data using all replicas, with the higher replicas weighted, for either enzyme and
calculated 2D free energy surfaces (FESs) (Fig.S4). One coordinate in these FESs are the
interaction energies between two PET units that are not directly adjacent, which allows
us to monitor the intramolecular PET-5mer interactions. To correlate this with the PET-
5mer entry, we used the SER–C distance as a second coordinate and distinguish between
productive and non-productive regions with a cut-off value of 4Å. All FESs indicate that
non-productive PET-5mer states and also those during entry with SER–C distances below
6Å but above 4Å are energetically stabilized, which suggests that PET–PET interactions
hinder rather than promote PET-5mer entry into the active site.
In our opinion, the most promising approach to overcome this inhibitory effect is to
improve the preprocessing of PET waste. Tarazonaet al.studied the surface erosion process
of PET to differentiate between the PET surface and the bulk properties, which might
enable to find a sweet spot between increased PET surface mobility and the increased bulk
crystallization.19 They found that enlarging the PET surface, e.g. by using micronized
PET particles, increasing the surface amorphization and lowering the surface glass transition
temperature due to the plasticization effect of water promotes the degradation activity by
20
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
increasing the PET accessibility and mobility to overcome intramolecular constraints. This is
also consistent with arecent studyby Schubertet al., in which chain mobilityand the number
of available sites for endo-type chain scission, which depend on the degree of crystallinity, are
postulated as the activity-limiting factor causing the initial lag phase for the release of the
soluble product.7 Another biotechnological approach to mitigate this hindering effect could
be to design enzymes to introduce residues that enhance enzyme–PET interactions, which
would promote and counterbalance the loss of PET–PET interactions upon entry into the
binding cleft.
PET–enzyme interactions can also hinder PET entryNext, we analyzed the con-
tribution of intermolecular interactions between the PET-5mer and enzyme to the observed
overall energy barrier during PET-5mer entry. To this end, we first examined individual
entry histories and identified effects that promote or inhibit entry by calculatingEint be-
tween the PET-5mer and residues within 3Å during entry. PET-5mer entry can be hindered
by strong PET–enzyme interactions prior to entry or by repulsion of PET-5mer within the
binding cleft, so that PET-5mer states outside the cleft are favored (Fig.S5A). Conversely,
an entry-promoting effect has favorable interactions during entry, which facilitate structural
PET-5mer rearrangements that overcome PET–PET interactions (Fig.S5B). Furthermore,
PET-5mer entry gets supported through stabilizing interactions for productive PET5-mer
poses, which compensate for the loss of PET–PET interactions (Fig.S5C).
To obtain a more general overview, FESs were created using a similar approach as before,
but this time for the PET–enzyme interactions. The SER–C distance was again used as a
coordinate to monitor the entry process, while Eint between the PET-5mer and selected
residues was used as another coordinate. The selection and mutation of certain residues
allow us to investigate the specific, and sometimes different effects of amino acids in both
enzymes. For instance, depletion of tyrosine in the LCCICCG variant (Y127G) increased
activity compared to WT-LCC, while introduction of tyrosine in the PES-H1FY variant
21
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(Q94Y) at the corresponding position resulted in increased activity compared to WT-PES-
H1.3,14 Two more positions are relevant for the improved activity of LCCICCG and PES-
H1FY: the L92F mutation in PES-H1FY and the F243I mutation in LCCICCG.3,14 The F125L
mutation in the LCC, corresponding to position L92F of PES-H1FY, has been shown to
reduce LCC binding to PET surfaces, increasing its availability for targeting degradation
intermediates and enhancing overall activity, so it is also analyzed here.60 Additionally, we
studied L209 of PES-H1 corresponding to position F243I of LCCICCG, for which a mutation
to alanine was chosen instead of isoleucine based on studies reporting alanine as the only
variant exhibiting activity close to that of the WT.14,32
To investigate the effects of these mutations, we performed HREMD simulations for the
LCCIG and PES-H1FY variants as well as for LCCIG F125L and PES-H1FY L209A, and cal-
culated the FES from the HREMD data as described above. The resulting FESs reveals
distinctive PET–enzyme interaction patterns for WT and mutated residues (Fig.6). Mu-
tations at positions PES-H1FY 209/LCCIG 243 stabilize productive states in both enzymes,
which can be inferred from new free energy minima (in yellow/brown colors in Fig.6) at
SER–C distances below 4Å and less pronounced minima for distances above 6Å after mu-
tation, suggesting weaker interactions with the PET-5mer in latter states. In contrast, the
effects at positions PES-H1FY 92/LCCIG 125 and PES-H1FY 94/LCCIG 127 differ between
the two enzymes. In the case of LCCIG, entry of the PET-5mer after either mutation is
promoted due to the elimination of non-productive energy minima resulting from weakened
interaction with the PET-5mer for SER–C distances above 6Å, whereas in PES-H1FY, the
entry of the PET-5mer after the mutation becomes more difficult due to increased interac-
tion with the PET-5mer in non-productive states. We therefore conclude that the increase in
PET degradation activity could result from a direct promotion of PET entry by the mutated
residues for LCCICCG, but from different mechanism for PES-H1FY.
22
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Figure 6: Free energy surfaces of the PET–residue interactions over the SER–C distance
obtained from HREMD simulations of LCC and PES-H1 variants. The top row per enzyme
presents the FESs for residues present in the WT and the bottom row for the mutated
residues in the LCCIG/PES-H1FY variants (indicated by blue boxes) and for the LCCIG
F125L/PES-H1FY L209A variants. The area for SER–C distance< 4 Å harbors productive
poses. The gray hatched area indicates distances that were not sampled as the ester carbon
atom would be too close to the catalytic serine. The free energies,∆G are given in kJ/mol
according to the color scale on the right.
23
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
To further explore our hypothesis that increased entry of PET into the active site contributes
to increased activity as presumed for LCCICCG, we analyzed additional residues near the
active site of both enzymes and then mutated them. Our aim was to identify residues that
lack entry-promoting FES features and are therefore promising mutation targets to improve
PET entry ability. FES features to be introduced include the creation of free energy minima
in the productive region with a SER–C distance below 4Å, indicating stabilized productive
positions of PET-5mer, the elimination of free energy minima in the non-productive region,
indicating reduced interactions with PET-5mer, and the facilitation of the transition from
the non-productive to the productive region by avoiding energy barriers there. The residues
that we identified as promising mutation sites were then mutated to glycine or alanine;
larger amino acids were not introduced to avoid creating steric hindrances. In addition, the
PES-H1FY H184S variant was simulated, in which the mutation site is located near a highly
conserved tryptophan (PES-H1: W155, LCC: W190) adjacent to the binding cleft and whose
’wobbling’ presumably increases catalytic activity.45 Mutation of H184 to a serine is likely
to increase the flexibility of this tryptophan due to the lower steric requirements of serine.
This resulted in a total of 14 mutation sites that were evaluated for each enzyme. For
each mutant, an HREMD simulation was performed (see TableS1 for the list of HREMD
simulations) and the FES calculated as described above. In many cases the overall goal of the
in silicomutations to facilitate PET-5mer entry into the active site was achieved. For these
cases the FES is shown in Fig.S7, and they include mutations with improved stabilization
of productive states (PES-H1FY: S68A, D93A; LCCIG: T211G, N246A), reduced interaction
in non-productive states (PES-H1FY: S68A, R91A, D93A, N212A; LCCIG: T192G, S241G),
or smoother transitions towards productive states without intermediate states where the
PET-5mer could get trapped (PES-H1FY: S68A, D93A; LCCIG: HIS164A, T211G, S241G,
N246A). The PES-H1FY H184S variant could neither improve the interactions at position
184 nor the interactions of the ’wobbling’ tryptophan with the PET-5mer. The five most
promising in silicomutations per enzyme (i.e., the ones shown in Fig.S7) were then evalu-
24
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
ated experimentally, using the same protocol as employed for the previous PES-H1FY triple
mutant to determine the PET degradation activity. It should be noted that one of these
mutants, PES-H1FY L175A, is a borderline case, as a state slightly above the 4Å crite-
rion applied to the SER–C distance became stabilized; we nonetheless included it in our
experimental evaluation, which is discussed below.
Kinetic experiments reveal an increase in activity for the PES-H1FY S68A muta-
tion In order to link simulation and experiment, the activity of the mentioned mutations
introduced in the PES-H1FY and LCCICCG enzymes was determined. The percentage weight
loss of the PET films shown in Fig.4 indicates that none of the variants resulted in a signifi-
cant increase in the degradation activity. PES-H1FY R91A, LCCICCG T192G, and LCCICCG
N246A showed significantly lower degradation activity than PES-H1FY and LCCICCG, re-
spectively. Interestingly, these are also the three variants with the least promising FES
profiles among the ten selected variants (Fig.S7). The FES improvements in these mutants
were mainly related to the destabilization of the non-productive states, while the productive
state did not gain in stability. In LCCIG N246A, on the other hand, while the productive
state was stabilized, also a non-productive state at SER–C distances of≈6.5Å became more
stable, which could explain the reduction in activity for this variant. In addition, there is
also the possibility that other factors may influence the experimental outcome and thus mask
improvements due to mutations. It should also be mentioned that the reproducibility of the
experiments was problematic despite uniform experimental conditions in all experiments,
which we suggest can be attributed to influences of the inherent properties of the PET films
such as crystallinity or molecular weight distribution.16
To reduce potential masking effects and identify subtle effects on individual steps in
PET degradation, we analyzed the degradation kinetics using a previously described tur-
bidimetric assay using PET nanoparticles (PET-NP) that measures turbidity changes at
600nm over time.14,69 Here, not only the substrate load[S0] was varied while maintaining
25
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
a fixed enzyme concentration[E0], as done in conventional Michaelis–Menten kinetics mea-
surements (convMM), but also the reverse approach with varying enzyme concentration and
fixed substrate load was followed, which is called inverse Michaelis–Menten (invMM) and
is a commonly used approach for kinetic measurements with insoluble substrates such as
PET.20,29,70–76 To further ensure a more homogeneous distribution of the substrate, PET-
NP were used instead of a PET film, which should lead to more uniform and reproducible
results.76 This approach was used to evaluate the three most interesting candidates per
enzyme that showed the most improvement in their FES profiles upon mutation while ex-
hibiting similar PET degradation activity to PES-H1FY and LCCICCG, respectively, namely
PES-H1FY S68A, D93A, N212A and LCCICCG H164A, T211G, S241G (Tab.1 and Tab.S3).
Table 1: The Michaelis–Menten constantsKm were derived from the nonlinear fit to experi-
mental data for both settings,convMM andinvMM, and both enzymes, LCCICCG (ICCG) and
PES-H1FY (FY), and corresponding variants. Additional secondary parameterskcat, molarKm
and molarη are provided.
convKm
g
L
 invKm[µM] kcat
h
1
min·µM
i
molarKM [µM] molarη
h
1
min·µM2
i
LCCICCG 0.215 ±0.059 0.365 ±0.061 0.047 0.357 0.132
ICCG H164A 0.095 ±0.063 0.861 ±0.164 0.032 0.278 0.114
ICCG T211G 0.091 ±0.068 0.430 ±0.130 0.042 0.223 0.189
ICCG S241G 0.250 ±0.068 0.234 ±0.070 0.054 0.357 0.151
PES-H1FY 0.391 ±0.109 0.892 ±0.105 0.088 1.036 0.085
FY S68A 0.357 ±0.117 0.278 ±0.053 0.084 0.728 0.115
FY D93A 0.501 ±0.180 2.017 ±0.481 0.040 2.434 0.016
FY N212A 0.481 ±0.174 1.767 ±0.318 0.068 1.564 0.043
It should be noted that the conventional measurements led to inconsistent results, especially
for the LCCICCG variants, which confirms that the conventional approach and the applied
kinetic model meets experimental challenges when dealing with PET as substrate. There-
fore, the following discussion is based on results obtained with the inverse Michaelis–Menten
approach. For invKm significant differences are observed in enzyme–substrate affinity be-
tween some of the variants and the respective parent enzyme, LCCICCG or PES-H1FY. An
approximate 3-fold decrease ininvKm was detected for the PES-H1FY S68A variant compared
26
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
to PES-H1FY (PES-H1FY S68A: invKm=0.273µM; PES-H1FY: invKm=0.892µM), which in-
dicates a higher enzyme–substrate affinity for PES-H1FY S68A. For the other two PES-H1FY
variants, higherinvKm values than for PES-H1FY suggest a decreased affinity, which is sup-
ported by similar trends in themolarKm values. For LCCICCG the results are less clear. The
higher invKm values for LCCICCG H164A and LCCICCG T211G than for LCCICCG are not
mirrored by the corresponding molarKm results, which are lower, while the turnover rate
constant kcat could also not be improved. For the LCCICCG S241G variant a reduction in
molarKm, a similar molarKm value as for LCCICCG and an increase in kcat were observed,
but these improvements are not statistically significant (Tab.S3). Combining affinity and
turnover rate intomolarη = kcat/molarKm yields the molar catalytic efficiency. First, it should
be noted that a higher catalytic efficiency was observed for all LCCICCG variants than for the
FY variants. A comparison of these figures per enzyme indicates that PES-H1FY S68A and
LCCICCG T211G outperform FY and LCCICCG, respectively, while LCCICCG S241G shows
a slight improvement. Thus, the most promising mutations revealed by experiments are
also the mutations with the most promising FES changes (Fig.S7). In particular for the
T211G mutation in LCCICCG we succeeded in creating a smooth free energy path leading
to the productive state, which corresponds to the largest increase inmolarη with respect to
the parent enzyme for all variants studied. With the S68A mutation in PES-H1FY we were
able to abolish the stabilization of unproductive states, while the productive state gained
stability, yet not as much as with T211G in LCCICCG.
In ourin silicomutation strategy, we have restricted ourselves to alanine and glycine as
target amino acids. Given the promising, yet not perfect results for the PES-H1FY S68A vari-
ant, we decided to investigate the effects of side-chain size, polarity, charge and aromaticity
at that position. To this end, we generated additionalin silicovariants (S68I, S68F, S68Q,
S68D, S68K), run HREMD simulations per variant and analyzed the resulting FES (Fig.S8).
The results reveal that our original strategy to mutate PES-H1FY S68 to alanine was a good
choice, as mutating this residue to any other residue stabilizes non-productive states and
27
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
isolated areas emerged in the FES, suggesting that the transition to the productive state
to has become more difficult. We therefore conclude that interactions with this residue are
generally not beneficial for PET entry, which is best avoided by removing steric hindrances
as realized in the PES-H1FY S68A mutant.
In conclusion, we were able to define PET entry features by comparing the FES of
residues of the respective parent enzyme with their mutations, which allowed us to link the
FES appearance with the enzymatic activity measured in experiments. The FES approach
allowed us to identify residues that potentially hinder PET entry, and PES-H1FY and LCCIG
variants were generated in which these residues were mutated and evaluated computationally
and experimentally. This analysis confirmed our idea that changing the FES so that PET can
moreeasilyentertheactivesitebyremovingenergytrapsbeforereachingtheproductivestate
and stabilizing the latter, which was best realized in PES-H1FY S68A and LCCICCG T211G
and resulted in higher catalytic activity. With respect to the experimental results it should
be noted thatinvKM, in contrast toconvKM, reflects how effectively the enzyme can operate
at different enzyme concentrations for a given substrate load. Considering the results of both
approaches, it seems conceivable that the efficiency of the enzymes has increased especially
at low enzyme concentrations, while their PET affinity has not necessarily improved. This
would be advantageous in industrial applications where the substrate concentration is high
and the enzyme concentration is relatively low and adaptation is impractical for cost or
feasibility reasons.
Principal component analysis reveals that PET can enter via three pathwaysTo
complete our comprehensive analysis of the PET entry into the binding cleft, we next present
the complete pathway of how the PET-5mer reaches its final productive state in the active
site. In doing so, we do not limit our analysis to the assumption that there can only be one
such pathway, but attempt to identify all possible pathways. To this end, we compiled data
of all entry events with phases inside the active site of 1ns. Here, we included data from
28
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
all simulated variants per enzyme, LCC and PES-H1, assuming that the general pathways
should not be affected by the mutations, but only the energies along the pathways (as shown
in our previous FES analysis), which could shift the balance between pathway preferences
in the case of multiple entry pathways. This generated a large dataset that is suitable for a
meaningful principal component analysis (PCA). The PCA was applied to the distances of
the PET-5mer ester carbon, which becomes productively bound after entry, to all Cα atoms
of the corresponding enzyme within 10Å. This allows to capture the dynamics during the
PET-5mer entry without introducing bias by pre-selecting specific residues. The resulting
principal components (PCs) are used to calculate the free energy (∆G) along the first two
PCs, which account for 86% of the variance and are shown as FESs in Fig.S9A,B.
To identify productive and non-productive states in these FES presentations, we pro-
jected them into the PC1–PC2 space (indicated by green and rose color in Fig.S9A,B). This
shows that the productive states are clearly separated from non-productive states and that
the productive states are localized in the∆G minima regions. We further analyzed the
contributions of amino acids mainly involved in the PET-5mer entry by their contributions
to PC1, which reveals 49 relevant amino acid positions, which account for 62% of the data
variance (Fig.S9C). The involvement of so many positions highlights how complicated the
entry pathway of a polymer such as PET into the active enzyme site is. This complexity also
challenges the applicability of collective variable-based methods, such as metadynamics,77
for the targeted sampling of entry pathways. HREMD simulations, as used in this study, do
not restrict the conformational PET space to be sampled, but simply increase the space that
is generally sampled, thus providing a suitable approach. Inspection of the FES along the
PCs of the enzyme–PET contacts also shows that the PET-5mer does not enter the active
site via an exclusive pathway, but has three such preferential entry routes in both enzymes.
For each of these three pathways, a representative trajectory is projected onto the FES and
also structures of both enzymes (Fig.7).
29
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Figure 7: The three preferred entry pathways of the PET-5mer as revealed by PCA applied
to the HREMD data involving the simulations of all LCC (left) and PES-H1 (right) variants
performed in this work. For each pathway, a representative example is shown. The pathways
are mapped as circles on the FES in the PC1,PC2 plane of either enzyme and are also shown
(asspheres)togetherwiththecorrespondingenzymestructure. Theprogressofeachpathway
is highlighted by the color change from cyan to magenta. In the structure plots, the spheres
show the positions of the PET-5mer ester carbons that are finally productively bound.
These trajectories show how the position of the PET ester carbon evolves towards its pro-
ductive pose, represented by the color change from cyan to magenta. The first pathway leads
from the side opposite the ’wobbling’ tryptophan to the active site (Fig.7, top). The second
pathway goes directly from the exterior to the catalytic serine (Fig.7, middle), while in the
third pathway, the ester bond slides over the benzene ring of the ’wobbling’ tryptophan until
it reaches its final position for hydrolysis (Fig.7, bottom). Visual inspection of a number
of entry pathways revealed a significant flexibility of the ester carbon position, involving
multiple reorientations of the ester position, even when close to the active site, until a final
productive conformation is attained. Both enzymes exhibit the same entry pathways, with
30
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
the first route being the most clearly defined and energetically favored in both cases. As for
the second-preferred route, the LCC shows a preference for the direct entry of PET-5mer
as found in the second pathway, which is also better defined than in PES-H1, while in the
latter these arguments apply to the third pathway.
The pathway preference may be influenced by the interactions with certain residues and
their contribution to PC1, the principal component that mainly distinguishes the three path-
ways from each other (Fig.S9C). Amino acids with a negative contribution predominantly
influence the negative range of PC1, impacting the first pathway located at negative PC1
values. Conversely, amino acids with a positive contribution primarily affect the positive
range of PC1, influencing the third pathway situated at positive PC1 values. The magni-
tude of the amino acid contributions reflects their respective strengths. The second pathway
corresponds to PC1≈0 and therefore has no significant amino acid contributions along PC1.
The positions mutated in PES-H1 and LCC correspond to amino acids that contribute to
PC1. Among the three positions mutated in the more active IG and FY variants, two
contribute negatively to PC1 (PES-H1FY: 94/LCCICCG: 127 and PES-H1FY: 92) and thus
primarily affect the first pathway, which has been identified as the most important for both
enzymes. The other mutation in LCCICCG contributes to the positive PC1 direction and
consequently to the third pathway (LCCICCG: 243). For several of the positions that we
previously analyzed in terms of the FES reflecting their interaction with the PET-5mer, we
here find a strong contribution to PC1. In particular, position 68 of PES-H1 makes the
largest contribution to PC1, which turned out to be the PES-H1FY variant with the highest
catalytic efficiency after its mutation from serine to alanine (Tab.1). Together with position
209 in PES-H1 (which corresponds to position 243 in LCC and emerged as important for the
LCCICCG’s activity3), position 68 lines one end of the catalytic binding cleft and might, thus,
constitute a sterical hindrance when the predominant entry pathway is attempted (Fig.S6) .
For LCC, we had identified position 241 as a promising mutation site, which also contributes
to the first entry pathway.
31
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
In summary, the PET entry process exhibits a certain degree of variability due to the
considerable flexibility of the PET chain and persistent PET–PET interactions during entry
as shown above, but also due to the possibility that the ester bond that is eventually cleaved
can reach the active site by different routes. For both PES-H1 and LCC, we have identified
one pathway as the predominant one, which is identical for both enzymes and is consistent
with the findings by Falkensteinet al., who proposed this pathway as the PET entry path-
way.52 However, the plausibility of stepwise PET degradation through ’hopping and sliding’
and successive cleavage of PET ester bonds as the primary degradation mechanism appears
less tenable.
3 Conclusion
In this study, we systematically investigated the binding trajectory of PET to LCC and PES-
H1, aiming to deepen our understanding of the adsorption process and PET entry into the
binding site. To this end, we designed the study approach summarized in Fig.8. We started
with examining the initial adsorption of the PET hydrolases at a large amorphous PET bulk
using conventional atomistic MD simulations and explored the subsequent entry of PET into
the catalytically active site using enhanced-sampling HREMD simulations. Each simulation
step involved analyzing the energetics of the different binding phenomena to identify enzyme
residues that either promoted or hindered these events. This analysis was complemented by
amino acid mutations, initially evaluated through additional simulations and subsequently
validated through experimental measurements in the wet lab.
Our primary finding regarding the PET surface binding is that heightened adsorption
affinity, facilitated by the introduction of positive surface patches and polar residues, may
not correlate with improved enzymatic activity. This conclusion aligns with the Sabatier
principle, underscoring the importance of balancing binding affinity across enzyme regions,
both proximal and distal to the active site, with enzymatic activity optimization. For the
32
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
next step, the entry of PET into the binding site, we have made the important observation
that there is not just one such pathway, but three main ones. In each of these pathways, two
critical sources of energy barriers may impede PET from accessing the active site and assum-
ing a productive state. One arises from intra- and intermolecular PET-PET interactions,
requiring resolution for the linear binding cleft to accommodate a long, flexible PET chain.
The other potential hindrance stems from PET interactions with amino acid residues along
the pathway. Our analysis, including free energy surface and principal component analysis of
these interactions for wild-type and mutant LCC and PES-H1 enzymes, reveals that energy
barriers may result from the stabilization of unproductive states. Conversely, facilitating
a seamless energetic transition from unproductive to productive states and stabilizing the
latter could enhance enzymatic activity. This theoretical deduction finds support in kinetic
experiments involving the S68A mutant of PES-H1FY and the T211G mutant of LCCICCG.
However, it should be noted that the variants we identified to facilitate PET incorporation
did not show a significant increase in PET degradation activity. This can be explained by the
fact that we did not investigate the PET hydrolysis step itself and the subsequent product
release, which are also of great importance for enzyme activity in addition to PET entry
into the active site. Future studies should therefore investigate the effects of the mutations
investigated here on the activation energy barrier of the hydrolysis reaction using QM/MM
simulations and their influences on the resulting product complexes.
In summary, our pioneering methodology synergizes HREMD simulations and free en-
ergy analyses to dissect substrate entry pathways and pinpoint barriers. This approach
unveils critical insights into the intricate pathways traversed by polymers during degrada-
tion, enabling the development of mutation strategies to enhance enzyme kinetics. Here, our
computational simulations have significantly advanced the understanding of PET hydrolase
mechanisms and offer invaluable guidance for future engineering endeavors aimed at maxi-
mizing PET hydrolase applicability. Moreover, this approach holds promise for application
to a wide range of enzymes beyond PET hydrolases.
33
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Figure 8: Summary of the workflow applied and results obtained in this study.
34
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Acknowledgement
A.J.thankstheGermanFederalEnvironmentalFoundation(DeutscheBundesstiftungUmwelt)
for the financial support by providing a PhD fellowship. A.J is furthermore grateful to
her colleague Lara Scharbert for valuable suggestions in figure design. A.J. and B.S. grate-
fully acknowledge the computing time granted through JARA-HPC (project PETaseMD) on
the supercomputer JURECA at Forschungszentrum Jülich,78 the hybrid computer cluster
purchased from funding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation) project number INST 208/704-1 FUGG, the Center for Information and Media
Technology at Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, and the Regional Computing Center
of the University of Cologne (RRZK) for providing computing time on the DFG-funded
(Funding number: INST 216/512/1FUGG) High Performance Computing (HPC) system
CHEOPS. R.W. and U.T.B. acknowledge the funding received from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under grant agreement no. 870294 for the
MIX-UP project and no. 953214 for the upPE-T project.
Supporting Information Available
The following files are available free of charge.
• Material and Methods Section
• RMSD and RMSF of PES-H1, PES-H1FY, LCC, LCCICCG and LCCIG
• EPS of PET
• exemplary PET–PET interaction plots during PET entry
• FES plots for PET–PET interaction for WT enzymes
• exemplary PET–residue interaction plots during PET entry
35
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
• Mutation sites highlighted in LCC and PES-H1 structures
• FES plots for PET–residue interaction for variants analyzed experimentally and addi-
tional PES-H1FY S68 variants
• PC1contributionprofileandPC1/PC2FESwithprojectionsof(non-)productivestates
• additional kinetic parameters
References
(1) PlasticsEurope Plastics - the Facts 2022.PlasticsEurope 2022,
(2) Wei, R.; Tiso, T.; Bertling, J.; O’Conner, K.; Blank, L. M.; Bornscheuer, U. T. Possi-
bilities and limitations of biotechnological plastic degradation and recycling.Nat Catal
2020, 3, 867–871.
(3) Tournier, V. et al. An engineered PET depolymerase to break down and recycle plastic
bottles. Nature 2020, 580, 216–219.
(4) Wei, R.; von Haugwitz, G.; Pfaff, L.; Mican, J.; Badenhorst, C. P. S.; Liu, W.; We-
ber,G.; Austin,H.P.; Bednar,D.; Damborsky,J.; Bornscheuer,U.T.Mechanism-based
design of efficient PET hydrolases.ACS Catal 2022, 12, 3382–3396.
(5) Tournier, V.; Duquesne, S.; Guillamot, F.; Cramail, H.; Taton, D.; Marty, A.; André, I.
Enzymes’ power for plastics degradation.Chem Rev2023, 123, 5612–5701.
(6) Mican, J.; Jaradat, D. M.; Liu, W.; Weber, G.; Mazurenko, S.; Bornscheuer, U. T.;
Damborsky, J.; Wei, R.; Bednar, D. Exploring new galaxies: Perspectives on the dis-
covery of novel PET-degrading enzymes.Appl Catal B-Environ2024, 342, 123404.
(7) Schubert, S. W.; Thomsen, T. B.; Clausen, K. S. R.; Malmendal, A.; Hunt, C. J.;
Borch, K.; Jensen, K.; Brask, J.; Meyer, A. S.; Westh, P. Relationships of crystallinity
36
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
and reaction rates for enzymatic degradation of poly (ethylene terephthalate), PET.
ChemSusChem e202301752.
(8) Palm, G. J.; Reisky, L.; Böttcher, D.; Müller, H.; Michels, E. A. P.; Walczak, M. C.;
Berndt, L.; Weiss, M. S.; Bornscheuer, U. T.; Weber, G. Structure of the plastic-
degrading Ideonella sakaiensis MHETase bound to a substrate.Nat Commun 2019,
10, 1717.
(9) von Haugwitz, G. et al. Structural insights into (tere)phthalate-ester hydrolysis by a
carboxylesterase and its role in promoting PET depolymerization.ACS Catal 2022,
12, 15259–15270.
(10) Wei, R.; Breite, D.; Song, C.; Gräsing, D.; Ploss, T.; Hille, P.; Schwerdtfeger, R.;
Matysik, J.; Schulze, A.; Zimmermann, W. Biocatalytic degradation efficiency of
postconsumer polyethylene terephthalate packaging determined by their polymer mi-
crostructures. Adv Sci2019, 6, 1900491.
(11) Müller, R.-J.; Schrader, H.; Profe, J.; Dresler, K.; Deckwer, W.-D. Enzymatic degrada-
tion of poly(ethylene terephthalate): Rapid hydrolyse using a hydrolase fromT. fusca.
Macromol Rapid Comm2005, 26, 1400–1405.
(12) Taniguchi, I.; Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Kimura, Y.; Oda, K. Biodegrada-
tion of PET: Current status and application aspects.ACS Catal 2019, 9, 4089–4105.
(13) Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Takehana, T.; Taniguchi, I.; Yamaji, H.; Maeda, Y.; Toy-
ohara, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Kimura, Y.; Oda, K. A bacterium that degrades and assimi-
lates poly(ethylene terephthalate).Science 2016, 351, 1196–1199.
(14) Pfaff, L. et al. Multiple substrate binding mode-guided engineering of a thermophilic
PET hydrolase.ACS Catal 2022, 12, 9790–9800.
(15) CARBIOS https://www.carbios.com/en/enzymatic-recycling/.
37
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(16) Arnal, G.; Anglade, J.; Gavalda, S.; Tournier, V.; Chabot, N.; Bornscheuer, U. T.; We-
ber, G.; Marty, A. Assessment of four engineered PET degrading enzymes considering
large-scale industrial applications.ACS Catalysis2023, 13, 13156–13166.
(17) Thomsen, T. B.; Hunt, C. J.; Meyer, A. S. Influence of substrate crystallinity and glass
transition temperature on enzymatic degradation of polyethylene terephthalate (PET).
New Biotechnol2022, 69, 28–35.
(18) Wellen, R.; Rabello, M. The kinetics of isothermal cold crystallization and tensile prop-
erties of poly(ethylene terephthalate).J Mater Sci2005, 6099–6104.
(19) Tarazona, N. A.; Wei, R.; Brott, S.; Pfaff, L.; Bornscheuer, U. T.; Lendlein, A.;
Machatschek, R. Rapid depolymerization of poly(ethylene terephthalate) thin films
by a dual-enzyme system and its impact on material properties.Chem Catalysis2022,
2, 3573–3589.
(20) Cui, Y.; Chen, Y.; Sun, J.; Zhu, T.; Li, H. P. C.; Geng, W.-C.; Wu, B. Computational
redesign of a hydrolase for nearly complete PET depolymerization at industrially rele-
vant high-solids loading.Nat Commun 2024, 15, 1417.
(21) Thomsen, T. B.; Schubert, S.; Hunt, C. J.; Borch, K.; Jensen, K.; Brask, J.; Westh, P.;
Meyer, A. S. Rate response of poly(ethylene terephthalate)-hydrolases to substrate crys-
tallinity: Basis for understanding the lag phase.ChemSusChem 2023, 16, e202300291.
(22) Badino, S. F.; Bååth, J. A.; Borch, K.; Jensen, K.; Westh, P. Adsorption of enzymes
with hydrolytic activity on polyethylene terephthalate.Enzyme Microb Tech2021, 152,
109937.
(23) Nakamura, A.; Kobayashi, N.; Koga, N.; Iino, R. Positive charge introduction on the
surface of thermostabilized PET hydrolase facilitates PET binding and degradation.
ACS Catal 2021, 11, 8550–8564.
38
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(24) Fang, Y.; Chao, K.; He, J.; Wang, Z.; Chen, Z. High-efficiency depolymeriza-
tion/degradation of polyethylene terephthalate plastic by a whole-cell biocatalyst.3
Biotech 2023, 13, 138.
(25) Thumarat, U.; Nakamura, R.; Kawabata, T.; Suzuki, H.; Kawai, F. Biochemical and
genetic analysis of a cutinase-type polyesterase from a thermophilicThermobifida alba
AHK119. Appl Microbiol Biotechnol2012, 95, 419–430.
(26) Herrero Acero, E.; Ribitsch, D.; Dellacher, A.; Zitzenbacher, S.; Marold, A.; Steinkell-
ner, G.; Gruber, K.; Schwab, H.; Guebitz, G. M. Surface engineering of a cutinase from
Thermobifida cellulosilyticafor improved polyester hydrolysis.Biotechnol Bioeng2013,
110, 2581–2590.
(27) Miyakawa, T.; Mizushima, H.; Ohtsuka, J.; Oda, M.; Kawai, F.; Tanokura, M. Struc-
tural basis for the Ca(2+)-enhanced thermostability and activity of PET-degrading
cutinase-like enzyme fromSaccharomonospora viridisAHK190.Appl Microbiol Biotech-
nol 2015, 99, 4297–4307.
(28) Ribitsch, D.; Hromic, A.; Zitzenbacher, S.; Zartl, B.; Gamerith, C.; Pellis, A.;
Jungbauer, A.; Łyskowski, A.; Steinkellner, G.; Gruber, K.; Tscheliessnig, R.; Her-
rero Acero, E.; Guebitz, G. M. Small cause, large effect: Structural characterization of
cutinases fromThermobifida cellulosilytica.Biotechnol Bioeng2017, 114, 2481–2488.
(29) Bååth, J. A.; Jensen, K.; Borch, K.; Westh, P.; Kari, J. Sabatier principle for rational-
izing enzymatic hydrolysis of a synthetic polyester.JACS Au2022, 2, 1223–1231.
(30) Cui, Y. et al. Computational redesign of a PETase for plastic biodegradation under
ambient condition by the GRAPE strategy.ACS Catal 2021, 11, 1340–1350.
(31) Li, Z.; Zhao, Y.; Wu, P.; Wang, H.; Li, Q.; Gao, J.; Qin, H.-M.; Wei, H.; Born-
scheuer, U. T.; Han, X.; Wei, R.; Liu, W. Structural insight and engineering of a
plastic degrading hydrolase Ple629.Biochem Bioph Res Co2022, 626, 100–106.
39
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(32) Richter, P. K.; Blázquez-Sánchez, P.; Zhao, Z.; Engelberger, F.; Wiebeler, C.; nze, G.;
Frank, R.; Krinke, D.; Frezzotti, E.; Lihanova, Y.; Falkenstein, P.; Matysik, J.; Zimmer-
mann, W.; Sträter, N.; Sonnendecker, C. Structure and function of the metagenomic
plastic-degrading polyester hydrolase PHL7 bound to its product.Nat Commun2023,
14, 1905.
(33) Zeng, W.; Li, X.; Yang, Y.; Min, J.; Huang, J.-W.; Liu, W.; Niu, D.; Yang, X.; Han, X.;
Zhang, L.; Dai, L.; Chen, C.-C.; Guo, R.-T. Substrate-binding mode of a thermophilic
PET hydrolase and engineering the enzyme to enhance the hydrolytic efficacy.ACS
Catal 2022, 12, 3033–3040.
(34) Yang, Y. et al. Complete bio-degradation of poly(butylene adipate-co-terephthalate)
via engineered cutinases.Nat Commun 2023, 14, 1645.
(35) Han, X.; Liu, W.; Huang, J. W.; Ma, J.; Zheng, Y.; Ko, T. P.; Xu, L.; Cheng, Y. S.;
Chen, C. C.; Guo, R. T. Structural insight into catalytic mechanism of PET hydrolase.
Nat Commun 2017, 8, 2106.
(36) Bollinger, A.; Thies, S.; Knieps-Grünhagen, E.; Gertzen, C.; Kobus, S.; Höppner, A.;
Ferrer, M.; Gohlke, H.; Smits, S. H. J.; Jaeger, K.-E. A novel polyester hydrolase from
the marine bacteriumPseudomonas aestusnigri – Structural and functional insights.
Front Microbiol2020, 11.
(37) Liu, B.; He, L.; Wang, L.; Li, T.; Li, C.; Liu, H.; Luo, Y.; Bao, R. Protein crystallogra-
phy and site-direct mutagenesis analysis of the poly(ethylene terephthalate) hydrolase
PETase fromIdeonella sakaiensis. ChemBioChem 2018, 19, 1471–1475.
(38) Tailoring cutinase activity towards polyethylene terephthalate and polyamide 6,6 fibers.
J Biotechnol2007, 128, 849–857.
(39) Silva, C.; Da, S.; Silva, N.; Matamá, T.; Araújo, R.; Martins, M.; Chen, S.; Chen, J.;
40
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
Wu, J.; Casal, M.; Cavaco-Paulo, A. Engineered Thermobifida fusca cutinase with
increased activity on polyester substrates.Biotechnol J 2011, 6, 1230–1239.
(40) Austin, H. P. et al. Characterization and engineering of a plastic-degrading aromatic
polyesterase. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA2018, 115, E4350–E4357.
(41) Ma, Y.; Yao, M.; Li, B.; Ding, M.; He, B.; Chen, S.; Zhou, X.; Yuan, Y. Enhanced
poly(ethylene terephthalate) hydrolase activity by protein engineering. Engineering
2018, 4, 888–893.
(42) Mhashal, A. R.; Kumar T, N.; Kumar, N.; Singhal, A.; Ravandur, A.; Sokkar, P.;
Kulkarni, N. The effect of double (S238F/W159H) mutations on the structure and
dynamics of PET degrading enzyme.J Biomol Struct Dyn2023, 0, 1–11.
(43) Chen, C. C.; Han, X.; Ko, T. P.; Liu, W.; Guo, R. T. Structural studies reveal the
molecular mechanism of PETase.FEBS J 2018, 285, 3717–3723.
(44) Chen, C.-C. et al. General features to enhance enzymatic activity of poly(ethylene
terephthalate) hydrolysis.Nat Catal 2021, 425–430.
(45) Crnjar, A.; Griñen, A.; Kamerlin, S. C. L.; Ramírez-Sarmiento, C. A. Conformational
selection of a tryptophan side chain drives the generalized increase in activity of PET
hydrolases through a Ser/Ile double mutation.ACS Org Inorg Au2023, 3, 109–119.
(46) Joo, S.; Cho, I. J.; Seo, H.; Son, H. F.; Sagong, H. Y.; Shin, T. J.; Choi, S. Y.; Lee, S. Y.;
Kim, K. J. Structural insight into molecular mechanism of poly(ethylene terephthalate)
degradation. Nat Commun 2018, 9, 382.
(47) Kawabata, T.; Oda, M.; Kawai, F. Mutational analysis of cutinase-like enzyme, Cut190,
based on the 3D docking structure with model compounds of polyethylene terephtha-
late. J Biosci Bioeng2017, 124, 28–35.
41
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(48) Fecker, T.; Galaz-Davison, P.; Engelberger, F.; Narui, Y.; Sotomayor, M.; Parra, L. P.;
Ramírez-Sarmiento, C. A. Active site flexibility as a hallmark for efficient PET degra-
dation byI.sakaiensis PETase. Biophys J 2018, 114, 1302–1312.
(49) Charupanit, K.; Tipmanee, V.; Sutthibutpong, T.; Limsakul, P. Identification of po-
tential sites for a plastic-degrading enzyme by a reverse screening through the protein
sequence space and molecular dynamics simulations.Molecules 2022, 27, 3353.
(50) Pirillo, V.; Orlando, M.; Tessaro, D.; Pollegioni, L.; Molla, G. An efficient protein
evolution workflow for the improvement of bacterial PET hydrolyzing enzymes.Int J
Mol Sci 2022, 23, 264.
(51) Aristizábal-Lanza, L.; Mankar, S. V.; Tullberg, C.; Zhang, B.; Linares-Pastén, J. A.
Comparison of the enzymatic depolymerization of polyethylene terephthalate and
AkestraTM usingHumicola insolenscutinase. Front Chem Eng2022, 4.
(52) Falkenstein, P.; Zhao, Z.; Di Pede-Mattatelli, A.; Künze, G.; Sommer, M.; Sonnen-
decker, C.; Zimmermann, W.; Colizzi, F.; Matysik, J.; Song, C. On the binding mode
and molecular mechanism of enzymatic polyethylene terephthalate degradation.ACS
Catal 2023, 13, 6919–6933.
(53) James, A.; De, S. Cation–πand hydrophobic interaction controlled PET recognition in
double mutated cutinase – identification of a novel binding subsite for better catalytic
activity.RSC Adv2022, 12, 20563–20577.
(54) Groß, C.; Hamacher, K.; Schmitz, K.; Jager, S. Cleavage product accumulation de-
creases the activity of cutinase during PET hydrolysis.J Chem Inf Model2017, 57,
243–255.
(55) Cruz-Chu,E.R.; Ritz,T.; Siwy,Z.S.; Schulten,K.Molecularcontrolofionicconduction
in polymer nanopores.Faraday Discuss2009, 143, 47–62.
42
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(56) Rabe, M.; Verdes, D.; Seeger, S. Understanding protein adsorption phenomena at solid
surfaces. Adv Colloid Interfac2011, 162, 87–106.
(57) Secundo, F. Conformational changes of enzymes upon immobilisation.Chem Soc Rev
2013, 42, 6250–6261.
(58) Bourassin, N.; Barbault, F.; Baaden, M.; Sacquin-Mora, S. Between two walls: Mod-
eling the adsorption behavior ofβ-glucosidase A on bare and SAM-functionalised gold
surfaces. bioRxiv 2021,
(59) Sagong, H. Y.; Son, H. F.; Seo, H.; Hong, H.; Lee, D.; Kim, K. J. Implications for the
PET decomposition mechanism through similarity and dissimilarity between PETases
from Rhizobacter gummiphilus and Ideonella sakaiensis. J Hazard Mater 2021, 416,
126075.
(60) Mrigwani, A.; Thakur, B.; Guptasarma, P. Counter-intuitive enhancement of degrada-
tion of polyethylene terephthalate through engineering of lowered enzyme binding to
solid plastic.Proteins 2023, 91, 807–821.
(61) Schmidt, J.; Wei, R.; Oeser, T.; Belisário-Ferrari, M. R.; Barth, M.; Then, J.; Zimmer-
mann,W.EffectofTris, MOPS,andphosphatebuffersonthehydrolysisofpolyethylene
terephthalate films by polyester hydrolases.FEBS Open Bio2016, 6, 919–927.
(62) Sonnendecker, C. et al. Low carbon footprint recycling of post-consumer PET plastic
with a metagenomic polyester hydrolase.ChemSusChem 2022, 15, e202101062.
(63) Zheng, M.; Li, Y.; Dong, W.; Zhang, Q.; Wang, W. Enantioselectivity and origin of en-
hanced efficiency in polyethylene terephthalate hydrolases catalyzed depolymerization.
J Hazard Mater2023, 452, 131295.
(64) Akram,E.; Cao,Y.; Xing,H.; Ding,Y.; Luo,Y.; Wei,R.; Zhang,Y.Onthetemperature
43
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
dependence of enzymatic degradation of poly(ethylene terephthalate).Chinese J Catal
2024,
(65) Boneta, S.; Arafet, K.; Moliner, V. QM/MM study of the enzymatic biodegradation
mechanism of polyethylene terephthalate.J Chem Inf Model2021, 61, 3041–3051.
(66) Ferrario, V.; Fischer, M.; Zhu, Y.; Pleiss, J. Modelling of substrate access and substrate
binding to cephalosporin acylases.Sci Rep2019, 9, 12402.
(67) Wei, R.; Song, C.; sing, D.; Schneider, T.; Bielytskyi, P.; ttcher, D.; Matysik, J.;
Bornscheuer, U. T.; Zimmermann, W. Conformational fitting of a flexible oligomeric
substrate does not explain the enzymatic PET degradation.Nat Commun 2019, 10.
(68) Orlando, C.; Prejanò, M.; Russo, N.; Marino, T. On the role of temperature in the
depolymerization of PET by FAST-PETase: An atomistic point of view on possible
active site pre-organization and substrate-destabilization effects. ChemBioChem 24,
e202300412.
(69) Belisário-Ferrari, M. R.; Wei, R.; Schneider, T.; Honak, A.; Zimmermann, W. Fast
turbidimetricassayforanalyzingtheenzymatichydrolysisofpolyethyleneterephthalate
model substrates.Biotechnol J 2019, 14, 1800272.
(70) Bååth, J. A.; Borch, K.; Jensen, K.; Brask, J.; Westh, P. Comparative biochemistry of
four polyester (PET) hydrolases**.ChemBioChem 2021, 22, 1627–1637.
(71) Schubert, S.; Schaller, K.; Bååth, J. A.; Hunt, C.; Borch, K.; Jensen, K.; Brask, J.;
Westh, P. Reaction pathways for the enzymatic degradation of poly(ethylene tereph-
thalate): What characterizes an efficient PET-hydrolase? ChemBioChem 2023, 24,
e202200516.
(72) Ronkvist, A. M.; Xie, W.; Lu, W.; Gross, R. A. Cutinase-catalyzed hydrolysis of
poly(ethylene terephthalate).Macromolecules 2009, 42, 5128–5138.
44
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
(73) Scandola, M.; Focarete, M. L.; Frisoni, G. Simple kinetic model for the heterogeneous
enzymatic hydrolysis of natural poly(3-hydroxybutyrate).Macromolecules 1998, 31,
3846–3851.
(74) Kari, J.; Andersen, M.; Borch, K.; Westh, P. An inverse Michaelis–Menten approach
for interfacial enzyme kinetics.ACS Catal 2017, 7, 4904–4914.
(75) Wei, R.; Oeser, T.; Barth, M.; Weigl, N.; Lübs, A.; Schulz-Siegmund, M.; Hacker, M. C.;
Zimmermann, W. Turbidimetric analysis of the enzymatic hydrolysis of polyethylene
terephthalate nanoparticles.J Mol Catal B-Enzym2014, 103, 72–78.
(76) Vogel, K.; Wei, R.; Pfaff, L.; Breite, D.; Al-Fathi, H.; Ortmann, C.; Estrela-Lopis, I.;
Venus, T.; Schulze, A.; Harms, H.; Bornscheuer, U. T.; Maskow, T. Enzymatic degra-
dation of polyethylene terephthalate nanoplastics analyzed in real time by isothermal
titration calorimetry.Sci Total Environ2021, 773, 145111.
(77) Bussi, G.; Laio, A. Using metadynamics to explore complex free-energy landscapes.Nat
Rev Phys2020, 2, 200–212.
(78) Krause, D.; Thörnig, P. JURECA: Modular Supercomputer at Jülich Supercomputing
Centre. JLSRF 2018, 4.
45
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint 
TOC Graphic
46
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission. 
The copyright holder for this preprint (whichthis version posted April 21, 2024. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.04.21.590457doi: bioRxiv preprint