polymers 
Article
Rational Protein Engineering to Increase the Activity and
Stability of IsPETase Using the PROSS Algorithm
Andrew Rennison 1
 , Jakob R. Winther 1, * and Cristiano Varrone 2, *
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Rennison, A.; Winther, J.R.;
Varrone, C. Rational Protein
Engineering to Increase the Activity
and Stability of IsPETase Using the
PROSS Algorithm. Polymers 2021, 13,
3884. https://doi.org/10.3390/
polym13223884
Academic Editor: Sergio Torres-Giner
Received: 21 October 2021
Accepted: 4 November 2021
Published: 10 November 2021
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1 Section for Biomolecular Sciences, Linderstrøm-Lang Centre for Protein Science, Department of Biology,
University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaloes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark; Andrewrennison100@gmail.com
2 Section for Sustainable Biotechnology, Department of Chemistry and BioScience, Aalborg University,
A.C. Meyers Vænge 15, C2, 2450 Copenhagen, Denmark
* Correspondence: jrwinther@bio.ku.dk (J.R.W.); cva@bio.aau.dk (C.V .)
Abstract: Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is the most widely used polyester plastic, with applica-
tions in the textile and packaging industry. Currently, re-moulding is the main path for PET recycling,
but this eventually leads to an unsustainable loss of quality; thus, other means of recycling are
required. Enzymatic hydrolysis offers the possibility of monomer formation under mild conditions
and opens up alternative and inﬁnite recycling paths. Here, IsPETase, derived from the bacterium
Ideonella sakaiensis, is considered to be the most active enzyme for PET degradation under mild
conditions, and although several studies have demonstrated improvements to both the stability and
activity of this enzyme, stability at even moderate temperatures is still an issue. In the present study,
we have used sequence and structure-based bioinformatic tools to identify mutations to increase the
thermal stability of the enzyme so as to increase PET degradation activity during extended hydrolysis
reactions. We found that amino acid substitution S136E showed signiﬁcant increases to activity and
stability. S136E is a previously unreported variant that led to a 3.3-fold increase in activity relative to
wild type.
Keywords: PETase; thermostability; thermal deactivation assay; PET hydrolysis
1. Introduction
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is a synthetic aromatic polyester and is one of the
most commonly used materials for textiles and (food and drinks) packaging and is appre-
ciated for its high durability, low weight, and gas permeability as well as its resistance
to degradation [1]. With up to 580 billion PET bottles predicted to be produced globally
throughout 2021 [2], it is clear that the material plays a large role, both economically and
environmentally. The most commonly used recycling process comprises sorting, mechan-
ical rinsing and grinding, followed by melt processing and extrusion. These processes
reduce the chain length and crystallinity of PET ﬁbres, ﬁnally resulting in reduced product
quality [1,3]. Additionally, while recycling is a top priority, in 2018, only approximately
40% of plastic packaging waste was recycled in the EU, with the majority of the rest go-
ing to landﬁlls or being incinerated [4]. Furthermore, much of the virgin PET produced
from petroleum resources is lost as waste (incinerated or landﬁlled) and is unable to be
recycled and reused in its most valuable form. Thus, in order to ensure that this useful
material is kept within a closed loop, according to the circular economy concept, a recycling
method that can depolymerise post-consumer PET (PC-PET) into monomers, which can be
repolymerised into high crystallinity PET, is required.
PET is made of repeating units of mono(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (MHET) that
are linked by ester bonds. Many bacterial and fungal enzymes have been identiﬁed
that can convert PET into this monomer [ 5]. MHET, which is also an ester, can also be
further hydrolysed into its constituents ethylene glycol (EG) and terephthalic acid (TPA).
These PET-degrading enzymes are often lipases or cutinases, yet they often have relatively
Polymers 2021, 13, 3884. https://doi.org/10.3390/polym13223884 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/polymers
Polymers 2021, 13, 3884 2 of 11
low turnover rates at the low temperatures that would be required for an economically
viable recycling process [3]. In 2016, interest in PET-degrading enzymes was raised by the
discovery of a bacterium, Ideonella sakaiensis, in a bottle recycling facility in Japan that could
grow solely on PET as an energy and carbon source. An enzyme of the cutinase family,
designated as Ideonella sakaiensis PET hydrolase (IsPETase), was identiﬁed in this bacterium
that could depolymerise PET together with the action of a second enzyme called mono(2-
hydroxyethyl) terephthalate hydrolase (MHETase) [ 6]. IsPETase demonstrated higher
PET degradation activity compared to other enzymes known at the time and, crucially,
was active in mesophilic conditions, with an optimum temperature of 30 ◦C [6,7]. This
seemed to indicate the potential applicability of the enzyme in biotechnological recycling
and upcycling. However, IsPETase was much less thermally stable than other known
PET-degrading enzymes, causing issues with expression yields and extended processing
times. Although the enzyme had the highest known activity at low temperatures [ 6], it
still did not have the required activity or stability to form part of an economically viable
depolymerisation process [8].
IsPETase has an alpha/beta hydrolase fold and uses a serine hydrolase mechanism
that is similar to trypsin. It is not known to what extent IsPETase has evolved by natural
selection in I. sakaiensis, but as PET has only been found at signiﬁcant levels in nature for
about 50 years, it is likely that the enzyme has not yet reached its full evolutionary potential.
Thus, several studies have been performed to increase the activity and thermostability of the
enzyme through rationally designed point mutations [3]. Examples of improved variants
include AustinPETase [9] and JooPETase [10], which were both produced to improve activity,
and SonPETase [11], which developed with the goal of increasing stability.AustinPETase was
devised by applying substrate docking calculations to suggest mutations and to narrow the
active site cleft by introducing the substitutions W159H and S238F. JooPETase was obtained
in a similar manner, resulting in R280A, which removed a protruding arginine residue
from the substrate binding pocket. Finally, SonPETase was built on the R280A variant by
adding a further two substitutions, S121E and D186H, to stabilise the loop regions.
In this study, a computational approach was used in which amino acid substitutions
were recommended for the stabilisation of the enzyme by the Protein Repair One Stop
Shop (PROSS) method. These were visually examined in a molecular viewer (PyMol) to
determine their suitability. Variants were then experimentally assessed based upon their
thermostability by differential scanning ﬂuorimetry (DSF) and a thermal deactivation assay.
Activity was also assayed on standardised PET ﬁlms over a range of temperatures.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. PROSS
The online PROSS server at (https://pross.weizmann.ac.il/step/pross-terms/ ac-
cessed: 12 Feburary 2020) was used for the design of the mutations that could be used
to increase the thermostability of IsPETase. The crystal structure of IsPETase was taken
from [10] (PDB code: 5XJH). The residues forming the active site, the oxyanion hole, and
the binding residue at W185 were ﬁxed during the mutation design, preventing them
from being altered. The standard multiple sequence alignment (MSA) parameters for the
PROSS server were used. This included only allowing proteins with an identity of over
35% and with a coverage of over 75%, both taken from a BLAST search, to be included in
the alignments. The maximum number of sequences to be used in the alignment was 4000,
and the energy function used in the Rosetta calculations was talaris 2014.
2.2. Plasmid Construction
The base plasmid used for the expression of all of the variants was pET21b(+)-Is-
PETase, obtained from AddGene (plasmid #112202) [9]. The PETase sequence was obtained
from [9], following which the gene was codon optimised for expression in E. coli and was
cloned into the expression vector pET-21b(+) with a C-terminal His tag. The endogenous
Polymers 2021, 13, 3884 3 of 11
signal peptide was removed from the gene by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
subsequent kinase, ligase, DpnI (KLD) treatment, as described below.
2.3. Variant Construction
Mutations were introduced to the wild-type gene by PCR with mutagenic primers,
which were designed using the online tool NEBasechanger, which is available at (https:
//nebasechanger.neb.com/ accessed: 16 January 2020). Codons for the new amino acids
that were to be introduced were chosen from the codon usage chart inE. coli K12 genes [12].
Following the introduction of the point mutations by PCR, the linear mutated fragments
were circularised using the KLD kit (NEB), which included a DpnI enzyme to remove
any template DNA. The reaction mixture was incubated at room temperature for 10 min
before being directly used in the transformation. The gene for SonPETase was purchased
from Twist Bioscience (San Francisco, CA, USA) and was introduced into the pET-21b(+)
backbone by Gibson assembly using standard protocols. All of the primers used for cloning
and site-directed mutagenesis are listed in S1.
2.4. Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation
Single clones of E. coli BL21(DE3) cells containing relevant plasmids were inoculated
into 10 mL of LB medium with 100 µg/L of ampicillin at 37 ◦C at 200 rpm. The overnight
culture was then inoculated into a volume of 500 mL LB-AB medium in 3 L ﬂasks, with
an initial growth temperature of 37 ◦C, and the samples were shaken at 200 rpm. After
the culture reached OD 600 of 0.4–0.6, the temperature was then reduced to 16 ◦C, and
expression was induced with 0.4 mM isopropyl β-D-1-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG), and
the culture was allowed to grow for 24 h. The cells were harvested by centrifugation for
15 min at 7000 rpm and 4 ◦C, the supernatant was discarded, and the pellet was frozen at
−20 ◦C. The pellets were resuspended in 20 mL of lysis buffer (50 mM phosphate buffer pH
7.0) and were lysed by ultrasonication in two rounds of 8 ×30 s pulses, with the mixture
kept on ice. This mixture was then centrifuged at 18,000 rpm and 4 ◦C for 15 min, and
the supernatant was retained. His-pur Ni-NTA agarose resin (Thermo-scientiﬁc, Roskilde,
Denmark) was equilibrated in lysis buffer on a gravity ﬂow column (Bio-rad, Hercules,
CA, USA) ensuring a column volume of approximately 2 mL for each 20 mL of cell lysate.
The resin was then resuspended in approximately 10 mL of the phosphate buffer and was
mixed with cell lysate at 4 ◦C overnight to allow the His-tagged proteins to bind to the
Ni-NTA resin. Following this, the lysate/bound resin mixture was again added to the
gravity ﬂow column and was eluted with increasing concentrations of imidazole in 50 mM
phosphate buffer at pH 7.0, with the target protein eluting at 250 mM imidazole. The eluted
fraction was subjected to dialysis in 3.5 kDa molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) standard
regenerated cellulose (RC) dialysis tubing (Spectrum labs) to wash out the imidazole in
the dialysis buffer, and afterwards, it was stored in 50 mM phosphate buffer with a pH
of 7.0. Protein concentration was determined at 280 nm using an extinction coefﬁcient of
39,420 cm−1M−1.
2.5. Assessment of Melting Temperature by Differential Scanning Fluorimetry
The Tm of variants was determined by DSF on a Prometheus (NanoTemper Technolo-
gies GmBH, München, Germany) according the manufactures directions. Accordingly,
protein ﬂuorescence was monitored at 330 nm and 350 nm in lysis buffer at a protein con-
centration of ~10 µM while the temperature increased from 20◦C to 90 ◦C at 0.5 ◦C per min.
Tm was determined at the inﬂection point of the second derivative of the E330/E350-ratio.
2.6. Assessment of Melting Temperatures by Thermal Deactivation Assay
The activity of IsPETase on PET can be deﬁned as an ester hydrolysis, and as such, a
medium-throughput assay was developed to quantify the reduction in the activity of the
enzyme during incubation at a speciﬁc temperature over time. We used para-nitrophenyl
acetate (pNPA) (Thermo-scientiﬁc, Roskilde, Denmark) as a model esterase substrate [13].
Polymers 2021, 13, 3884 4 of 11
Puriﬁed enzyme was standardized to 5 µM in 500 µL of lysis buffer and was incubated
at 45 ◦C for various time periods. At each timepoint, 20 µL of sample was removed from
the incubation tube and was added to 170 µL of phosphate buffer in a 96-well plate kept
on ice. After the incubation period, the plate was allowed to come to room temperature,
and 10 µL of 20 mM pNPA in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (Thermo-scientiﬁc, Roskilde,
Denmark) was added to each well using a multichannel pipette. The plate was then
incubated at 25 ◦C in a spectrophotometer, and the absorbance was measured at 405 nm at
1 min intervals. All of the experiments were done in triplicate, and a blank control assay
was conducted with the phosphate buffer replacing the enzyme. The linear range of the
assay with respect to product p-nitrophenol was determined, and only absorbance values
that were within this range were accepted. The slope up to the ﬁrst ﬁve points on the curve
of absorbance against time was then calculated for each incubation time, and this was then
taken as the initial activity. The slope of the blank control assay was used to correct activity
measurements for background hydrolysis. The initial rate of reaction was then plotted
against incubation time in order to determine the rate of denaturation and the half-life (t1/2)
of the enzyme following incubation. Due to the large error resulting from background
correction, any activities that were less than 5% of the initial activity or less than double
that of the blank control assay were discarded. Finally, only decay curves with three or
more points satisfying these data acceptance criteria were accepted. Thet1/2 was calculated
by ﬁtting the data to conventional exponential decay, as expressed by Equation (1), where
At is the activity at time t, A0 is the initial activity, and k is the rate constant for decay:
At = A0 e−kt (1)
The half-life of the decay of the activity of each variant upon incubation was then
calculated using Equation (2), where t1/2 is the half-life, and k is the rate constant for decay:
t1/2 = Ln(2)
k (2)
2.7. Assessment of PET Hydrolysis
For simplicity, we chose an assay modiﬁed from [14], where standardised and commer-
cially available PET ﬁlm (Goodfellow, UK) was the substrate and the release of MHET/TPA
was detected at 260 nm using an NanoDrop 1000 spectrophotometer (Thermo-scientiﬁc,
Roskilde, Denmark). PET discs were cut from a 0.25 mm thick amorphous PET sheet using
a standard ofﬁce hole punch, creating 1
4
′′discs with a calculated surface area of 0.64 cm2.
The discs were submerged in ethanol and were allowed to dry in a laminar ﬂow bench in
order to sterilise them. They were then placed in a 2 mL eppendorf tube with 100 nM of
enzyme in a 50 mM tricine pH 9.0 buffer with 10% (v/v) DMSO for a total reaction volume
of 250 µL. Short Pasteur pipette lengths made from polyethylene were placed on top of
the discs to ensure that they did not ﬂoat on top of the small volume of liquid due to the
high surface tension. Samples were shaken (200 rpm) at various temperatures in a shaking
incubator (IKA KS 3000i) (Staufen, Germany). Samples of 2 µL in volume were taken at
regular intervals, and the absorbance was read at 260 nm. Standard curves made using the
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method described below gave extinc-
tion coefﬁcients for MHET and TPA, respectively, as 135.4 M−1cm−1 and 118.4 M−1cm−1.
Samples of the hydrolysis products also showed an MHET concentration that was approxi-
mately 5 times higher than that of TPA after 24 h on average. For simplicity, and since the
extinction coefﬁcients are similar, the product is reported as the MHET equivalents, i.e., the
sum of TPA and MHET.
2.8. High Performance Liquid Chromatography Analysis
The method was modiﬁed from the one reported by [15]. Samples with a volume of
50 µL were taken and centrifuged at 20,000 rpm for 10 min, and the supernatant was diluted
in a 1:1 ratio with methanol. Standards of TPA (Thermo-scientiﬁc, Roskilde, Denmark),
Polymers 2021, 13, 3884 5 of 11
MHET (Advance ChemBlock Inc., Burlingame, CA, USA), and Bis(2-hydroxyethyl) tereph-
thalate (BHET) (Thermo-scientiﬁc, Roskilde, Denmark) taken also made in a 50% methanol
solution (v/v) to ensure equivalence with the samples from 0.05 mg/mL to 25 mg/mL. Any
concentrations below this range would be considered below the method’s limit of quantiﬁ-
cation. The samples were analysed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system (Sunnyvale, CA,
USA) ﬁtted with a UV/Vis detector. A C18 column (Phenomenex Luna 5 µm, 250 mm ×
4.6 mm) (Torrance, CA, USA) at 35 ◦C was used for the separation of the reaction products,
with a mixture of 60% Milli-Q water, 20% acetonitrile, and 20% 10 mM H2SO4 (v/v/v) being
used as the mobile phase. The ﬂow rate was 1 mL/min, and the injection volume was
10 µL, with detection at 260 nm.
2.9. Kinetic Analysis of Variant Hydrolysis of PET
Inverse Michaelis–Menten (InvMM) determinations were based on the methods out-
lined in [16]. Amorphous PET discs produced in the same method as described above were
added to a variety of enzyme concentrations between 50 nM and 650 nM, with the amount
of degradation products quantiﬁed as described above. The linearity of the progress of the
reaction over time was conﬁrmed, and ﬁnal samples were taken after 6 h of hydrolysis.
Rates were then reported in units of nmolProductsmin−1, where InvVmax is the maximum
rate in the units above, as determined by the InvMM kinetics as described by [ 16]. Cal-
culations of InvVmax and InvKm were performed using the Prism (GraphPad, San Diego,
CA, USA) statistical software by ﬁtting the data to a standard Michaelis–Menten equation.
Conﬁdence intervals of 95% were also determined using this software.
3. Results and Discussion
3.1. Protein Engineering to Improve Ths Stability of IsPETase Using PROSS
The upload of the structure for IsPETase (PDB ID: 5XJH) into the PROSS server resulted
in an extensive list of 51 substitutions, see Supplementary Information for the full list (S2).
As this number was too large to be studied in the scope of this project, a limited few were
selected to be studied on the basis of their alignments to three highly efﬁcient thermostable
PET hydrolysing enzymes, namely Cutinase 2 from Thermobiﬁda fusca (TfCut2) [17], an
Alpha/Beta hydrolase family protein from Saccharomonospora viridis (Cut190) [18], and
the Leaf Compost Cutinase from an uncultured organism (LCC) [19], and were discarded
if no agreements were found. From this process, three novel variants were selected for
experimental characterization: S125RPETase, S136EPETase, and T270QPETase. The alignments
can be seen in Table 1, and the visualization of the substitutions can be found in the
Supplementary information (S3).
Table 1. Alignment of mutations suggested by the PROSS server and conﬁrmed by simulation, with
the three thermostable PET hydrolases Tfcut2, LCC, and Cut190. Three of the mutations showed
matches with the thermostable PET hydrolases and were experimentally produced and assessed
for their thermostability and PET hydrolytic activity. Bold-labelled amino acids show agreements
with the substitution suggested by PROSS; underlines are similar amino acids to those suggested by
PROSS, while those that are italic are substitutions for an amino acid with a side chain of signiﬁcantly
different properties.
Substitution Designed by PROSS S125R S136E T270Q
IsPETase S S T
Tfcut2 E N Q
LCC S T Q
Cut190 R E Q
From this series of alignments, we can see that the enzyme Cut190 contains the
relevant amino acid corresponding to the substitutions designed by the PROSS server. As
this enzyme is active on PET and since it has a higher thermostability than IsPETase, we
Polymers 2021, 13, 3884 6 of 11
surmised that the substitutions at these positions would at least have no deleterious effects
and would therefore be studied through further experiments.
3.2. Improved Thermostability of IsPETase Variants
Variants were constructed in plasmids containing a truncated IsPETase gene with the
I. sakaiensis signal peptide removed using PCR with mutagenic primers. The protein was
produced intracellularly and was puriﬁed to over 85% purity, as described in the Materials
and Methods section.
To examine the effect that the rationally designed substitutions had on thermostability,
we used two assays: a structure-based heat inactivation and an activity-based assay that
was developed during the study. In the second assay, the activity half-life was determined
to create a better picture of how the protein behaves under typical hydrolysis conditions,
with any partial unfolding leading to partially active enzyme or refolding upon cooling.
Upon the incubation of both the variant and the wild-type enzymes at 45 ◦C, the sam-
ples were withdrawn for activity determination using a para-nitrophenol acetate (pNPA)
substrate. From these measurements, activity half-lives were determined. Although this
assay measured the hydrolysis of a small model substrate, we anticipate that it mimics the
inactivation of IsPETase at this temperature. The difference in pH between this inactivation
and the PET hydrolysis experiments is not expected to make differences in the relative
stabilities between variants. Thus, when assaying PETase activity, it is likely that relative
differences between the half-lives of variants (during PET hydrolysis at increased tempera-
tures) will be similar to those seen here. Results from these stability assays are shown in
Figure 1, with progress curves and decay curves resulting from the thermal deactivation
assay in the Supplementary information (S4).
Figure 1. Determination of thermostability of PETase variants and wild-type enzyme. Panel ( a): Dye-free differential
scanning ﬂuorimetry measuring the ratio between ﬂuorescence of tryptophan residues in a folded and unfolded state. Panel
(b): Half-lives of enzyme activity on the pNPA model substrate following incubation at 45 ◦C.
The Tm of IsPETase reported here, at 42.5◦C, is somewhat lower than that found in
other studies, where values of 50.8 ◦C [20], 48.8 ◦C [10], and 46.8 ◦C [9] have been reported
when using dye-based approaches at various pH levels. However, with wild-type IsPETase
as reference, we found that ∆Tm is the highest in S136EPETase (1.1 ◦C), with all of the other
variants showing differences of less than a degree compared to the wild-type enzyme
(Figure 1a). As these differences are rather small compared to the overall T m, in order
to conﬁrm that this was a genuinely improved variant, we also tested all of the enzymes
Polymers 2021, 13, 3884 7 of 11
with the thermal deactivation assay. The pattern of the differences in t1/2 compared to the
wild-type enzyme is broadly the same as the pattern seen in the Tm determinations. The
activity half-life, t1/2, of the S136EPETase variant displays a 2.4-fold increase when measured
at 45◦C, suggesting that this variant is actually improved in terms of thermostability when
compared to IsPETase (Figure 1b).
The relative increases of thermostability seem to be somewhat different between
the two assays, with t1/2 showing a much larger increase than T m. However, the direct
comparison of these two related variables is difﬁcult, as they essentially measure different
properties. This does suggest some that some interesting mechanisms are at play during
the loss of activity in the S136EPETase variant. As the enzyme samples were cooled on
ice after incubation, it could be suggested that some measure of refolding into an active
conformation occurs following incubation at 45 ◦C. This could lead to an apparent increase
in the thermostability as measured by t 1/2, which would not be discernible with the
measure of T m. Refolding in this manner could lead to several mechanisms to retain
activity, such as the prevention of aggregate formation or the reassembly of local structures
that allow partial activity to be retained. The measure of t 1/2 could therefore result in a
more illustrative measure of stability that applies better to the real-world applications of
these enzymes.
Taking these two sets of results together, we concluded that onlyS136EPETase showed
a consistent improvement in terms of thermostability. Therefore, it was decided that
S136EPETase would be further assayed for activity on a PET discover a range of temperatures
compared to the wild-type enzyme.
3.3. Increased PET Degradation Activity of S136EPETase
As stated above, comparison between various studies reporting increased IsPETase
variant activity can be difﬁcult due to the absence of a standardised PET hydrolysis activity
assay and the different types/crystallinity of the PET substrates that are used. Unfor-
tunately, it is often difﬁcult to distinguish the effects of PETase variants over extended
time-courses, as thermostability and activity become intertwined when the half-life and
assay time are of a comparable magnitude. Thus, apparent increases in activity may be
indistinguishable from (or at least masked by) higher stability, especially at higher temper-
atures. Nevertheless, as IsPETase did not produce a quantiﬁable amount of degradation
product over shorter timescales, it was necessary to assay over a longer period. The results
of this PET degradation assay for S136EPETase compared to IsPETase are shown inFigure 2,
with S125RPETase, and T270QPETase being omitted due to their marginal differences in
thermostability, as stated above.
The data above show that IsPETase, as expected, shows a signiﬁcant loss of product
formation as the temperature is increased from 30 ◦C to 40 ◦C. S136EPETase seems to show
a higher thermostability in this assay also, with a relative reduction in product formation
at higher temperatures that is smaller than that seen in the wild-type enzyme. Notably,
S136EPETase shows a signiﬁcant increase in product formation compared to IsPETase, with
3.3 times higher absorbances at the optimum temperature of 34 ◦C. This increase compares
favourably with the activity increases seen for other variants [10,20]. While it is somewhat
surprising to ﬁnd a mutation that leads to increases in both thermostability and activity,
it appears to be the case here. However, there are complex factors that take place in the
hydrolysis of an insoluble substrate, such as changes to the crystallinity as the plastic
moves towards the glass transition temperature, or the higher motility of the termini of
polymer chains at higher temperatures. As such, it cannot be expected that the simple
trade-off between stability and activity be borne out in this case.
Polymers 2021, 13, 3884 8 of 11
Figure 2. Hydrolysis rates of standardized PET discs over 24 h by S136EPETase variant and wild-type
enzyme at a concentration of 100 nM over a range of relevant temperatures. Error bars represent the
standard deviation of triplicate measurements. Absorbances are based on a path length of 1 cm.
3.4. Kinetic Analysis of S136EPETase Variant
As already mentioned, it is difﬁcult to decouple the effects of thermostability and
intrinsic activity in assays of PETase variants. Given the low activity and stability of the
wild-type enzyme, it was not possible to measure the degradation products during the
linear part of the progress curve for the hydrolysis. Therefore, we decided to remove any
effects of thermal degradation during the assay of the variants and to compare S136EPETase
to a variant that was previously shown to have a higher stability SonPETase [11]. Unfortu-
nately, conventional Michaelis–Menten kinetics can only be applied to conditions where
substrate concentrations can be varied homogeneously in solution. With a solid substrate
such as PET, this is, of course, not possible, and for this reason, an alternative approach
to kinetic characterization, termed InvMM kinetics, has been recently developed [ 15,21].
The InvMM framework relies on substrate saturation and the concept that at InvVmax, each
available site on the surface of a substrate, the so-called “attack sites”, is occupied by an
enzyme molecule. Therefore, given two assays with identical substrates and identical
surface areas, InvVmax can be seen as a measure of the intrinsic rate at which the enzyme de-
grades the substrate. The concentration of the enzyme at half-saturation with respect to the
attack sites InvKm can be interpreted similarly to that of the conventional Km as a measure
for substrate afﬁnity. As the number of attack sites cannot be easily determined, neither
InvKm nor InvVmax can be determined in absolute terms for a particular substrate; however,
different enzymes can be compared under, as best as possible, identical conditions.
We thus compared theS136EPETase with SonPETase using the same substrate and assay
conditions in order to compare the best performing variant in the current study with the
previously described enzyme. The two curves are shown in Figure 3; See the Supplementary
Materials for typical chromatograms showing MHET as the major product (S5).
Given that these kinetic hydrolysis assessments were also performed in the linear
section of the progress curve for the reactions (See Supplementary material, S6), these can be
considered as a measure of the intrinsic activity of the enzymes. The two values of InvVmax
for S136EPETase and SonPETase calculated in these assays were 1.13 nmolMHET.min−1 and
1.58 nmolMHET.min−1, respectively, which are similar within the 95 % conﬁdence intervals
for the values calculated over all data points. The ﬁnal point on the S136EPETase curve
appears to be a slight outlier, which pulls the calculated InvVmax value down, suggesting
that the actual values of the two variants could be closer. Likewise, the InvKm values for
the two enzymes are very close, indicating a similar substrate afﬁnity.
Polymers 2021, 13, 3884 9 of 11
Figure 3. Determination of InvKm and InvVmax for S136EPETase (panel (a) and SonPETase (panel (b))
after 6 h of hydrolysis of a standardised PET disc at 30 ◦C. The major product found by a concurrent
HPLC analysis in all kinetic determinations was MHET, and given that the extinction coefﬁcients
of TPA and MHET are similar, concentrations are reported as MHET equivalents. Experimental
values are shown as points on each graph. Error bars represent the standard deviations of triplicate
measurements, and the line of best ﬁt is ﬁt to a Michaelis−Menten equation [15].
Based on this, we can conclude that the S136EPETase variant performs at a similar level
as SonPETase, an enzyme that has been previously described as a promising variant for
PET degradation [11]. Furthermore, this experiment has demonstrated that the apparent
increase in the activity of the S136EPETase variant relative to the wild-type enzyme, which
is seen in Figure 2, is due to a genuine increase in the ability of the enzyme to degrade PET
rather than the associated increase to thermostability. We therefore suggest that S136E is an
interesting addition to the growing number of substitutions in IsPETase, which should be
incorporated into further studies.
Supplementary Materials: The following are available online at https://www.mdpi.com/article/
10.3390/polym13223884/s1: S1, Primers used during the study; S2, Full list of PROSS results; S3,
Visualization of substitutions; S4, Thermal deactivation assay data; S5, Example chromatograms; S6,
Inverse Michaelis–Menten progress curves.
Polymers 2021, 13, 3884 10 of 11
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.R., J.R.W., and C.V .; methodology, A.R.; formal analysis,
A.R.; investigation, A.R., J.R.W., and C.V .; resources, J.R.W. and C.V .; data curation, J.R.W.; writing—
original draft preparation, A.R.; writing—review and editing, C.V . and J.R.W.; visualization, A.R.;
supervision, J.R.W. and C.V .; project administration, J.R.W. and C.V .; funding acquisition, J.R.W. and
C.V . All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: H2020 UPLIFT project (Grant Agreement no. 953073).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: All pertinent data is included in the manuscript and supporting
information.
Acknowledgments: The authors wish to thank the European Commission for the ﬁnancial support
of this work, under H2020 Grant Agreement no. 953073 (acronym: UPLIFT) and declare that there
are no conﬂicts of interest. The authors would also like to thank Charlotte O’Shea and Lei Yang from
the Section of Sustainable Biotechnology of the Aalborg University for their invaluable technical
support, and all the staff and students at the Linderstrøm-Lang Centre for Protein Science, Section
for Biomolecular Sciences, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Andrady, A.L.; Neal, M.A. Applications and societal beneﬁts of plastics. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2009, 364, 1977–1984.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Tiseo, I. Global PET bottle production 2004–2021. Statista 2020.
3. Taniguchi, I.; Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Kimura, Y.; Oda, K. Biodegradation of PET: Current status and application
aspects. ACS Catal. 2019, 9, 4089–4105. [CrossRef]
4. Eurostat. Recycling Rates of Packaging Waste for Monitoring Compliance with Policy Targets, by Type of Packaging. 2021. Avail-
able online: https://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=env_waspacr&lang=en (accessed on 15 April 2021).
5. Jenkins, S.; Quer, A.M.I.; Fonseca, C.; Varrone, C. Microbial degradation of plastics: New plastic degraders, mixed cultures and
engineering strategies. Soil Microenviron. Bioremediation Polym. Prod. 2019, 213–238. [CrossRef]
6. Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Takehana, T.; Taniguchi, I.; Yamaji, H.; Maeda, Y.; Toyohara, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Kimura, Y.; Oda, K. A
bacterium that degrades and assimilates poly(ethylene terephthalate). Science 2016, 351, 1196–1199. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Liu, B.; He, L.; Wang, L.; Li, T.; Li, C.; Liu, H.; Luo, Y.; Bao, R. Protein crystallography and site-direct mutagenesis analysis of the
poly(ethylene terephthalate) hydrolase PETase from Ideonella sakaiensis.ChemBioChem 2018, 19, 1471–1475. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Kawai, F. The current state of research on PET hydrolyzing enzymes available for Biorecycling. Catalysts 2021, 11, 206. [CrossRef]
9. Austin, H.P .; Allen, M.D.; Donohoe, B.S.; Rorrer, N.; Kearns, F.; Silveira, R.L.; Pollard, B.C.; Dominick, G.; Duman, R.; El Omari,
K.; et al. Characterization and engineering of a plastic-degrading aromatic polyesterase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2018, 115,
E4350–E4357. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Joo, S.; Cho, I.J.; Seo, H.; Son, H.F.; Sagong, H.-Y.; Shin, T.J.; Choi, S.Y.; Lee, S.Y.; Kim, K.-J. Structural insight into molecular
mechanism of poly(ethylene terephthalate) degradation. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 1–12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Son, H.F.; Cho, I.J.; Joo, S.; Seo, H.; Sagong, H.-Y.; Choi, S.Y.; Lee, S.Y.; Kim, K.-J. Rational protein engineering of thermo-stable
PETase from Ideonella sakaiensis for highly efﬁcient PET degradation. ACS Catal. 2019, 9, 3519–3526. [CrossRef]
12. Maloy, S.R.; Stewart, V .J.; Taylor, R.K.Genetic Analysis of Pathogenic Bacteria: A Laboratory Manual; Cold Spring Harbour Laboratory
Press: New York City, NY, USA, 1996.
13. Xi, X.; Ni, K.; Hao, H.; Shang, Y.; Zhao, B.; Qian, Z. Secretory expression in Bacillus subtilis and biochemical characterization of
a highly thermostable polyethylene terephthalate hydrolase from bacterium HR29. Enzym. Microb. Technol. 2021, 143, 109715.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Zhong-Johnson, E.Z.L.; Voigt, C.A.; Sinskey, A.J. An absorbance method for analysis of enzymatic degradation kinetics of
poly(ethylene terephthalate) ﬁlms. Sci. Rep. 2021, 11, 1–9. [CrossRef]
15. Barth, M.; Oeser, T.; Wei, R.; Then, J.; Schmidt, J.; Zimmermann, W. Effect of hydrolysis products on the enzymatic degradation of
polyethylene terephthalate nanoparticles by a polyester hydrolase from Thermobiﬁda fusca. Biochem. Eng. J. 2015, 93, 222–228.
[CrossRef]
16. Kari, J.; Andersen, M.; Borch, K.; Westh, P . An inverse Michaelis–Menten approach for interfacial enzyme kinetics.ACS Catal.
2017, 7, 4904–4914. [CrossRef]
17. Acero, E.H.; Ribitsch, D.; Steinkellner, G.; Gruber, K.; Greimel, K.; Eiteljoerg, I.; Trotscha, E.; Wei, R.; Zimmermann, W.; Zinn, M.;
et al. Enzymatic surface hydrolysis of PET: Effect of structural diversity on kinetic properties of cutinases from Thermobiﬁda.
Macromolecules 2011, 44, 4632–4640. [CrossRef]
Polymers 2021, 13, 3884 11 of 11
18. Kawai, F.; Oda, M.; Tamashiro, T.; Waku, T.; Tanaka, N.; Yamamoto, M.; Mizushima, H.; Miyakawa, T.; Tanokura, M. A novel
Ca2+-activated, thermostabilized polyesterase capable of hydrolyzing polyethylene terephthalate from Saccharomonospora
viridis AHK190. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2014, 98, 10053–10064. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Sulaiman, S.; Yamato, S.; Kanaya, E.; Kim, J.-J.; Koga, Y.; Takano, K.; Kanaya, S. Isolation of a novel cutinase homolog with
Polyethylene Terephthalate-degrading activity from leaf-branch compost by using a metagenomic approach. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2012, 78, 1556–1562. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Meng, X.; Yang, L.; Liu, H.; Li, Q.; Xu, G.; Zhang, Y.; Guan, F.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang, W.; Wu, N.; et al. Protein engineering of stable
IsPETase for PET plastic degradation by Premuse. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2021, 180, 667–676. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21. Bååth, J.A.; Borch, K.; Jensen, K.; Brask, J.; Westh, P . Comparative biochemistry of four polyester (PET) hydrolases.ChemBioChem
2021, 22, 1627–1637. [CrossRef] [PubMed]