Citation: Cai, Z.; Li, M.; Zhu, Z.;
Wang, X.; Huang, Y.; Li, T.; Gong, H.;
Yan, M. Biological Degradation of
Plastics and Microplastics: A Recent
Perspective on Associated
Mechanisms and Inﬂuencing Factors.
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
microorganisms11071661
Academic Editor: Nico Jehmlich
Received: 22 May 2023
Revised: 9 June 2023
Accepted: 17 June 2023
Published: 26 June 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
microorganisms
Review
Biological Degradation of Plastics and Microplastics: A Recent
Perspective on Associated Mechanisms and Inﬂuencing Factors
Zeming Cai 1, Minqian Li 1, Ziying Zhu 1, Xiaocui Wang 1, Yuanyin Huang 1, Tianmu Li 1, Han Gong 1, *
and Muting Yan 1,2, *
1 College of Marine Sciences, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510641, China;
17820577242@163.com (Z.C.); koitoyuu045@foxmail.com (M.L.); zz2545440446@163.com (Z.Z.);
cc45683968exo@163.com (X.W.); 17666057810@163.com (Y.H.); 13503034564@163.com (T.L.)
2 Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom,
Kowloon, Hong Kong
* Correspondence: gonghan@scau.edu.cn (H.G.); marineymt@scau.edu.cn (M.Y.)
Abstract: Plastic and microplastic pollution has caused a great deal of ecological problems because of
its persistence and potential adverse effects on human health. The degradation of plastics through
biological processes is of great signiﬁcance for ecological health, therefore, the feasibility of plastic
degradation by microorganisms has attracted a lot of attention. This study comprises a preliminary
discussion on the biodegradation mechanism and the advantages and roles of different bacterial
enzymes, such as PET hydrolase and PCL-cutinase, in the degradation of different polymers, such as
PET and PCL, respectively. With a particular focus on their modes of action and potential enzymatic
mechanisms, this review sums up studies on the biological degradation of plastics and microplastics
related to mechanisms and inﬂuencing factors, along with their enzymes in enhancing the degradation
of synthetic plastics in the process. In addition, biodegradation of plastic is also affected by plastic
additives and plasticizers. Plasticizers and additives in the composition of plastics can cause harmful
impacts. To further improve the degradation efﬁciency of polymers, various pretreatments to improve
the efﬁciency of biodegradation, which can cause a signiﬁcant reduction in toxic plastic pollution,
were also preliminarily discussed here. The existing research and data show a large number of
microorganisms involved in plastic biodegradation, though their speciﬁc mechanisms have not been
thoroughly explored yet. Therefore, there is a signiﬁcant potential for employing various bacterial
strains for efﬁcient degradation of plastics to improve human health and safety.
Keywords: plastics; microplastics; biodegradation; microorganism; enzymes; pretreatment
1. Introduction
Plastics have caused a great deal of ecological problems that have attracted a lot of
attention worldwide. Plastic products are useful and they bring convenience to our lives.
However, as a persistent pollutant, they can remain in natural environment for hundreds
of years or longer [ 1]. In 1950, the global production of plastics (excluding ﬁber) was
1.3 million tons, and by 2018, it reached an alarming level of 359 million tons (excluding
ﬁber), resulting in widespread environmental contamination [2]. It is estimated that only
10% of plastic waste is recycled, 14% is incinerated, and the rest is dumped into landﬁlls,
ultimately entering the natural environment [3]. Plastics are transported through air and
water currents, therefore, they not only affect the natural environment but also pose adverse
ecological impacts in the deep-sea sediments and polar regions [ 4]. In fact, plastics and
microplastics (MPs, size 5 mm) have been commonly found in freshwater, the atmosphere,
and soil environments across the world. A class of high molecular weight polymers is
referred to as plastics in general. The formation of “white pollution” has caused serious
environmental pollution and ecological damage around the world. Polyethylene (PE),
polypropylene (PP), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), polystyrene (PS), and polyvinyl
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661. https://doi.org/10.3390/microorganisms11071661 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/microorganisms
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 2 of 17
chloride (PVC) are the most widely utilized plastics, with PE and PP making up more than
half of global output [5]. Plastic waste is persistent when released into the environment,
high polymers may take a much longer time for plastics to degrade in the environment,
and even complete degradation of plastics may take centuries [6]. Therefore, it is necessary
to investigate the pathways of plastic degradation and their efﬁciency in the environment.
Plastics are made up of numerous compounds, including a vast range of chemicals.
These include basic substances, such as monomers, oligomers, polymers, and additives,
and the additives are mainly divided into plasticizers, antioxidants, heat stabilizers, and
pigments [7]. Apart from the pristine additives, plastics adsorb chemical pollutants from the
surrounding environment, which makes plastics a hub for toxic substances. The microbial
degradation of such plastics containing additives and adsorbed chemicals also needs special
attention [8]. MPs contain additives with a large amount of mixed chemical components
that may bio-accumulate in the food chain [ 9]. When released into the environment,
plastics and MPs can undergo degradation processes, such as hydrolysis, thermal oxidative
degradation, biodegradation, electrochemistry, and photodegradation [ 10]. Microbial
biodegradation has been regarded as one of the main ways to effectively deal with plastic
pollution [11]. It is a process in which microorganisms use carbon sources in the form
of organic matter to metabolize, which can not only produce non-toxic by-products but
also provide energy to microorganisms or transform them into other useful products [12].
Biodegradation may effectively reduce the harm of additives to plastics and achieve a better
ecological environment [13].
Plastics likely have a negative impact on biodiversity loss and the life cycle of plastics
and plastic pollution may directly change. Microbial degradation is of great signiﬁcance in
reducing the negative impact of plastics. Due to the diversity and richness in the composi-
tion of the microbial communities, there will be more possibilities for plastic biodegradation
research. We focus on the advantages of biodegradation, especially in terms of bacterial
degradation. The literature suggests that the more suitable and eco-friendly way lies in
microbial-mediated degradation [9]. Microbial enzymatic degradation will be based on the
degradation ability of bacterial enzymes and appropriate biodegradation efﬁciency [14].
Although knowledge of the environmental degradation of plastics is still limited, the fate
and effects of plastics are determined by the type and strength of degradation [2]. Therefore,
exploring the ability of bacteria and the interaction between bacterial enzymes and plastics
is critical to obtain key biodegradable microorganisms. There are not many in-depth studies
on biodegradation, which can be looked at in different ways depending on the additives
in plastics and the enzymes in bacteria. This article’s goal is to examine the viability of
biodegradable plastics, with a particular emphasis on the most current research on the
functions of various microorganisms and their enzymes in the biodegradation of synthetic
plastics. It also pointed out the existing microbial degradation challenges and correspond-
ing methods. Emphasis has also been placed on the biodegradation mechanism and the
degradation ability and effectiveness of microbial enzymes, and ﬁnally, the importance of
pretreatment for biodegradation.
2. The Challenges and Feasibility of MPs/Plastics in Biodegradation
2.1. The Challenges in Biodegradation of MPs/Plastics
MPs/plastics are not part of rich functional groups and hydrolyzable bonds, they
are not a suitable substrate for microbial attachment and enzymatic reaction [15] due to
their intrinsic composition and properties, such as durability and resistance to degradation.
The recalcitrant polymers do not completely degrade, making these polymers difﬁcult
to assimilate in the environment [16]. The recalcitrant polymers with less ﬂexibility and
long chains effectively biodegrade into small monomers, which require more enzymatic
activities for a longer period of time to cause speciﬁc sensitive bonds with the chemical
groups on the polymer side chain or polymer chain and enhance their fracture [17]. In a
biodegradation process, the problem of conventional petroleum-based plastics involves not
being completely decomposed and assimilated by microorganisms when they fragmented
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 3 of 17
under abiotic factors over a long time, such as UV radiation, temperature, and physical
stress [4]. Because plastic is a long-chain molecule or macromolecule with a single func-
tional group, high molecular weight (MW), hydrophobicity, and crystallinity, the ability of
microbes to break it down has been signiﬁcantly reduced as a result of its manufacturing
performance. For example, plastics without pro-oxidants lack functional groups/enzyme-
sensitive ester bonds that may not often be subjected to enzymatic attacks. On the contrary,
biodegradable plastics might have appropriate functional groups or enzyme-sensitive ester
linkages that could be attacked by enzymatic, photo-, and thermo-oxidation [ 18]. High
polymers are more difﬁcult to disintegrate in comparison to other plastics, such as emerging
biodegradable plastics, due to their short chains, low molecular weights, and ﬂexible, abun-
dant functional groups [18]. The problem and difﬁculty of plastic degradation depend on
traditional plastics with a unique chemical composition. Therefore, microbial degradation
ability and efﬁciency should be improved, or more suitable and efﬁcient strains should
be found [3]. Currently, there are still undeveloped technologies and cost issues, such as
technological development and capital consumption not in line with social development.
Microorganisms are difﬁcult to efﬁciently degrade plastics, and there are more possibilities
for microorganisms to search for and match plastic degradation [19].
Moreover, one of the reasons why plastic degradation is currently a hot environmental
research topic is that turning plastics into small particles can release toxicity in this difﬁcult
task. First, phthalates (PAEs) are widely used as plasticizers to introduce unique character-
istics in plastic products, such as plasticity, ﬂexibility, and durability. Humans are exposed
to PAEs mainly through food, and they can cause serious problems, such as endocrine
disruption, metabolic disorders, and reproductive toxicity [ 20]. There is also a known
endocrine disruptor compound that accounts for a large proportion of synthetic polymers
and additive plasticizers, Bisphenol A (BPA). It is produced in large quantities worldwide,
mainly used in the production of various polymer materials and also in polycarbonate
synthesis [21]. Plastics are macromolecular substances which initially show relatively little
toxicity and will not be absorbed by the human body. The peak of plastic toxicity is due
to the toxic additives that need to be added during processing or the insufﬁcient reaction
during synthesis. However, small particulate compounds, such as monomers, are highly
toxic [22] (Figure 1). The properties of MPs and POPs, and environmental conditions are
the factors responsible for the adsorption of POPs on MPs [23]. The toxicity or harm may
rise in the monomer stage when a large amount of POPs is adsorbed on MP surface, the
efﬁciency of transfer of the ingested POPs in the food chain is unknown, but the range is
wide [24]. Human exposure to monomers and POPs can cause disrupting the natural gut
microbiota balance through inhalation, ingestion, and skin contact (Figure 1). The toxicity
and pollution range of plastics and MPs are wide, and they affect ecology and humans in
all aspects. We urgently need to ﬁnd the reasons for the biodegradation by microorganisms.
2.2. The Feasibility in Biodegradation of Plastics/MPs
Microbial diversity is the key condition for biodegradation. Microorganisms include
bacteria, fungi, and a few algae, which have powerful functions and abilities, such as
small size, fast absorption, and metabolism, strong adaptability, easy variation, and wide
distribution [5,25]. Microorganisms have congenital or acquired abilities to survive even
in places with particularly harsh environments. The microbial communities can adapt to
new environments and attach to them, and they mainly release certain enzymes that allow
them to utilize persistent plastic pollution as their only carbon source [26]. Biodegradation
is inﬂuenced by a combination of biological and abiotic factors. Biological factors include
bacteria, fungi, bioﬁlms, and microbial communities as the carbon source food for microor-
ganisms. Abiotic factors are from several aspects of natural photooxidation and man-made
physical and chemical degradation. These factors catalyze complex metabolic reactions to
form the ecosystem structure and function of biodegradable plastics [27]. The microbial
degradation of plastics and MPs is affected by the growth of microorganisms and factors
related to the external environment. Environmental variables and the habitat under study
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 4 of 17
may be major determinants of microbial diversity and richness [ 28]. In addition to the
microorganisms involved, the circumstances for plastic biodegradation also depend on the
surface properties and surface structure of plastic materials, such as roughness, electrostatic
interaction, topography, hydrophobicity, and free energy [29].
Microorganisms 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Additives, dyes, and organic pollutants in plastics can have negative effects on both hu-
mans and nature. 
2.2. The Feasibility in Biodegradation of Plastics/MPs 
Microbial diversity is the key condition for biodegradation. Microorganisms include 
bacteria, fungi, and a few algae, which have powerful functions and abilities, such as small 
size, fast absorption, and metabolism, strong adaptability, easy variation, and wide distri-
bution [5,25]. Microorganisms have congenital or acquired abilities to survive even in 
places with particularly harsh environmen ts. The microbial communities can adapt to 
new environments and attach to them, and they mainly release certain enzymes that allow 
them to utilize persistent plastic pollution as their only carbon source [26]. Biodegradation 
is influenced by a combination of biological and abiotic factors. Biological factors include 
bacteria, fungi, biofilms, and microbial communities as the carbon source food for micro-
organisms. Abiotic factors are from severa l aspects of natural photooxidation and man-
made physical and chemical degradation. These factors catalyze complex metabolic reac-
tions to form the ecosystem structure and function of biodegradable plastics [27]. The mi-
crobial degradation of plastics and MPs is affected by the growth of microorganisms and 
factors related to the external environment.  Environmental variables and the habitat un-
der study may be major determinants of microbial diversity and richness [28]. In addition 
to the microorganisms involved, the circumstances for plastic biodegradation also depend 
on the surface properties and surface structur e of plastic materials,  such as roughness, 
electrostatic interaction, topography, hydrophobicity, and free energy [29]. 
More possibilities for effective biodegradation of polymers involve various microor-
ganisms. In marine habitats, biofilms form ed by microbial populations are conducive to 
plastics and MPs degradation. The formation of microbial biofilm is the way of polymer 
biodegradation. It is initially attached by microorganisms and forms microbial biofilm on 
the surface of the plastic, which is called a plastisphere [30]. Microbial communities are 
associated with biofilms. The biofilms contai n different microbial communities and con-
tain potential plastics degrading microorganisms. For instance, the hydrophobicity of PE 
interferes with the formation of biofilm. However, the micro-bacterial community with 
high cell surface hydrophobicity can better adhe re to the surface of PE and form biofilm 
on its surface [31]. In nature, however, various studies have shown that the bacteria typi-
cally collaborate in communities. The microbial community has a variety of microorgan-
isms to participate in the degradation, which improves efficiency compared to a single 
microorganism. Microb ial communities or consortia can degrade complex compounds 
Figure 1. Additives, dyes, and organic pollutants in plastics can have negative effects on both humans
and nature.
More possibilities for effective biodegradation of polymers involve various microor-
ganisms. In marine habitats, bioﬁlms formed by microbial populations are conducive to
plastics and MPs degradation. The formation of microbial bioﬁlm is the way of polymer
biodegradation. It is initially attached by microorganisms and forms microbial bioﬁlm
on the surface of the plastic, which is called a plastisphere [ 30]. Microbial communities
are associated with bioﬁlms. The bioﬁlms contain different microbial communities and
contain potential plastics degrading microorganisms. For instance, the hydrophobicity
of PE interferes with the formation of bioﬁlm. However, the micro-bacterial community
with high cell surface hydrophobicity can better adhere to the surface of PE and form
bioﬁlm on its surface [31]. In nature, however, various studies have shown that the bacteria
typically collaborate in communities. The microbial community has a variety of microor-
ganisms to participate in the degradation, which improves efﬁciency compared to a single
microorganism. Microbial communities or consortia can degrade complex compounds
into single monomers due to the observation of multiple microorganisms that coexist in an
environment to function together [5].
The pure cultures of bacteria isolated from most environments show that bacteria have
diversity and functionality. Through the identiﬁcation of a large amount of data, species
belonging to various bacterial phyla, including Proteobacteria, Firmicutes and Actinobacteria,
are able to degrade plastics. Most potential bacteria that can biodegrade plastics were
isolated from contaminated sites, such as landﬁlls [ 32]. Based on bacteria’s inherent
ability to break down long-chain fatty acids, plastic degradation is possible. Bacterial
species from Pseudomonas, Escherichia, and Bacillus genera exhibit enormous potential for
degrading plastics, especially for recalcitrant polymers, such as PE, PET, PS. Additionally,
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 5 of 17
it has been demonstrated that bacterial strains, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Bacillus
megaterium, Rhodococcus ruber, and others may break down the thermoplastics PE and
PET [5]. Furthermore, fungi able to degrade plastics have a powerful enzymatic system.
Filamentous fungi play an important role in the degradation and mineralization of plastic
pollutants. They have the ability to degrade PE and PET [33]. With more research, it was
discovered that microorganisms able to degrade plastic vary in the diversity, abundance,
and activity, providing plastic-degrading evidence.
3. Mechanism of Plastics/MPs Biodegradation
Microorganisms depolymerize MPs, which leads to extracellular enzymes and free rad-
icals produced by the microbes to catalytically cleave biodegraded plastics into smaller ele-
ments. Microbiological degradation of plastics is generally a process of breaking down the
polymer into shorter chains or smaller molecules (e.g., oligomers, dimers, and monomers).
The polymers that are tiny enough are depolymerized into monomers that may be necessary
for microbial uptake and growth to pass through semipermeable membranes and even-
tually mineralization in cells. Then, the monomers in the cells are either mineralized into
CO2, H2O (under aerobic conditions) or CO2, H2O and CH4 (under anaerobic conditions)
to produce biomass for energy (Figure 2).
Microorganisms 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 18 
 
 
into single monomers due to the observation of multiple microorganisms that coexist in 
an environment to function together [5]. 
The pure cultures of bacteria isolated from  most environments show that bacteria 
have diversity and functionality. Through the identification of a large amount of data, 
species belonging to various bacterial phyla, including Proteobacteria, Firmicutes and Ac-
tinobacteria, are able to degrade plastics. Most potential bacteria that can biodegrade plas-
tics were isolated from contaminated sites, such as landfills [32]. Based on bacterias in-
herent ability to break down long-chain fatty acids, plastic degradation is possible. Bacte-
rial species from Pseudomonas, Escherichia, and Bacillus genera exhibit enormous potential 
for degrading plastics, especially for recalcitrant polymers, such as PE, PET, PS. Addition-
ally, it has been demonstrated that bacterial strains, such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Bacil-
lus megaterium, Rhodococcus ruber, and others may break down the thermoplastics PE and 
PET [5]. Furthermore, fungi able to degrade plastics have a powerful enzymatic system. 
Filamentous fungi play an important role in the degradation and mineralization of plastic 
pollutants. They have the ability to degrade PE and PET [33]. With more research, it was 
discovered that microorganisms able to degrade plastic vary in the diversity, abundance, 
and activity, providing plastic-degrading evidence. 
3. Mechanism of Plastics/MPs Biodegradation 
Microorganisms depolymerize MPs, which leads to extracellular enzymes and free 
radicals produced by the microbes to catalytically cleave biodegraded plastics into smaller 
elements. Microbiological degradation of plastics is generally a process of breaking down 
the polymer into shorter chains or smaller molecules (e.g., oligomers, dimers, and mono-
mers). The polymers that are tiny enough are depolymerized into monomers that may be 
necessary for microbial uptake and growth to pass through semipermeable membranes 
and eventually mineralization in cells. Then, the monomers in the cells are either miner-
alized into CO
2, H2O (under aerobic conditions) or CO 2, H2O and CH4 (under anaerobic 
conditions) to produce biomass for energy (Figure 2).  
 
Figure 2. Degradation pathways of microplastics. Plastic degrading to small fragments forming mi-
croplastics can enter cells after decomposition. It  can be transformed into biomass for energy pro-
duction or mineralized. 
Microbial colonization on plastic surface through adhesion or exposure is the initial 
step for microbial degradation of plastics, which is the premise of enzymatic degradation. 
Figure 2. Degradation pathways of microplastics. Plastic degrading to small fragments forming
microplastics can enter cells after decomposition. It can be transformed into biomass for energy
production or mineralized.
Microbial colonization on plastic surface through adhesion or exposure is the initial
step for microbial degradation of plastics, which is the premise of enzymatic degradation.
The second step is hydrolysis, which comprises the combination of enzyme and polymer
matrix, and then catalytic hydrolysis and cracking. The bound enzyme is a hydrolase,
which catalyzes the hydrolysis of organic matter [34]. The extracellular and intracellular
enzymes from microorganisms involve two important processes. Extracellular enzymes,
such as depolymerases and hydrolases, induce hydrolytic cleavage to the polymer chain.
The polymer chain after being attacked by enzyme enhancement results in small oligomers
or monomers that bacteria can integrate with the cell. Additionally, small oligomers or
monomers can be absorbed in the cell after their metabolism by enzymes in the cell [25].
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 6 of 17
Compared with oxidative degradation for large plastics or plastic fragments, enzymatic
degradation can be measured by weight loss and additions of functional groups. One of
the biggest changes in MPs is the weight loss of the plastics during biodegradation. This is
the initial MPs weight and the weight reached after contact with microorganisms [32].
Something produced by microbial degradation and metabolism is conducive to the
environment. Polymer morphology, such as crystallinity, is a key factor affecting biodegrad-
ability, which greatly affects its biodegradation rate. The reason is that the enzyme mainly
attacks the amorphous domain of the polymer, and its molecules are loosely arranged and
easier to degrade [ 34]. Therefore, microbial enzymes play a key role in environmental
remediation and ecological health by biodegradation, participate in bio-transformation
and biodegradation processes, and combine the advantages of efﬁciency and functionality,
making the bio-catalytic processes more competitive, clean, safe, and eco-friendly [13].
4. Microorganisms and Their Enzymes in Plastics/MPs Degradation
4.1. Microbial Degradation of Commonly Used Plastics/MPs
The degradation evidence can be mainly decided by three results of technology:
(1) Changes in the plastics/MPs structure, (2) physical loss of plastics/MPs mass, (3) the
generation of plastics/MPs metabolites. These combined results are likely the strongest
evidence for plastics/MPs biodegradation [3].
4.1.1. Microbial Degradation of the Commonly Used Recalcitrant Plastics/MPs
Nonhydrolyzable plastics’ primary molecular chain is entirely made up of C-C bonds,
as well as PE, PP , PVC, and PS. As nonhydrolyzable plastics, their application range is
larger, but the level of biodegradation is relatively low. The nonhydrolyzable MPs are
often converted into small molecules of organic matter through redox reactions by bacteria
or fungi before being utilized by microorganisms [ 19]. PA and PET are hydrolyzable
plastics that are relatively easy to decompose. There is an increasing example showing
that microorganisms can have a corresponding ability to degrade plastic pieces. PET is
the most common thermoplastic plastic, with the largest production proportion of almost
70 million tons annually worldwide, mainly used as ﬁber in textiles and packaging, and a
small part is used in ﬁlm and engineering ﬁelds [ 35]. Currently, bacteria and fungi for the
partial degradation of PET are only a few. Therefore, it appears that only a few bacterial
phyla exhibit PET degradation features, and the majority of bacterial isolates that can
degrade PET are found in the Gram-positive phylum Actinobacteria [36], which includes the
genera Thermobiﬁda and Thermomonospora [37]. In the database, several signature enzymes
have been reported for PET metabolism, such as PETase, MHETase, TPA dioxygenase,
and PCA dioxygenase [38]. Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F, a new bacterium that can utilize PET
as its main energy as well as carbon source and produce morphological changes in the
PET ﬁlm, was discovered by the researchers after they screened microbial communities
from samples contaminated with debris. The discovery of this bacterium is unique in
that it can use plastics as its only food source. Producing two enzymes from the strain
has the ability to hydrolyze PET, converting PET efﬁciently into environmentally benign
monomers. Isakaiensis secretes a PET hydrolase (PETase)that can efﬁciently hydrolyze
PET [38]. Isakaiensis strain, like some bacteria, secrete enzymes to hydrolyze MPs and
mineralize them in cells [ 34]. Actually, the whole process is divided into two steps, the
strain synthesizes two highly specialized enzymes—PETase and MHETase. However,
the exact binding mechanism of PETase is unknown. Additionally, both Pseudomonas
nitroreducens S8 and Pseudomonas monteilii S17 are capable of colonizing the PET surface as
a transparent bioﬁlm layer with a steady population density, allowing them to use PET as a
carbon source. The combined use of P . nitroreducens S8and P . monteilii S17, which produce a
PET surface that is highly accessible for PET hydrolases, demonstrated a strong synergistic
effect on the disruption of PET surfaces [39].
PS is a high molecular weight synthetic hydrophobic polymer, not easy to be attacked
by microorganisms and difﬁcult to degrade, and the degree of PS biodegradation is very
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 7 of 17
low [40]. However, the research has identiﬁed the ability for PS degradation in the intestinal
tract of mealworms. The mealworm gut microbiome found that two operational taxonomic
units (OTUs) (Citrobacter sp. and Kosakonia sp.) had strong ties with plastics, such as PE
and PS, indicating that they have degradation potential for chemically dissimilar plastics.
Further studies should be conducted to exploit the gut microbiome of mealworms for the
biodegradation of PS [41]. Besides non-hydrolyzable PS, PE biodegradation is also very
challenging. PE is a thermoplastic hydrocarbon polymer, with corrosion resistance and
electrical insulation properties, and is considered one of the most widely produced and
commercialized synthetic polymers worldwide [31].
PE contains a carbon-carbon backbone and non-hydrolyzable covalent bonds, its
properties are highly resistant to degradation. Microbial consortium may be a relatively
effective choice for the degradation of PE in terms of function and inherent synergy [ 9].
According to reports, Pseudomonas sp., Bacillus sp., Mycobacterium sp., and Nocardia sp. are
PE-degrading bacteria [42]. Research has shown that a bacterial consortium was capable of
forming a thick bioﬁlm on the weathered PE surface and cause changes to the rheological
and topographical characteristics of the surface. The amesophilic bacterial consortium
obtained from landﬁll sediment was analyzed. The researchers observed that Bacillus sp.
and Paenibacillus sp., which are both abundant in the bacterial consortium, decreased the
mean MPs particle diameter and dry weight after 60 days by a combined 22.8% and 14.7%,
respectively [5].
Among PE polymers, high-density polyethylene (HDPE) and low-density polyethy-
lene (LDPE) are the most commonly used polymers, especially LDPE, which has become
one of the most important plastic grades for modern polymers. The difference between
LDPE and HDPE is that HDPE is a high crystallinity, non-polar thermoplastic resin. The
softening point of HDPE is 125–135 ◦C, while LDPE is 90–100 ◦C. HDPE is resistant to
strong oxidant corrosion, acid, alkali, and various salt corrosion, insoluble in any organic
solvent, etc. LDPE is resistant to corrosion in acid, alkali, and salt solutions, but has
poor solvent resistance. Due to the production function of HDPE, it is relatively difﬁcult
to degrade in terms of microbial degradation [ 42,43]. In biodegradation, a comparison
between bacteria and fungi isolated from the same dump identiﬁed that fungi proved
more effective for the degradation of PE than bacteria. This study further showed that
fungi-treated LDPE ﬁlms experienced a higher percentage of weight loss than that treated
by bacteria [44]. Using fungal and bacterial strains as an individual or as a consortium
can efﬁciently degrade LDPE. The interaction formed ridges and grooves on LDPE, which
conﬁrmed the occurrence of degradation [45]. For bacterial development, microorganisms
isolated from marine habitats use the carbon in LDPE. After 30 days of incubation, the dry
weight loss of LDPE ﬁlms containing four bacterial isolates was 1, 0, 78, 22, and 0.46%,
and after 90 days, it was 1, 1, 72, and 0.97%, respectively. The effectiveness of using LDPE
as a carbon source for bacterial growth is determined by calculations of weight loss and
carbon mineralization of LDPE ﬁlm. After 90 days of incubation, the bacterially treated
LDPE ﬁlms’ FTIR spectra revealed new peak generation and shifting of the peak for the
functional groups, and SEM images revealed surface deterioration, fragility, damaged layer,
cracks, and scratches on all four marine bacteria-treated LDPE ﬁlms [42].
Among the known fungal strains that degrade plastics, Penicillium oxalicum NS4
(KU559906) and Penicillium chrysogenum NS10 (KU559907), two fungal strains that have
been found to degrade HDPE and LDPE and cause noticeable morphological changes on the
plastic sheet, have been isolated from fungi [46]. A prominent strain, Aspergillus genus, as
the most prominent fungal group, has shown strong plastic-degrading ability. Aspergillus
genus degrades synthetic plastics PE and PP , likeA. clavatus, A. fumigatus, and A. niger [32].
A plastic dump wasteland isolation of Aspergillus niger (ITCC No. 6052) has demonstrated
its ability to break down HDPE [ 47]. Understanding A. niger and studying its enzyme
system will help to deeply understand its role in HDPE biodegradation. Aspergillus sp.,
including Rhizopus oryzae strain NS5 and A. niger, respectively, degrade LDPE and HDPE.
In addition, two Penicillium strains (Penicillium oxalicum NS4 and Penicilliumchrysogenum
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 8 of 17
NS10) proved to have properties for LDPE and HDPE [ 48]. The degree of weight loss
depended on many aspects, with LDPE and HDPE showing the greatest weight loss in the
form of foils, ﬁlms, or strips.
4.1.2. Microbial Degradation of Toxic Components in Commonly Used Plastics/MPs
Since the 1950s, when the mass manufacture of plastics began, the production of all
sorts of polymers infused with different additives and ﬁllers has expanded tremendously.
PAEs and BPA are prominent plastics that can cause harmful impacts. BPA is toxic to most
marine animals and vertebrates. It is potentially carcinogenic because BPA structurally
resembles diethylstilbestrol (DES). Therefore, the toxicity is higher when the plastic particles
or even smaller stages are exposed [49].
The toxic substances, PAEs and BPA, which are some of the main components of
plastics, are involved in plastics biodegradation. Most studies on PAE’s biodegradation
use bacteria, such as Pseudomonas, Arthrobacter, Rhodococcus, Bacillus, Mycobacterium, Delﬁa,
and Gordonia [13]. The microbial degradation of PAEs is through ester bond hydrolysis
to produce monoester, which decomposes to produce phthalic acid (PA) and alcohol, and
ultimately produces short-chain acid, which would ultimately engage the Krebs cycle [50].
Hydrolase and oxygenase are the enzymes for the biodegradation of PAEs. One of the
enzymes, esterase, shows the best activity in degrading phthalates, with pH value and
temperature in the range from 7 to 10 and 30 to 70 ◦C, respectively [51]. It was found
that reducing weight is quite effective in the role of pretreatment temperature and hydro-
lase. An estuary waste electronics dismantling area Bacillus sp. GZB isolated facultative
anaerobic BPA-degrading bacteria may accelerate BPA biodegradation in water sediment.
The addition of Bacillus sp. GZB was closely connected to improved biodegradation efﬁ-
ciency. BPA biodegradation was enhanced by adding substance, such as electron donors
and co-substrates, or yeast extract, NaCl, humic acid, and glucose, respectively [52]. BPA
undergoes bioaugmentation and bio-stimulation in water-sediment microcosms [53].
4.1.3. Microbial Degradation of Commonly Used Biodegradable Plastics/MPs
Emerging plastics called biodegradable plastics are prone to degradation, compared
to high polymers. Biodegradable plastics (BPs) such as poly-caprolactone (PCL), poly
butylene succinate-co-adipate (PBSA), poly butylene succinate (PBS), and poly lactic acid
(PLA), when compared to high polymers, are prone to degradation and overcome the envi-
ronmental pollution and challenges associated with synthetic plastics. Some biodegradable
polymers that play a role in composting, such as PCL, polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB), PLA,
and PBS, can be degraded signiﬁcantly. Their chemical structure, which includes ester
linkages that make them susceptible to breakdown by microbial enzyme systems, is cru-
cial [15].
Thermophilic actinomycetes with activity to PHB, PCL, or polyethersulfone (PES) were
isolated from various environments (like compost) in Taiwan [54]. When exposed to PCL
wastes at 50 ◦C, two thermophilic bacteria isolated from compost demonstrated effective
synergy, accelerating PCL breakdown and substantially increasing the amount of the
disintegrated polymer [55]. Because PCL is a thermoplastic crystalline polyester, it can be
hydrolyzed into small molecules by lipase and then further assimilated by microorganisms.
For instance, PCL was completely degraded by Aspergillus sp. strain ST-01, isolated from
soil after six days incubation at 50 ◦C by thermotolerant PCL-degrading microorganisms.
Catalase and Protease are secreted by Aspergillus sp. strain ST-01 as its enzyme. Besides,
marine organisms, such as Pseudomonas, Alcanivorax, and Tenacibaculum, isolated from the
deep sea sediments, can also effectively degrade PCL [56].
4.2. Enzymes Involved in Plastics/MPs Biodegradation
4.2.1. Enzymes Involved in Plastics/MPs Hydrolysis
A variety of enzymes, including cutinases, esterases, lipases, laccases, peroxidases,
proteases, and ureases from bacterial and fungal sources, have been demonstrated to
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 9 of 17
have the capacity to break down PE, PET, and PP [5]. Fungal cellulase systems observed
cellulose depolymerization free enzyme to act directly on solid polymeric substrates, and
the ﬁnal step converted monomeric constituents (e.g., cellobiose hydrolysis to glucose) [57].
The properties of fungal enzymes, especially the depolymerases, allow them to break
down different polymers, they can generally degrade PET and PE. The distribution and
penetrative ability of fungal hyphae are a signiﬁcant factor in their original colonization
before depolymerization and their enzyme capacities to enhance hyphal attachment to
hydrophobic substrates. Laccases from actinomycetes, Rhodococcus ruber, and fungi, such
as Aspergillus ﬂavus and Pleurotus ostreatus, have also exhibited signiﬁcant degradation of
PE. It may be caused by the oxidation of the PE hydrocarbon backbone [ 5]. Besides, in
the biodegradation of conventional low-density plastic LDPE, other fungal species with
substantial plastic degrading properties includeFusarium solani, Alternaria solani, Aspergillus
fumigatus, Spicaria spp., Geomyces pannorum, Phoma sp., Penicillum spp., etc. [ 58]. The
degradation microorganisms of polyethylene materials mainly include bacteria and fungi,
among which there are are mainly fungi such as F. oxysporum and Aspergillus fumigates. The
cultivation of non-degradable plastic waste PE byF. oxysporumstrains has better tolerance to
high concentration PE, which can cause strong oxidation phenomena and observe changes
in PE ﬁlm morphology. Aspergillus fumigates form bioﬁlms to degrade LDPE, achieving
current experimental efﬁciency in the fungal degradation of LDPE [59,60].
Some hydrolyzable plastics and PET are degraded by highly efﬁcient degrading bacte-
ria (Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F) or hydrolyzed by bacterial enzymes (hydrolase and keratinase),
and their enzymes are combined for degradation, such as PETase and MHETase. Previous
studies generally used esterases, lipases, keratinases, and other hydrolytic enzymes to
degrade PET. When an enzyme speciﬁcally hydrolyzing PET is discovered, it is named
PETase [61]. A recent study reported the enzymes secreted by bacteria degrading PET
polymer step by step, synthesize the two enzymes and act synergistically, increasing the
degrading efﬁciency by six times (Figure 3). PET was hydrolyzed by enzymes ofI. sakaiensis
strain in PET depolymerization into its monomers ethylene glycol (EG) and terephthalic
acid (TPA) [62]. During PET depolymerization, TPA and EG in I. sakaiensis strain are
liberated, which requires PETase and MHETase to act synergistically [57]. Both enzymes’
potential as PET-degrading agents has gained signiﬁcant attention to reduce plastic waste.
PETase effectively impacts the stability of the PET molecules because of its esterase that
catalyzes the ester bond. The dimer BHET and monomer MHET are released when PETase
hydrolyzes polymeric PET molecules (Figure 3). The MHETase then converts the MHET
into TPA and EG [35].
Synergistic enzymes secreted by multiple microorganisms and microbes with a two-
enzyme system are the hotspot of the study on the biodegradation of pollutants internally
and externally due to their powerful degrading ability and special metabolic type. Similarly,
a potential research area is the development of multienzyme systems for the depolymeriza-
tion of plastic waste. For example, I. sakaiensis strain has a dual enzyme system containing
PETase and MHETase that has evolved the ability to utilize crystalline polyester substrates.
The latest research shows that scientists have designed I. sakaiensis strain enzymes to im-
prove degradation efﬁciency [ 57]. The research has shown that improved enzymes can
allow bacteria to degrade 90% of plastic products within 10 h. Scientists optimize enzymes
to transcend natural evolution by genetic engineering, in order to make the enzyme work
more efﬁciently than the natural state, the enzyme needs to be artiﬁcially modiﬁed. A PET
hydrolase that has been reﬁned and tuned has shown great efﬁciency, producing at least
90% PET depolymerization into monomers during a 10-h period. This enzyme from the
bacterium I sakaiensis strain 201-F6 outperformed all PET hydrolases reported so far [63].
PET ﬁlms were virtually completely destroyed by the strain’s two highly speciﬁc enzymes,
PETase and MHETase, in a couple of weeks. The effective degradation was observed around
30 ◦C, under mesothermic conditions [35]. PETase and MHETase are two unique enzymes,
their concerted action for the hydrolysis of PET is essential. PET degradation relates to the
presence of MHETase. Even PETase at low concentrations also improved the degradation
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 10 of 17
efﬁciency [57]. The enzyme combination with a substrate is closely related to maintaining
the structural stability of enzyme biocatalyst [ 30]. In general, the practices for standard
commercial use, such as enzyme immobilization, enzyme entrapping, or encapsulation,
hinder the optimal enzyme-substrate interaction in PETase, thereby reducing the overall
effect on PET degradation [35]. There is a relatively low turnover rate for PET hydrolases.
However, it is enzymatically hydrolyzed at about 65–75 ◦C, thereby realizing the effective
enzymatic degradation of PET through heat-resistant PET hydrolase [36]. The research on
PET hydrolase can be expanded to substrate scope of PETase, and PETase variants can be
screened to improve the thermal stability and PET degradation ability [27]. Therefore, it
is signiﬁcant to further investigate the molecular mechanism of PET hydrolase and the
development and utilization of new PET-degrading enzymes. The studies on PET biodegra-
dation have found multiple cutinase enzymes, which can perform PET depolymerization
with the prevalence of esterase enzymes in nature [57].
Microorganisms 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 18 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The enzymes involved in PET degradation secreted by Ideonella sakaiensis . Ideonella sa-
kaiensis strain secretes enzymes PETase and MHETase, which degrade PET plastic, and the artificial 
enzyme PETase combined with MHETase significantly improve the degradation efficiency. 
Synergistic enzymes secreted by multiple microorganisms and microbes with a two-
enzyme system are the hotspot of the study on the biodegradation of pollutants internally 
and externally due to their powerful degrading ability and special metabolic type. Simi-
larly, a potential research area is the development of multienzyme systems for the depol-
ymerization of plastic waste. For example, I. sakaiensis strain has a dual enzyme system 
containing PETase and MHETase that has evolved the ability to utilize crystalline polyes-
ter substrates. The latest research shows that scientists have designed  I. sakaiensis  strain 
enzymes to improve degradation efficiency [57]. The research has shown that improved 
enzymes can allow bacteria to degrade 90% of plastic products within 10 h. Scientists op-
timize enzymes to transcend natural evolution by genetic engineering, in order to make 
the enzyme work more efficiently than the natural state, the enzyme needs to be artificially 
modified. A PET hydrolase that has been re fined and tuned has shown great efficiency, 
producing at least 90% PET depolymerization into monomers during a 10-h period. This 
enzyme from the bacterium I sakaiensis strain 201-F6 outperformed all PET hydrolases re-
ported so far [63]. PET films were virtually completely destroyed by the strain s two 
highly specific enzymes, PETase and MHETase, in a couple of weeks. The effective degra-
dation was observed around 30 °C, under mesothermic conditions [35]. PETase and 
MHETase are two unique enzymes, their concerted action for the hydrolysis of PET is 
essential. PET degradation relates to the presence of MHETase. Even PETase at low con-
centrations also improved the degradation efficiency [57]. The enzyme combination with 
a substrate is closely related to maintaining the structural stability of enzyme biocatalyst 
[30]. In general, the practices for standard commercial use, such as enzyme immobiliza-
tion, enzyme entrapping, or encapsulation, hinder the optimal enzyme-substrate interac-
tion in PETase, thereby reducing the overall effect on PET degradation [35]. There is a 
relatively low turnover rate for PET hydrolases. However, it is enzymatically hydrolyzed 
at about 65–75 °C, thereby realizing the effe ctive enzymatic degradation of PET through 
Figure 3. The enzymes involved in PET degradation secreted byIdeonella sakaiensis. Ideonella sakaiensis
strain secretes enzymes PETase and MHETase, which degrade PET plastic, and the artiﬁcial enzyme
PETase combined with MHETase signiﬁcantly improve the degradation efﬁciency.
Fungi are members of 10 genera of the Ascomycota and Mucor, and they degrade
polyethylene more quickly than bacteria. The crucial factor causing this distinction is that
fungi can adhere to polymer surfaces with hydrophobic surfaces. When using PP and PE
as the sole carbon source, it may be possible to culture Aspergillus, Fusarium oxysporum,
and Penicillium for three months to test their capacity for degradation. The analysis also
validates the presence of bioﬁlms and reveals alterations to PP and PE’s surface. The
incubated fungus are also examined, and it is shown that they can survive for more than
three months without any extra carbon sources [64]. In ascomycetes, Fusarium oxysporum can
secrete keratinase that can depolymerize PET. Similarly, the cutinase LC-cutinase, which
can degrade PET and PCL, was generated from a leaf’s fosmid library and produced in
Escherichia coli. It may be utilized to modify PET’s surface and break it down. There is a
great deal of potential for cutinases to hydrolyze PET and PCL. The underlying mechanisms
of cutinase enzyme for degrading speciﬁc plastics should be analyzed. In the future, the
transformation and cloning of bacteria and enzymes can greatly improve the degradation
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 11 of 17
of various plastics. Recent studies indicated that the two cutinases, LC-cutinase and
Thermobiﬁda fusca cutinase, achieved higher activity in the experiment, and the residual
activity of the latter was higher after 40 h. Thus, LC-cutinase is marginally less stable
than T. fusca cutinase [65]. In the presence of surfactants and organic solvents, the T. fusca
cutinases demonstrated a number of beneﬁts, including adaptable hydrolytic activity, good
tolerance to surfactants, superior stability in organic solvents, and thermostability. Two
types of cutinases with 93% similarity, called TfU 0882 and TfU 0883, were isolated from T.
fusca, which can metabolize synthetic polyesters. Despite the two enzymes’ remarkable
resemblance, only TfU 0883 can break down PET at 60◦C. Although both LC keratinase and
BC lip can break down PCL, LC-cutinase has been shown to have a speciﬁc PCL-degrading
activity of 300 mg/h/mg of enzyme at pH 8.0 and 50 ◦C, but BC lip’s PCL-degrading
activity (8 mg/h/mg of enzyme) was signiﬁcantly lower than that of LC-cutinase, under
the same conditions. When PET was degraded using LC-cutinase, the ﬁndings revealed that
the degradation rate was 230–970 times more than that of the data for other cutinases [65].
The research report demonstrates that LC-cutinase’s hydrolytic activity is what causes PET
to deteriorate. It exerts and enhances speciﬁc abilities and can totally break down PET into
TPA and EG [66]. With a thorough understanding of these enzymes’ protein structures,
it is possible to improve their catalytic efﬁcacy in degrading different types of polymers,
including PET. Microorganisms evolved in the process and found suitable enzymes for
mutation, selecting mutated keratinase to decompose PET in a short period of time [35].
In order to develop more efﬁcient enzymes, relational studies can analyze the detailed
structure and function of cutinase.
4.2.2. Biodegradation Associated Enzymes Produced by Microorganisms in the
Extreme Environments
Extreme environmental microorganisms, such as halophiles and psychrophiles, exhibit
plastic degradation potential. Thermophilic, alkaliphilic, halophilic, and psychrophilic bacteria
in multiple extreme environments are potentially capable of degrading synthetic plastics
(Table 1). This special type of environment requires screening of more effective degra-
dation bacteria [67]. Actually, plastic contaminated places are characterized by extreme
environmental conditions, such as low or elevated temperatures, acidic or alkaline pH,
high salt concentrations, or high pressure. With regard to the features of thermophilic
and halophilic enzymes, they have a longer life cycle, allowing their storage at room tem-
perature and preventing a signiﬁcant loss of enzymatic activity [ 68]. Consequently, as a
source of plastic-degrading enzymes and microorganisms, there is a signiﬁcant scope for
thermophile and extremophile microbiomes to be explored. The most thermally stable
leaf-branching compost cutinase (LCC) had the highest PET depolymerization rates at
65 ◦C [3]. At elevated temperatures, several thermophiles have shown high potential for
polymer degradation, similar to high-temperature plastic degradation agents. The bacteria
can produce numerous enzymes with higher activity, which improves substrate bioavail-
ability and solubility [67]. It was reported the ﬁrst time that Chelatococcus sp. E1 isolated
from a compost sample was able to degrade PE. When pretreated PE samples were set at
60 ◦C, Chelatococcus sp. E1 as thermophilic strains, PE co-cultured with Chelatococcus sp. E1
apparently shifted the molecular weight distribution to the lower molecular weight side,
increasing the biodegradability of HDPE and LDPE [42]. One of society’s main challenges
may be solved by the development of extremozymes and the growth of extremophiles in
severe environments.
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 12 of 17
Table 1. Enzymes and degradation factors corresponding to degrading bacteria.
Source Enzyme Major Mechanism
of Degradation
Plastics/
Mircoplastics Optimum Conditions References
Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F PETase Hydrolysis PET Temperature 70–75 ◦C [35]
Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F MHETase Hydrolysis PET Temperature 70–75 ◦C [35]
Amycolaptosis sp. —— Hydrolysis PLA Temperature 50 ◦C [54]
Aspergillus oryzae —— Hydrolysis PBS Temperature 50 ◦C [15]
Penicillium funiculosum —— Hydrolysis PHB Temperature 50 ◦C [15]
Thermomonospora and
curvata(cutinase homolog
from leaf-branch compost)
LC-cutinase Hydrolysis PET Temperature 50 ◦C [65]
Thermophilic, alkaliphilic,
halophilic, and psychrophilic
bacteria
Bacteriophilic
enzyme Hydrolysis Various plastic Salt, low, or high pH,
temperatures [67]
Pseudomonas, Arthrobacter PME hydrolases Hydrolysis and
oxidation
PVC, PP ,
PE, PS (PAEs) Temperature 30–70◦C [13]
Bacillus sp. GZB A spore-laccase
The expression of
different functional
genes
PC (BPA) Adding electron donors
and co-substrates [69]
Aspergillus sp. strain ST-01 Catalase, Protease Colonization PCL Temperature 50 ◦C [56]
5. Ways to Improve Biodegradation of Plastics/MPs
The pretreatment of plastic waste requires recycling or collection of microplastics in
sewage in order to reduce the toxicity of additives, the adhesion of POPs, and depolymer-
ized polymer chain [70]. The hydrophilicity of the polymer must be increased by chemical
or biological oxidation processes in order to facilitate bacterial attachment and degradation.
The results of various pretreatments can improve the efﬁciency of biodegradation. Recy-
cling and biological processing achieve a signiﬁcant reduction in plastic toxic pollution and
improve biodegradation (Figure 4). However, considering further degradation of polymers,
it is necessary to explore different characteristics of plastics for degradation. Biodegradable
plastics are relatively more susceptible to pretreatment than traditional plastics due to
their suitable physico-chemical properties, such as relatively low molecular weight, high
ﬂexibility, and more functional groups. Plastics can be pretreated with a variety of physical
and chemical agents to alter their structural and morphological characteristics, such as
reducing their molecular weight, rupturing chemical bonds, creating surface cracks, and
enriching functional groups. All of these actions facilitate the biodegradation process that
follows [32]. The changes in the biodegradation of plastics and MPs by different pretreat-
ments should be determined, which can further increase the percentage of degradation.
The pretreatment of plastic polymers with high temperature, photooxidation catalysis, and
catalysis of microbial enzymes could promote their efﬁcient biodegradation (Figure 4).
The pretreatment of PE, such as pyrolysis, makes it more easily metabolized by
microorganisms [18]. Pretreatment using temperature for PET optimization improves
the efﬁciency of PET-hydrolyzing enzymes, ultimately enhancing the degradation and
temperature treatment. It is the most efﬁcient pretreatment for PET degradation. The
biodegradation activity of the enzymes, especially PETase, is affected by ambient temper-
ature and PET structure. Due to the reduced ﬂexibility of the PET molecules related to
ambient temperature, the activity of the bacterial enzyme reached a higher value by suitable
temperature, resulting in optimal catalysis. Other results show that the biodegradability by
some bacteria of plastics that passed the temperature treatment is enhanced, and the broken
or damaged effect of the corresponding enzymes on long-chain molecules of polymers is
signiﬁcantly increased [25]. For instance, the biodegradation of thermally pretreated HDPE
by Klebsiella pneumoniae CH001 was efﬁciently achieved, and the thermal pretreatment
caused a signiﬁcant reduction in the tensile strength of HDPE [32] (Figure 4).
By mixing with biodegradable additives, photo-initiators, or co-polymerization, weight
reduction of PE degradation can be improved [ 71]. As a green way, photocatalysis has
developed rapidly in recent years [72]. It was found that many simple iron salts can suc-
cessfully catalyze the oxidative bond-breaking process of 400 nm LED irradiation lamp
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 13 of 17
with pure oxygen or air, and ferrous chloride as the ideal photocatalyst [ 73]. Similarly,
aromatic hydrocarbons, such as isopropylbenzene and cyclohexylbenzene, can undergo
catalysis to achieve good C-C bond breaking and conversion to benzoic acid under the
catalytic system [74]. The experiments conﬁrmed that light, FeCl 3, and air are necessary for
efﬁcient degradation (Figure 4). This method also could be efﬁciently used to break down
commercial samples of high molecular weight PS [73].
Microorganisms 2023, 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 18 
 
 
characteristics, such as reducing their molecular weight, rupturing chemical bonds, creat-
ing surface cracks, and enriching functional groups. All of these actions facilitate the bio-
degradation process that follows [32]. The chan ges in the biodegradation of plastics and 
MPs by different pretreatments should be determined, which can further increase the per-
centage of degradation. The pretreatment of plastic polymers with high temperature, pho-
tooxidation catalysis, and catalysis of microbial enzymes could promote their efficient bi-
odegradation (Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4. Pretreatment through physical and chemical methods can greatly make plastics prone to 
degradation. 
The pretreatment of PE, such as pyrolysis, makes it more easily metabolized by mi-
croorganisms [18]. Pretreatment using temperature for PET optimization improves the ef-
ficiency of PET-hydrolyzing enzymes, ultimately enhancing the degradation and temper-
ature treatment. It is the most efficient pr etreatment for PET degradation. The biodegra-
dation activity of the enzymes, especially PETase, is affected by ambient temperature and 
PET structure. Due to the reduced flexibility of the PET molecules related to ambient tem-
perature, the activity of the bacterial enzyme reached a higher value by suitable tempera-
ture, resulting in optimal catalysis. Other results show that the biodegradability by some 
bacteria of plastics that passed the temperature treatment is enhanced, and the broken or 
damaged effect of the corresponding enzymes on long-chain molecules of polymers is 
significantly increased  [25]. For instance, the biodegradation of thermally pretreated 
HDPE by Klebsiella pneumoniae CH001 was efficiently achieved, and the thermal pretreat-
ment caused a significant reduction in the tensile strength of HDPE [32] (Figure 4). 
By mixing with biodegradable additives, photo-initiators, or co-polymerization, 
weight reduction of PE degradation can be improved [71]. As a green way, photocatalysis 
has developed rapidly in recent years [72]. It  was found that many simple iron salts can 
successfully catalyze the oxidative bond-breaking process of 400 nm LED irradiation lamp 
with pure oxygen or air, and ferrous chloride as the ideal photocatalyst [73]. Similarly, 
aromatic hydrocarbons, such as isopropylb enzene and cyclohexylbenzene, can undergo 
catalysis to achieve good C-C bond breaking  and conversion to benzoic acid under the 
catalytic system [74]. The experiments confirmed that light, FeCl
3, and air are necessary 
for efficient degradation (Figure 4). This method also could be efficiently used to break 
down commercial samples of high molecular weight PS [73]. 
The enzymatic surface modification of polyme r fibers (i.e., changing the functional 
groups on the surface of plastic fibers) improves the wettability, fastness, dyeing, and pill-
ing resistance of plastics, ultimately improving the hydrophilicity of plastics, such as 
Figure 4. Pretreatment through physical and chemical methods can greatly make plastics prone
to degradation.
The enzymatic surface modiﬁcation of polymer ﬁbers (i.e., changing the functional
groups on the surface of plastic ﬁbers) improves the wettability, fastness, dyeing, and
pilling resistance of plastics, ultimately improving the hydrophilicity of plastics, such as
lipase from Candida antarctica and keratinase from Aspergillus oryzae, in order to improve the
hydrophilicity of fabrics [42]. With regard to plastics with C-C backbones, biodegradation
using whole-cell enzymes is considered to be a potentially better method [75]. It is reported
to use a multidisciplinary approach, monomer biocatalysis of PET, such as whole cell
catalysis, becomes a biopolymer, which can form a biological cycle. Whole-cell catalysis
can reduce the hydrophobicity of plastics and enhance the binding strength between
enzymes and high crystalline substrate PET, with two basic steps including adsorption
and hydrolysis [62]. As a whole-cell biocatalyzer, the anaerobic thermophile Clostridium
thermocellum combines the synthesis of the enzyme with the hydrolysis of PET in one
process (Figure 4). The result demonstrates that a PET ﬁlm lost almost 60% of its weight
over a 14-day incubation at 60 ◦C [76]. Thus, whole-cell catalysis can be one of the ideal
additives for pretreatment catalysts [76]. The pretreatment of the various substrates using
various parameters, such as photo-treatment and temperature, enzymatic pretreatment,
and various additives, has indicated the enhancement of plastics and MPs biodegradation.
6. Conclusions
Plastic and MP pollution has been a long-standing problem with serious concerns
in many ﬁelds because of its harmful effects on ecological and human health. There is
currently a dearth of information on the capacity and potential of enzymes, including
hydrolases, cutinase, and bacteriophilic enzymes, in the breakdown of plastics through
enzymatic means. Therefore, further studies should be conducted to optimize effective
enzymatic conditions for plastics degradation and focusing on the structural analysis of
relative enzymes and the reaction mechanisms to obtain desired results. In recent years,
many studies have focused on enzymes isolated from bacteria, such as PETase and cutinases.
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 14 of 17
Therefore, selecting the suitable degradation microorganism for plastic treatment aiming at
different types of plastics is of signiﬁcance. Studies on the biodegradation of plastics can
help to understand how microorganisms work and their potential to reduce the amount
of plastic in the environment. They can also help to develop better enzymes to address
the issues related to plastic waste. This review mainly concentrated on the breakdown of
microorganisms in frequently used plastics and explored their enzymes, which operate as
possible instruments for degradation that may greatly become the creation of sustainable
bioremediation methods. Furthermore, studies on the impact of various pretreatment
techniques and additives on the microbiological breakdown of synthetic plastics may
produce better outcomes.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Z.C.; writing—original draft preparation, Z.C.; writing—
review and editing, M.L., Z.Z., X.W., Y.H. and T.L.; supervision, H.G.; funding acquisition, M.Y.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This project was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province,
China (2022A1515010197, 2021XNYNYKJHZGJ036, 210708146901717), National Natural Science
Foundation of China (42177253, 41706186), Guangzhou Science and Technology Project (202201010415,
20212100029).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Magalhães, S.; Alves, L.; Medronho, B.; Romano, A.; Rasteiro, M.D.G. Microplastics in Ecosystems: From Current Trends to
Bio-Based Removal Strategies. Molecules 2020, 25, 3954. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Zhang, K.; Hamidian, A.H.; Tubi´ c, A.; Zhang, Y.; Fang, J.K.H.; Wu, C.; Lam, P .K.S. Understanding plastic degradation and
microplastic formation in the environment: A review. Environ. Pollut. 2021, 274, 116554. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Lear, G.; Kingsbury, J.M.; Franchini, S.; Gambarini, V .; Maday, S.D.M.; Wallbank, J.A.; Weaver, L.; Pantos, O. Plastics and the
microbiome: Impacts and solutions. Environ. Microbiome 2021, 16, 2. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Urbanek, A.K.; Rymowicz, W.; Miro ´ nczuk, A.M. Degradation of plastics and plastic-degrading bacteria in cold marine habitats.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2018, 102, 7669–7678. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Amobonye, A.; Bhagwat, P .; Singh, S.; Pillai, S. Plastic biodegradation: Frontline microbes and their enzymes.Sci. Total Environ.
2021, 759, 143536. [CrossRef]
6. Li, P .; Wang, X.; Su, M.; Zou, X.; Duan, L.; Zhang, H. Characteristics of Plastic Pollution in the Environment: A Review. Bull.
Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 2021, 107, 577–584. [CrossRef]
7. Zimmermann, L.; Bartosova, Z.; Braun, K.; Oehlmann, J.; Völker, C.; Wagner, M. Plastic Products Leach Chemicals That Induce In
Vitro Toxicity under Realistic Use Conditions. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2021, 55, 11814–11823. [CrossRef]
8. Schmaltz, E.; Melvin, E.C.; Diana, Z.; Gunady, E.F.; Rittschof, D.; Somarelli, J.A.; Virdin, J.; Dunphy-Daly, M.M. Plastic pollution
solutions: Emerging technologies to prevent and collectmarineplastic pollution. Environ. Int. 2020, 144, 106067. [CrossRef]
9. Gao, R.; Sun, C. A marine bacterial community capable of degrading poly(ethylene terephthalate) and polyethylene. J. Hazard.
Mater. 2021, 416, 125928. [CrossRef]
10. Ajith, N.; Arumugam, S.; Parthasarathy, S.; Manupoori, S.; Janakiraman, S. Global distribution of microplastics and its impact on
marine environment-a review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 2020, 27, 25970–25986. [CrossRef]
11. Li, W.C.; Tse, H.F.; Fok, L. Plastic waste in the marine environment: A review of sources, occurrence and effects.Sci. Total. Environ.
2016, 566–567, 333–349. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Hu, L.; Fu, J.; Zheng, P .; Dai, M.; Zeng, G.; Pan, X. Accumulation of microplastics in tadpoles from different functional zones in
Hangzhou Great Bay Area, China: Relation to growth stage and feeding habits. J. Hazard. Mater. 2022, 424, 127665. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
13. Carmen, S. Microbial capability for the degradation of chemical additives present in petroleum-based plastic products: A review
on current status and perspectives. J. Hazard. Mater. 2021, 402, 123534. [CrossRef]
14. Roohi; Bano, K.; Kuddus, M.; Zaheer, M.R.; Zia, Q.; Khan, M.F.; Ashraf, G.M.; Gupta, A.; Aliev, G. Microbial Enzymatic
Degradation of Biodegradable Plastics. Curr. Pharm. Biotechnol. 2017, 18, 429–440. [CrossRef]
15. Al Hosni, A.S.; Pittman, J.K.; Robson, G.D. Microbial degradation of four biodegradable polymers in soil and compost demon-
strating polycaprolactone as an ideal compostable plastic. Waste Manag. 2019, 97, 105–114. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 15 of 17
16. Geyer, R.; Jambeck, J.R.; Law, K.L. Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. Sci. Adv. 2017, 3, e1700782. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
17. Maity, S.; Banerjee, S.; Biswas, C.; Guchhait, R.; Chatterjee, A.; Pramanick, K. Functional interplay between plastic polymers and
microbes: A comprehensive review. Biodegradation 2021, 32, 487–510. [CrossRef]
18. Narancic, T.; O’Connor, K.E. Plastic waste as a global challenge: Are biodegradable plastics the answer to the plastic waste
problem? Microbiology 2019, 165, 129–137. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
19. Zhang, B.; Chen, L.; Chao, J.; Yang, X.; Wang, Q. Research Progress of Microplastics in Freshwater Sediments in China.Environ.
Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 2020, 27, 31046–31060. [CrossRef]
20. Zhou, B.; Zhao, L.; Wang, Y.; Sun, Y.; Li, X.; Xu, H.; Weng, L.; Pan, Z.; Yang, S.; Chang, X.; et al. Spatial distribution of phthalate
esters and the associated response of enzyme activities and microbial community composition in typical plastic-shed vegetable
soils in China. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2020, 195, 110495. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
21. Konieczna, A.; Rutkowska, A.; Racho ´ n, D. Health risk of exposure to Bisphenol A (BPA).Rocz. Panstw. Zakl. Hig. 2015, 66, 5–11.
[PubMed]
22. Wright, S.L.; Kelly, F.J. Plastic and Human Health: A Micro Issue?Environ. Sci. Technol. 2017, 51, 6634–6647. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
23. Fu, L.; Li, J.; Wang, G.; Luan, Y.; Dai, W. Adsorption behavior of organic pollutants on microplastics.Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2021,
217, 112207. [CrossRef]
24. Andrady, A.L. Microplastics in the marine environment. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2011, 62, 1596–1605. [CrossRef]
25. Yuan, J.; Ma, J.; Sun, Y.; Zhou, T.; Zhao, Y.; Yu, F. Microbial degradation and other environmental aspects of microplastics/plastics.
Sci. Total Environ. 2020, 715, 136968. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Wang, G.X.; Huang, D.; Ji, J.H.; Völker, C.; Wurm, F.R. Seawater-Degradable Polymers-Fighting the Marine Plastic Pollution.Adv.
Sci. 2020, 8, 2001121. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Papadopoulou, A.; Hecht, K.; Buller, R. Enzymatic PET Degradation. Chimia 2019, 73, 743–749. [CrossRef]
28. Yang, Y.; Liu, W.; Zhang, Z.; Grossart, H.P .; Gadd, G.M. Microplastics provide new microbial niches in aquatic environments.
Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2020, 104, 6501–6511. [CrossRef]
29. Yang, H.; Chen, G.; Wang, J. Microplastics in the Marine Environment: Sources, Fates, Impacts and Microbial Degradation. Toxics
2021, 9, 41. [CrossRef]
30. Ganesh Kumar, A.; Anjana, K.; Hinduja, M.; Sujitha, K.; Dharani, G. Review on plastic wastes in marine environment—
Biodegradation and biotechnological solutions. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2020, 150, 110733. [CrossRef]
31. Bardají, D.K.R.; Moretto, J.A.S.; Furlan, J.P .R.; Stehling, E.G. A mini-review: Current advances in polyethylene biodegradation.
World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2020, 36, 32. [CrossRef]
32. Matjašiˇ c, T.; Simˇ ciˇ c, T.; Medvešˇ cek, N.; Bajt, O.; Dreo, T.; Mori, N. Critical evaluation of biodegradation studies on synthetic
plastics through a systematic literature review. Sci. Total. Environ. 2021, 752, 141959. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Sánchez, C. Fungal potential for the degradation of petroleum-based polymers: An overview of macro- and microplastics
biodegradation. Biotechnol. Adv. 2020, 40, 107501. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Tokiwa, Y.; Calabia, B.P .; Ugwu, C.U.; Aiba, S. Biodegradability of plastics. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2009, 10, 3722–3742. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
35. Maity, W.; Maity, S.; Bera, S.; Roy, A. Emerging Roles of PETase and MHETase in the Biodegradation of Plastic Wastes. Appl.
Biochem. Biotechnol. 2021, 193, 2699–2716. [CrossRef]
36. Kawai, F.; Kawabata, T.; Oda, M. Current knowledge on enzymatic PET degradation and its possible application to waste stream
management and other ﬁelds. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2019, 103, 4253–4268. [CrossRef]
37. Hu, X.; Thumarat, U.; Zhang, X.; Tang, M.; Kawai, F. Diversity of polyester-degrading bacteria in compost and molecular analysis
of a thermoactive esterase from Thermobiﬁda alba AHK119. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2010, 87, 771–779. [CrossRef]
38. Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Takehana, T.; Taniguchi, I.; Yamaji, H.; Maeda, Y.; Toyohara, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Kimura, Y.; Oda, K. A
bacterium that degrades and assimilates poly(ethylene terephthalate). Science 2016, 351, 1196–1199. [CrossRef]
39. Yan, Z.F.; Xu, K.W.; Wu, J. Synergism Between Multi-Pseudomonas and Cutinase for Biodegradation of Crude Oil-Based
Derivatives. Curr. Microbiol. 2022, 80, 30. [CrossRef]
40. Kaplan, D.L.; Hartenstein, R.; Sutter, J. Biodegradation of polystyrene, poly(metnyl methacrylate), and phenol formaldehyde.
Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1979, 38, 551–553. [CrossRef]
41. Brandon, A.M.; Gao, S.H.; Tian, R.; Ning, D.; Yang, S.S.; Zhou, J.; Wu, W.M.; Criddle, C.S. Biodegradation of Polyethylene and
Plastic Mixtures in Mealworms (Larvae of Tenebrio molitor) and Effects on the Gut Microbiome.Environ. Sci. Technol. 2018, 52,
6526–6533. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Khandare, S.D.; Chaudhary, D.R.; Jha, B. Marine bacterial biodegradation of low-density polyethylene (LDPE) plastic. Biodegrada-
tion 2021, 32, 127–143. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Eck, M.; Schwab, S.T.; Nelson, T.F.; Wurst, K.; Iberl, S.; Schleheck, D.; Link, C.; Battagliarin, G.; Mecking, S. Biodegradable
High-Density Polyethylene-like Material. Angew. Chem. 2023, 62, e202213438. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Muhonja, C.N.; Makonde, H.; Magoma, G.; Imbuga, M. Biodegradability of polyethylene by bacteria and fungi from Dandora
dumpsite Nairobi-Kenya. PLoS ONE 2018, 13, e0198446. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Sridharan, R.; Krishnaswamy, V .G.; Kumar, P .S. Analysis and microbial degradation of Low-Density Polyethylene (LDPE) in
Winogradsky column. Environ. Res. 2021, 201, 111646. [CrossRef]
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 16 of 17
46. Ojha, N.; Pradhan, N.; Singh, S.; Barla, A.; Shrivastava, A.; Khatua, P .; Rai, V .; Bose, S. Evaluation of HDPE and LDPE degradation
by fungus, implemented by statistical optimization. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 39515. [CrossRef]
47. Roager, L.; Sonnenschein, E.C. Bacterial Candidates for Colonization and Degradation of Marine Plastic Debris. Environ. Sci.
Technol. 2019, 53, 11636–11643. [CrossRef]
48. Sangeetha Devi, R.; Rajesh Kannan, V .; Nivas, D.; Kannan, K.; Chandru, S.; Robert Antony, A. Biodegradation of HDPE by
Aspergillus spp. from marine ecosystem of Gulf of Mannar, India. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 2015, 96, 32–40. [CrossRef]
49. Usman, A.; Ahmad, M. From BPA to its analogues: Is it a safe journey? Chemosphere 2016, 158, 131–142. [CrossRef]
50. Patil, N.K.; Kundapur, R.; Shouche, Y.S.; Karegoudar, T.B. Degradation of plasticizer di-n-butylphthalate byDelftia sp. TBKNP-05.
Curr. Microbiol. 2006, 52, 369–374. [CrossRef]
51. González-Márquez, A.; Loera-Corral, O.; Santacruz-Juárez, E.; Tlécuitl-Beristain, S.; García-Dávila, J.; Viniegra-González, G.;
Sánchez, C. Biodegradation patterns of the endocrine disrupting pollutant di(2-ethyl hexyl) phthalate by Fusarium culmorum.
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2019, 170, 293–299. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Xiong, J.; An, T.; Li, G.; Peng, P . Accelerated biodegradation of BPA in water-sediment microcosms withBacillus sp. GZB and the
associated bacterial community structure. Chemosphere 2017, 184, 120–126. [CrossRef]
53. Das, R.; Li, G.; Mai, B.; An, T. Spore cells from BPA degrading bacteria Bacillus sp. GZB displaying high laccase activity and
stability for BPA degradation. Sci. Total Environ. 2018, 640–641, 798–806. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Tseng, M.; Hoang, K.C.; Yang, M.K.; Yang, S.F.; Chu, W.S. Polyester-degrading thermophilic actinomycetes isolated from different
environment in Taiwan. Biodegradation 2007, 18, 579–583. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Nakasaki, K.; Matsuura, H.; Tanaka, H.; Sakai, T. Synergy of two thermophiles enables decomposition of poly-epsilon-caprolactone
under composting conditions. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 2006, 58, 373–383. [CrossRef]
56. Feng, S.; Yue, Y.; Chen, J.; Zhou, J.; Li, Y.; Zhang, Q. Biodegradation mechanism of polycaprolactone by a novel esterase MGS0156:
A QM/MM approach. Environ. Sci. Process. Impacts 2020, 22, 2332–2344. [CrossRef]
57. Knott, B.C.; Erickson, E.; Allen, M.D.; Gado, J.E.; Graham, R.; Kearns, F.L.; Pardo, I.; Topuzlu, E.; Anderson, J.J.; Austin, H.P .; et al.
Characterization and engineering of a two-enzyme system for plastics depolymerization. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2020, 117,
25476–25485. [CrossRef]
58. Zahra, S.; Abbas, S.S.; Mahsa, M.-T.; Mohsen, N. Biodegradation of low-density polyethylene (LDPE) by isolated fungi in solid
waste medium. Waste Manag. 2010, 30, 396–401. [CrossRef]
59. Spina, F.; Tummino, M.L.; Poli, A.; Prigione, V .; Ilieva, V .; Cocconcelli, P .; Puglisi, E.; Bracco, P .; Zanetti, M.; Varese, G.C. Low
density polyethylene degradation by ﬁlamentous fungi. Environ. Pollut. 2021, 274, 116548. [CrossRef]
60. Suresh, P .V .; Anil Kumar, P .K. Enhanced degradation ofα-chitin materials prepared from shrimp processing byproduct and
production of N-acetyl-D-glucosamine by thermoactive chitinases from soil mesophilic fungi. Biodegradation 2012, 23, 597–607.
[CrossRef]
61. Prata, J.C.; Silva, A.L.P .; da Costa, J.P .; Mouneyrac, C.; Walker, T.R.; Duarte, A.C.; Rocha-Santos, T. Solutions and Integrated
Strategies for the Control and Mitigation of Plastic and Microplastic Pollution. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public. Health 2019, 16, 2411.
[CrossRef]
62. Tiso, T.; Narancic, T.; Wei, R.; Pollet, E.; Beagan, N.; Schröder, K.; Honak, A.; Jiang, M.; Kenny, S.T.; Wierckx, N.; et al. Towards
bio-upcycling of polyethylene terephthalate. Metab. Eng. 2021, 66, 167–178. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Tournier, V .; Topham, C.M.; Gilles, A.; David, B.; Folgoas, C.; Moya-Leclair, E.; Kamionka, E.; Desrousseaux, M.L.; Texier, H.;
Gavalda, S.; et al. An engineered PET depolymerase to break down and recycle plastic bottles. Nature 2020, 580, 216–219.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Wróbel, M.; Szyma ´ nska, S.; Kowalkowski, T.; Hrynkiewicz, K. Selection of microorganisms capable of polyethylene (PE) and
polypropylene (PP) degradation. Microbiol. Res. 2023, 267, 127251. [CrossRef]
65. Sulaiman, S.; Yamato, S.; Kanaya, E.; Kim, J.J.; Koga, Y.; Takano, K.; Kanaya, S. Isolation of a novel cutinase homolog with
polyethylene terephthalate-degrading activity from leaf-branch compost by using a metagenomic approach. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2012, 78, 1556–1562. [CrossRef]
66. Wei, R.; Oeser, T.; Schmidt, J.; Meier, R.; Barth, M.; Then, J.; Zimmermann, W. Engineered bacterial polyester hydrolases efﬁciently
degrade polyethylene terephthalate due to relieved product inhibition. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2016, 113, 1658–1665. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
67. Atanasova, N.; Stoitsova, S.; Paunova-Krasteva, T.; Kambourova, M. Plastic Degradation by Extremophilic Bacteria. Int. J. Mol.
Sci. 2021, 22, 5610. [CrossRef]
68. Orellana, R.; Macaya, C.; Bravo, G.; Dorochesi, F.; Cumsille, A.; Valencia, R.; Rojas, C.; Seeger, M. Living at the Frontiers of Life:
Extremophiles in Chile and Their Potential for Bioremediation. Front. Microbiol. 2018, 9, 2309. [CrossRef]
69. Das, R.; Liang, Z.; Li, G.; Mai, B.; An, T. Genome sequence of a spore-laccase forming, BPA-degradingBacillus sp. GZB isolated
from an electronic-waste recycling site reveals insights into BPA degradation pathways. Arch. Microbiol. 2019, 201, 623–638.
[CrossRef]
70. Li, X.; Chen, L.; Ji, Y.; Li, M.; Dong, B.; Qian, G.; Zhou, J.; Dai, X. Effects of chemical pretreatments on microplastic extraction in
sewage sludge and their physicochemical characteristics. Water Res. 2020, 171, 115379. [CrossRef]
71. Zhang, L.; Sintim, H.Y.; Bary, A.I.; Hayes, D.G.; Wadsworth, L.C.; Anunciado, M.B.; Flury, M. Interaction of Lumbricus terrestris
with macroscopic polyethylene and biodegradable plastic mulch. Sci. Total. Environ. 2018, 635, 1600–1608. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Microorganisms 2023, 11, 1661 17 of 17
72. Song, Y.K.; Hong, S.H.; Eo, S.; Shim, W.J. The fragmentation of nano- and microplastic particles from thermoplastics accelerated
by simulated-sunlight-mediated photooxidation. Environ. Pollut. 2022, 311, 119847. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. Oh, S.; Stache, E.E. Chemical Upcycling of Commercial Polystyrene via Catalyst-Controlled Photooxidation. J. Am. Chem. Soc.
2022, 144, 5745–5749. [CrossRef]
74. Huang, Z.; Shanmugam, M.; Liu, Z.; Brookﬁeld, A.; Bennett, E.L.; Guan, R.; Vega Herrera, D.E.; Lopez-Sanchez, J.A.; Slater, A.G.;
McInnes, E.J.L.; et al. Chemical Recycling of Polystyrene to Valuable Chemicals via Selective Acid-Catalyzed Aerobic Oxidation
under Visible Light. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2022, 144, 6532–6542. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75. Wei, R.; Zimmermann, W. Microbial enzymes for the recycling of recalcitrant petroleum-based plastics: How far are we? Microb.
Biotechnol. 2017, 10, 1308–1322. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Yan, F.; Wei, R.; Cui, Q.; Bornscheuer, U.T.; Liu, Y.J. Thermophilic whole-cell degradation of polyethylene terephthalate using
engineered Clostridium thermocellum. Microb. Biotechnol. 2021, 14, 374–385. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.