/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Soong, Y.-H.V .; Sobkowicz,
M.J.; Xie, D. Recent Advances in
Biological Recycling of Polyethylene
Terephthalate (PET) Plastic Wastes.
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
bioengineering9030098
Academic Editor: Eva Garcia Ruiz
Received: 27 December 2021
Accepted: 23 February 2022
Published: 27 February 2022
Publisher’s Note:MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
bioengineering 
Review
Recent Advances in Biological Recycling of Polyethylene
Terephthalate (PET) Plastic Wastes
Ya-Hue Valerie Soong1, Margaret J. Sobkowicz 2 and Dongming Xie 1, *
1 Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA 01854, USA;
yahuevalerie_soong@student.uml.edu
2 Department of Plastics Engineering, University of Massachusetts Lowell, Lowell, MA 01854, USA;
margaret_sobkowiczkline@uml.edu
* Correspondence: dongming_xie@uml.edu; Tel.: +1-978-934-3159
Abstract: Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is one of the most commonly used polyester plastics
worldwide but is extremely difﬁcult to be hydrolyzed in a natural environment. PET plastic is an
inexpensive, lightweight, and durable material, which can readily be molded into an assortment of
products that are used in a broad range of applications. Most PET is used for single-use packaging
materials, such as disposable consumer items and packaging. Although PET plastics are a valuable
resource in many aspects, the proliferation of plastic products in the last several decades have
resulted in a negative environmental footprint. The long-term risk of released PET waste in the
environment poses a serious threat to ecosystems, food safety, and even human health in modern
society. Recycling is one of the most important actions currently available to reduce these impacts.
Current clean-up strategies have attempted to alleviate the adverse impacts of PET pollution but
are unable to compete with the increasing quantities of PET waste exposed to the environment. In
this review paper, current PET recycling methods to improve life cycle and waste management are
discussed, which can be further implemented to reduce plastics pollution and its impacts on health
and environment. Compared with conventional mechanical and chemical recycling processes, the
biotechnological recycling of PET involves enzymatic degradation of the waste PET and the followed
bioconversion of degraded PET monomers into value-added chemicals. This approach creates a
circular PET economy by recycling waste PET or upcycling it into more valuable products with
minimal environmental footprint.
Keywords: PET; plastic recycling; biodegradation; bioconversion; PET hydrolase; cutinase
1. Introduction
Plastics are composed of a broad spectrum of high molecular weight polymers de-
rived from synthetic, semi-synthetic, or natural compounds, assembled in a repeating
pattern [1,2]. Plastics can be readily molded into any shape and form by certain degree
of polymerization and melting processing [ 3,4]. Being able to design or engineer poly-
mers gives plastics incredibly versatility, with unique characteristics in strength, ﬂexibility,
durability, stress resistance, lightness, and electrical insulation.
More than 350 million tons of plastics are being produced worldwide annually in
various applications, including packaging, building and construction, textile, consumer and
institutional products, transportation, electrical and electronic equipment, and industrial
machinery [5] (Figure 1). Although plastics are valuable resources in many aspects, the
proliferation of plastic products in the last several decades have resulted in a negative
environmental footprint due to poor recycling rates after their ﬁrst use. Despite this obvious
problem, plastic production volume is expected to continuously increase during the next a
few decades [6]. Currently, about 70% of global plastics are found as waste. Only around
41% of post-consumer plastic waste is recovered by recycling and incineration with energy
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98. https://doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering9030098 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/bioengineering
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 2 of 27
generation process, whereas 40% is disposed of in landﬁlls and 19% ends up in the oceans
or on coastlines [7].
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 2 of 29 
 
with energy generation process, whereas 40% is disposed of in landfills and 19% ends up 
in the oceans or on coastlines [7]. 
 
Figure 1. Global plastic production. The most plastic is destined for single use packaging. More than 
240 million tons of plastic waste are generated every year. About 40% of plastic waste has accumu-
lated in landfills and 25% has been incinerated [7,8]. 
Plastics are mainly made as synthetic polymers, and a small portion are made as nat-
urally occurring biopolymers. Owing to their low cost, the ease of manufacture and their 
versatile properties, synthetic polymers are used for many different products. The major-
ity of synthetic plastics, including polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP), polystyrene 
(PS), polycarbonate (PC), polyvinylchloride (PVC), and polyethylene terephthalate (PET), 
are derived from fossil hydrocarbons, a non-renewable resource. Due to the increasing 
demand for plastic products and the lack of efficient and economical ways of recycling 
the used plastics, there has been a growing co ncern for plastic pollution in the environ-
ment. The long-term risk of hazardous chemicals from the released plastic wastes in the 
environment poses a serious threat to ecologic al systems and health problems. In partic-
ular, the micron-sized particles degraded from waste plastics, called microplastics, have 
now become a major pollutant in the ocean that threatens hundreds of thousands of ma-
rine lives due to ingestion, entanglement, and smothering [9–13]. 
Among all plastics, PET is the most abun dant polyester manufactured in the world 
and has been widely used for beverage bottles, packaging, clothing, and carpeting. At the 
same time, large quantities of PET have also  been released into the environment during 
the process of its production, application, and disposal [14]. It is estimated that it takes 
hundreds of years to completely degrade PET plastics by microorganisms in the environ-
ment. Now, the accumulation of PET wastes is  continuously increasi ng and starting to 
threaten ecosystems across the globe. 
Increasing environmental awareness has insp ired the search for novel technologies 
and other more environmentally friendly solutions, which not only deal with the increas-
ing amount of plastic waste but also reduce  the dependency on petroleum resources as 
the building blocks for manufacturing PET and other types of plastics. Mechanical recy-
cling of PET into new packaging and clothing  fibers is a low-cost and well-established 
approach, but it often downgrades the materi al properties [6]. Bioconversion of PET 
wastes into value-added chemical products may provide great benefits for both control-
ling the plastic pollution and creating new biomanufacturing resources [14,15]. 
This review aims to summarize the current major advances in recycling technologies 
for plastic wastes, particularly for biorecycling of PET. We hope it can help provide gen-
eral guidance and directions for developing a more sustainable and economical solution 
towards a circular economy of PET in the future.  
First, conventional approaches for recycling of PET and other plastics are discussed, 
which include landfilling, incineration for energy recovery, downgauging and reuse of 
packaging plastic materials, mechanical recycling, and chemical recycling. After that, the 
1% 
Figure 1. Global plastic production. The most plastic is destined for single use packaging. More
than 240 million tons of plastic waste are generated every year. About 40% of plastic waste has
accumulated in landﬁlls and 25% has been incinerated [7,8].
Plastics are mainly made as synthetic polymers, and a small portion are made as
naturally occurring biopolymers. Owing to their low cost, the ease of manufacture and
their versatile properties, synthetic polymers are used for many different products. The
majority of synthetic plastics, including polyethylene (PE), polypropylene (PP), polystyrene
(PS), polycarbonate (PC), polyvinylchloride (PVC), and polyethylene terephthalate (PET),
are derived from fossil hydrocarbons, a non-renewable resource. Due to the increasing
demand for plastic products and the lack of efﬁcient and economical ways of recycling the
used plastics, there has been a growing concern for plastic pollution in the environment. The
long-term risk of hazardous chemicals from the released plastic wastes in the environment
poses a serious threat to ecological systems and health problems. In particular, the micron-
sized particles degraded from waste plastics, called microplastics, have now become a
major pollutant in the ocean that threatens hundreds of thousands of marine lives due to
ingestion, entanglement, and smothering [9–13].
Among all plastics, PET is the most abundant polyester manufactured in the world
and has been widely used for beverage bottles, packaging, clothing, and carpeting. At
the same time, large quantities of PET have also been released into the environment
during the process of its production, application, and disposal [ 14]. It is estimated that
it takes hundreds of years to completely degrade PET plastics by microorganisms in the
environment. Now, the accumulation of PET wastes is continuously increasing and starting
to threaten ecosystems across the globe.
Increasing environmental awareness has inspired the search for novel technologies
and other more environmentally friendly solutions, which not only deal with the increasing
amount of plastic waste but also reduce the dependency on petroleum resources as the
building blocks for manufacturing PET and other types of plastics. Mechanical recycling of
PET into new packaging and clothing ﬁbers is a low-cost and well-established approach,
but it often downgrades the material properties [ 6]. Bioconversion of PET wastes into
value-added chemical products may provide great beneﬁts for both controlling the plastic
pollution and creating new biomanufacturing resources [14,15].
This review aims to summarize the current major advances in recycling technologies
for plastic wastes, particularly for biorecycling of PET. We hope it can help provide general
guidance and directions for developing a more sustainable and economical solution towards
a circular economy of PET in the future.
First, conventional approaches for recycling of PET and other plastics are discussed,
which include landﬁlling, incineration for energy recovery, downgauging and reuse of
packaging plastic materials, mechanical recycling, and chemical recycling. After that,
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 3 of 27
the recent progresses in the biodegradation of PET waste are compared and analyzed,
which covers the methods of both microbial degradation and enzymatic degradation. The
advantages, new opportunities, and challenges for using biological recycling approaches
towards a circular economy of new plastic industry are also discussed.
2. PET Properties and Applications
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is a condensation polymer synthesized by the poly-
merization of terephthalic acid (TPA) and ethylene glycol (EG), or by transesteriﬁcation
of dimethyl terephthalate (DMT) and EG [14–16]. Since it was ﬁrst developed by DuPont
in the middle of the 1940s, PET has become one of the most commonly manufactured
thermoplastics. Depending on the intended application and desired properties, virgin PET
is produced at different speciﬁcations by controlling the polymerization conditions [17,18].
PET is primarily used as textile ﬁbers and then applied to the fabrication of polymer ﬁlms.
Later, PET has been extensively used in injection blow molding applications to produce
durable crystal-clear bottles and jars [ 19,20]. Patented by engineer Nathaniel Wyeth in
1973, PET plastic bottles quickly gained market acceptance and have grown worldwide in
popularity and versatility to become a leading choice as beverage containers.
The demand for PET packaging, most commonly food and beverage packaging materi-
als, is expected to grow in the coming years as it is increasingly being used as a replacement
for glass and metal containers. Compared with other plastic materials used for packaging,
PET plastics are more durable, transparent, light-weighted, non-reactive, shatterproof,
thermally stable, cost-effective, and with higher pressure resistance, mechanic strength,
and better barrier properties (i.e., impermeability for liquids and gases) [ 21]. As PET is
extremely resistant to hydrolytic and enzymatic degradation, it makes PET very hard to be
decomposed and therefore the majority of PET polymers manufactured today will persist
for a considerable time, at least decades and probably for centuries. As a consequence,
substantial quantities of end-of-life PET plastics are accumulating in landﬁlls, global oceans,
and natural ecosystems, affecting mainland and aquatic life negatively [22–25].
3. Conventional Approaches for Recycling of PET and Other Plastics
PET is the most abundantly used polymer in the world. About 56 million tons of PET
are produced worldwide annually, most of which are for single-use packaging material,
such as disposable consumer items and packaging. After a short ﬁrst use, a staggering 95%
of plastic packaging material value is lost to the economy, with the depreciation reaching
up to $80–120 billion annually [26]. As of 2016, the major share of PET resin market by end
segments was dominated by PET bottles, accounting for 71% of global PET resin demand.
Among bottle grade PET resin, bottled water has the highest demand by end-use segment,
then carbonated soft drinks, followed by other drinks, of which concern a share of 26.3%,
26.1%, and 18.6%, respectively (Global PET Resin Market, 2016).
In view of increasing concerns over environmental protection, resource conservation,
and the development of recovery technology, recycling has become a basic premise in
the supply chain of PET bottles [ 27]. Collection programs for plastic waste have been
implemented across many countries since the 1970s. However, only about 25% of the PET
bottles are recycled in the United States. PET plastic materials can be recycled in various
ways and the ease of recycling varies among package design and product type. Therefore,
the increasing trend of PET waste management strategies, including recycling and recovery,
is one of the solutions to reduce energy and resource depletion, avoid harmful emissions
and minimize quantities of mismanaged plastic waste reaching the environment [28].
To establish an integrated plastic waste management system, the main strategies are
focused on the four R’s hierarchy, speciﬁed as reduce, reuse, recycle, recover, which lead to
improvements in the life cycle of plastics [29,30]. Recycling is the process of using recovered
material to manufacture a new product or to recover energy once a material enters the
waste stream [6].
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 4 of 27
3.1. Landﬁlling
Landﬁlling is considered the least desirable approach for plastic waste disposal, but
space and sites for landﬁlls are becoming scarce. Moreover, beyond the concerns related to
collection, transportation, and long-term risks of contamination of soils and groundwater
by toxic additives, give rise to the persistent organic pollutants [31]. Indeed, from the aspect
of sustainability, a major drawback for landﬁlls is that most of the material resources used
to produce the plastic are hard to recover, suggesting that the material ﬂow is linear rather
than cyclic [6]. Therefore, landﬁlls should only be used as a last resort, to accommodate
wastes resulting from recycling, feedstock production, or waste-to-energy [32].
3.2. Energy Recovery and Incineration
Energy recovery stands as the most resource-efﬁcient solution available compared
to landﬁlls. Energy recovery from waste means the conversion of waste into usable heat,
electricity, or fuel through a variety of processes, including incineration/combustion,
gasiﬁcation, and pyrolysis [33]. Incineration is the most commonly widespread thermal
treatment, which is a process aimed at attaining the complete oxidation of all the suitable
elemental species encompassed in the feedstock material [34].
Incineration of municipal solid waste (MSW) is a technology to treat waste while both
exploiting the energy content of the material and reducing the amount of solid material to
be landﬁlled. However, older incinerators are facing operational problems associated with
the increase in plastic content in MSW. The reason for this is the high-yielding caloriﬁc value
of plastics (often in excess of 40 MJ/kg) due to the high content of carbon and hydrogen [35].
Incineration of plastics raises a concern about the release of hazardous substances, such as
the ﬂy and bottom ash containing toxic residues (e.g., lead and cadmium), the leakage of
toxic chemical compounds (e.g., dioxins, polychlorinated biphenyls, and furans), and the
emission of greenhouse gases (e.g., carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide) [35–38]. In
addition, incineration does not reduce the demand for new material.
Incineration can be used with recovery of some of the energy content in the plastic.
For example, burning of plastics and other MSW can produce heat and steam to turn
turbine blades and generate electricity for the local grid [ 39]. As many environmental
regulations have been implemented for pursuing a more sustainable recycling-oriented
society, incineration has been widely considered to be ecologically unacceptable in the
last decade [40].
3.3. Downgauging and Reuse of Packaging Plastic Materials
Downgauging and reuse of plastic packaging are an economic imperative and the
means to achieve sustainability. Downgauging allows packagers to offer the same products
with higher product-to-package ratios by using thinner packaging materials, and thereby
reduces the amount of material needed. Reﬁlling and reusing plastic containers directly
reduces the demand for disposable plastic. Studies have found that if glass and PET bottles
were reﬁlled and reused up to 25–35 times, overall beer and soft drink container waste
would be reduced by 73.6% [ 41]. As compared to single-use throwaway plastic bottles,
signiﬁcant reduction in waste and energy consumption can be achieved with 7–8 reuses of
a single bottle.
PET is an inert plastic and has been safely used for many years. The toxicity study
investigation on the use of PET for reﬁllable bottles has exhibited that none of the toxic
substances leached into its contents, either when a beverage is stored unopened, or when
bottles are reﬁlled or frozen. It indicates that a PET bottle itself poses no danger when
reﬁlled and could be considered as a practical candidate for reﬁllable containers [ 42,43].
Moreover, PET has undergone rigorous testing under United States Food and Drug Admin-
istration (FDA) guidelines to ensure its safety as a food and beverage container suitable
for storage and reuse. Reﬁllable PET bottles lower the carbon footprint and save up to
40% of raw materials and 50% of greenhouse gas emissions [44]. The most robust reﬁllable
systems can be found in Latin American, where the reﬁllable PET carbonated soft drink
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 5 of 27
bottles have been used for many years with no safety issues. However, opened bottles can
harbor bacteria, as will glasses or any other beverage containers. All drinking containers,
including PET bottles, should be cleaned and washed thoroughly prior to reuse.
3.4. Four Categories of Plastic Recycling
As applied to plastic packaging, terminology for plastic recycling according to Ameri-
can Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) D5033 deﬁnitions includes four categories:
primary (mechanical reprocessing of scrap materials into products with equivalent proper-
ties), secondary (mechanical reprocessing of used materials into products requiring lower
properties), tertiary (recovery of valuable chemical constituents, such as monomers or
additives) and quaternary (recovery of energy) as presented in Figure 2 [ 6,45,46]. The
transformation of the waste to more valuable materials or products via reutilization or
recycling is called valorization. The primary recycling mainly covers the reuse of the waste
plastics, while the tertiary and quaternary categories fall into the valorizing.
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 5 of 29 
 
refilled and could be considered as a practical candidate for refillable containers [42,43]. 
Moreover, PET has undergone rigorous testing under United States Food and Drug Ad-
ministration (FDA) guidelines to ensure its safety as a food and beverage container suita-
ble for storage and reuse. Refillable PET bottles lower the carbon footprint and save up to 
40% of raw materials and 50% of greenhouse gas emissions [44]. The most robust refillable 
systems can be found in Latin American, wher e the refillable PET carbonated soft drink 
bottles have been used for many years with no safety issues. However, opened bottles can 
harbor bacteria, as will glasses or any other beverage containers. All drinking containers, 
including PET bottles, should be cleaned and washed thoroughly prior to reuse. 
3.4. Four Categories of Plastic Recycling  
As applied to plastic packaging, terminology for plastic recycling according to Amer-
ican Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) D5033 definitions includes four categories: 
primary (mechanical reprocessing of scrap materials into products with equivalent prop-
erties), secondary (mechanical reprocessing of used materials into products requiring 
lower properties), tertiary (recovery of valuable chemical constituents, such as monomers 
or additives) and quaternary (recovery of ener gy) as presented in Figure 2 [6,45,46]. The 
transformation of the waste to more valuable materials or products via reutilization or 
recycling is called valorization. The primary recycling mainly covers the reuse of the waste 
plastics, while the tertiary and quaternary categories fall into the valorizing.  
 
Figure 2. Plastic waste recycling and recovery routes [6,45,46]. 
  
Figure 2. Plastic waste recycling and recovery routes [6,45,46].
3.4.1. Primary Recycling
The primary recycling of plastics has been described as the process of reconversion of
clean, uncontaminated, and single-type plastic waste into its original pellet or resin form,
and reuse of materials for the very same applications [47]. The recovered plastics used in
products have equivalent performance characteristics to those made using virgin plastics,
which conserves the great amount of energy and cost. Ideally, primary recycling is often
referred to as closed-loop recycling. However, closed-loop recycling is most practical only
when the polymer constituent can be effectively separated from contamination sources and
stabilized against degradation during reprocessing and subsequent use [6]. Owing to the
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 6 of 27
purity and stability requirements, there is an obvious limitation on the number of cycles
and narrow range of applications for each plastic waste [48]. Recovery of PET from scrap
bottles used in the production of new bottles is an example of this recycling category.
3.4.2. Secondary Recycling (Mechanical Recycling)
Secondary recycling works as downgrading converts scrap plastic or waste into
products that have less demanding performance requirements than the original application
via physical means. In general, the polymeric waste is reprocessed into granules by
conventional extrusion after being separated from its associated contaminants. The main
drawback of this mechanical recycling process is deterioration of the properties of the
product, mainly due to the decrease in molecular weight after each cycle as a result of
chain-scissions [49]. This approach often requires reformulation to meet speciﬁcation of
the new product. Practically, PET and polyethylenes, such as high-density polyethylene
(HDPE), low-density polyethylene (LDPE), and linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE),
are able to be recycled by a mechanical process, while ﬂuoropolymers are unable to be
processed mechanically.
3.4.3. Tertiary Recycling (Chemical or Feedstock Recycling)
Tertiary recycling is the process of decomposing waste plastic into their building blocks
(i.e., monomers, oligomers, mixtures of the hydrocarbon compounds or other valuable low
molecular weight fragments). The decomposed products can subsequently be used as feed-
stock for the production of the plastic materials or as fuels for the production of automotive,
gasoline, jet fuel, and diesel products. Chemical recycling of PET has been more successful
as depolymerization under milder conditions is possible. PET plastic can be broken down
into dimethyl terephthalate and diols by glycolysis to make unsaturated polyester resins or
to remanufacture virgin PET [50]. In spite of all its advantages, chemical recycling is not a
promising process for economic sustainability mainly due to the energy costs [51].
3.4.4. Quaternary Recycling (Energy Recovery)
High caloriﬁc value is one of the physical property of plastics that is quite valuable.
Energy recovered from plastic waste can make a primary contribution to energy supply.
Quaternary recycling refers to the energy recovery from plastic waste by incineration [8,52].
This is currently the most effective approach to reduce the volume of organic materials
but retaining little value. Nonetheless, quaternary recycling is viewed as ecologically
unacceptable by reason of considerable toxic substances in smoke and ashes.
Most of the recycling techniques described above for PET wastes have not been applied
at a large scale. Development of new recycling technologies is an urgent need in the present
situation, which diminishes the consumption of energy, increases the amount or value of
products, and reduces or completely eliminates toxic wastes in a sustainable, economically
feasible and socially responsible manner. All physical, chemical, and biological approaches
that can be used for PET recycling are summarized in Figure 3. Biological recycling
is considered as one of the promising solutions, and has gained popularity in recent
years, especially by using microbial or enzymatic degradation to produce downcycle
feedstocks [53]. Furthermore, enzymatic technology could be applicable at a large scale for
dealing with production, recycling, and detoxifying of plastic waste.
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 7 of 27
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 7 of 29 
 
cycling is considered as one of the promising solutions, and has gained popularity in re-
cent years, especially by using microbial or enzymatic degradation to produce downcycle 
feedstocks [53]. Furthermore, enzymatic techno logy could be applicable at a large scale 
for dealing with production, recycling, and detoxifying of plastic waste. 
 
Figure 3. Physical, chemical, and biological approaches for PET recycling [2,54,55]. 
4. PET Recycling via Microbial Degradation 
Biodegradation is defined as the decomposition or degradation of organic substances 
by the actions of biological entities, such as microorganisms (i.e., bacteria, fungi, and ma-
rine microalgae) or enzymes [56–58], which is considered to occur after or concomitant 
with abiotic degradation. Although synthetic polymers were once considered resistant to 
microbial degradation, more recent studies have demonstrated that certain microbes have 
evolved to produce a variety of hydrolytic enzymes that allow them to degrade and pro-
cess polymers.  
Biodegradation of polymer involving microorganisms can be performed by a micro-
bial community or a single strain through several steps (Figure 4) [59,60]. First, the macro-
structure of the plastic matrix is fragmented into small pieces due to abiotic and biotic 
factors (i.e., solar light, irradiation, oxygen, pH, moisture, temperature, pressure, and 
abrasion). Microorganisms capable of using plastics as a carbon source and energy attach 
to the polymers, followed by the surface colonization and biofilm formation [61,62]. Bio-
deterioration by biofilm communities growing on the surface and inside the plastics en-
larges the pore size and facilitates the cracks. Biofragmentation relates to the action of 
extracellular polymer-degrading enzymes (i.e ., oxygenases, ureases, esterases, lipases, 
proteases, depolymerases, cutinases, etc.) secreted from the microbial colonies. These en-
zymes enable lowering the molecular weight and shorting the carbon-chain backbone of 
polymers by total or partial depolymerization of polymers into oligomers, dimers and 
then monomers that can be assimilated by the cells. Bioassimilation refers to the integra-
tion of atoms inside the cells. Microorganisms can easily metabolize most small molecules 
Figure 3. Physical, chemical, and biological approaches for PET recycling [2,54,55].
4. PET Recycling via Microbial Degradation
Biodegradation is deﬁned as the decomposition or degradation of organic substances
by the actions of biological entities, such as microorganisms (i.e., bacteria, fungi, and
marine microalgae) or enzymes [56–58], which is considered to occur after or concomitant
with abiotic degradation. Although synthetic polymers were once considered resistant
to microbial degradation, more recent studies have demonstrated that certain microbes
have evolved to produce a variety of hydrolytic enzymes that allow them to degrade and
process polymers.
Biodegradation of polymer involving microorganisms can be performed by a mi-
crobial community or a single strain through several steps (Figure 4) [ 59,60]. First, the
macrostructure of the plastic matrix is fragmented into small pieces due to abiotic and
biotic factors (i.e., solar light, irradiation, oxygen, pH, moisture, temperature, pressure,
and abrasion). Microorganisms capable of using plastics as a carbon source and energy
attach to the polymers, followed by the surface colonization and bioﬁlm formation [61,62].
Biodeterioration by bioﬁlm communities growing on the surface and inside the plastics
enlarges the pore size and facilitates the cracks. Biofragmentation relates to the action
of extracellular polymer-degrading enzymes (i.e., oxygenases, ureases, esterases, lipases,
proteases, depolymerases, cutinases, etc.) secreted from the microbial colonies. These
enzymes enable lowering the molecular weight and shorting the carbon-chain backbone of
polymers by total or partial depolymerization of polymers into oligomers, dimers and then
monomers that can be assimilated by the cells. Bioassimilation refers to the integration
of atoms inside the cells. Microorganisms can easily metabolize most small molecules
(oligomers less than 600 Daltons) and convert the polymer carbon/nitrogen into building
blocks of cells, which is contributing to the increasing of biomass. The ultimate step of the
polymer biodegradation is the mineralization, which is the excretion of completed oxidized
metabolites, such as CO2, CH4, N2, and H2O.
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 8 of 27
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 8 of 29 
 
(oligomers less than 600 Daltons) and convert the polymer carbon/nitrogen into building 
blocks of cells, which is contributing to the increasing of biomass. The ultimate step of the 
polymer biodegradation is the mineralization, which is the excretion of completed oxi-
dized metabolites, such as CO2, CH4, N2, and H2O.  
 
Figure 4. Mechanism of microbial degradation of plastics. 
CO2, H2O, 
Other Metabolic Byproducts
Aerobic Degradation
CH4, CO2, H2O,
Residues
Anaerobic Degradation
Microorganism
① Environmental Exposures
Abiotic Effect Biotic Effect
 Plastic Characteristics
• Molecular Weight
• Shape and Size
• Strength
• Crystallinity
• Additive
(Bio-)deterioration
Polymers Oligomers, Dimers, 
Monomers
Depolymerization
② Biofragmentation
③ Bioassimilation
④ Mineralization
H
H
H
HC
O
H H
COO NN
Figure 4. Mechanism of microbial degradation of plastics.
PET is usually regarded as non-biodegradable, but previous studies have indicated
that it or its copolymers can be depolymerized by the action of hydrolytic enzymes, either
in vitro [63,64] or in microbial systems [65,66]. The enzymatic hydrolysis of PET involves
the release of constituent monomers terephthalic acid (TPA) and ethylene glycol (EG),
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 9 of 27
which are environmentally benign monomers (Figure 5). PET can be hydrolyzed via physic-
ochemical processes, such as glycolysis, amine decomposition, pyrolysis, and supercritical
decomposition, and a biochemical process that utilizes the PET hydrolases [ 67]. Subse-
quently, the resulting PET monomers can be degraded by microorganisms endowed with
the appropriate metabolic pathways as energy sources. This momentous concept to de-
velop PET-based bioprocesses as the different pathways will generate a divergent range of
metabolites, with assorted applications. For instance, TPA is converted into protocatechuic
acid (PCA) that can further undergo dioxygenolytic cleavage and degradation via several
different pathways prior to reach the central metabolism [68–70]. PCA has been used to
synthesize adipic acid, an industrially important dicarboxylic acid that is a precursor to
nylon 6,6, among other polymers [71,72]. Similarly, EG is assimilated via different routes
based on the microorganism. For instance, in acetogen Acetobacterium woodii, EG is oxidized
to ethanol and acetaldehyde that is eventually converted to acetate via acetyl-CoA. In other
bacterial species, EG is degraded via the formation of glyoxylate [73]. It has been proposed
that some strains of Pseudomonas putida make use of the shunt that funnels glyoxylate to the
tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle via isocitrate or malate [74,75]. Moreover, researchers have
recently discovered that a variety of microalga promote biodegradation of polymers and
the energy required for degradation is reduced through the toxin system or synthesized
enzymes, which are involved in a reduction of activation energy to weaken the chemical
bonds in polyethylene polymers and even consume polymers as carbon source [57,58,76].
Hence, the PET degrading microorganisms and the enzymes involved are applicable for
biorecycling of waste PET.
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 10 of 29 
 
                                   
 
Figure 5. Microbial degradation of PET. PETase, PE T hydrolase; MHETase, MHET hydrolase; 
BHET, bis(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalic acid; MHET, mono(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalic acid; TPA, 
terephthalic acid; EG, ethylene glycol; PCA, protocatechuic acid. 
5. PET Recycling via Enzymatic Degradation 
Compared with conventional mechanical and chemical recycling processes, biologi-
cal recycling involving the enzymatic catalysis of plastic has provided many advantages 
nowadays. For example, the advantages of enzymatic methods, including the mild pro-
cess conditions, relatively low energy input, and no need of hazardous chemicals and ex-
pensive machinery, make the enzymatic degradation a very promising option for PET 
recycling in future [14,16].  
The high recalcitrant nature of plastics, including PET, is a major bottleneck for bio-
logical recycling. Enzymatic recycling of recalcitrant plastic PET has been investigated for 
more than two decades, and this research is now attracting more and more attention. PET 
monomers are linked by ester linkages, which can be hydrolyzed by various hydrolytic 
enzymes found in nature. Theoretically, PET is more susceptible to nature degradation 
than olefinic polymers, such as PE, PS, PP, and PVC [14,77,78]. The highly stable carbon–
carbon bonds of the polymer backbones make these polyolefins have extremely low bio-
degradability, as there are no known enzymes that can directly cleave the carbon–carbon 
linkages. Other factors, including crystallinity of the polymer chain and hydrophobicity 
of the surface, also adversely affect the enzyme degradation [79]. As a semicrystalline pol-
ymer, the micro-structural arrangement of the PET consists of both amorphous and crys-
talline domains with a strong effect on its bi odegradability. In comparison to the crystal-
line regions, the flexible amorphous domains of the polymer are generally more accessible 
to an enzymatic attack and initiate depolymerization [80]. It suggests that the biodegra-
dation rate of plastics decreases with increa sing crystallinity [81,82]. Moreover, with a 
Figure 5. Microbial degradation of PET. PETase, PET hydrolase; MHETase, MHET hydrolase; BHET,
bis(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalic acid; MHET, mono(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalic acid; TPA, tereph-
thalic acid; EG, ethylene glycol; PCA, protocatechuic acid.
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 10 of 27
5. PET Recycling via Enzymatic Degradation
Compared with conventional mechanical and chemical recycling processes, biological
recycling involving the enzymatic catalysis of plastic has provided many advantages
nowadays. For example, the advantages of enzymatic methods, including the mild process
conditions, relatively low energy input, and no need of hazardous chemicals and expensive
machinery, make the enzymatic degradation a very promising option for PET recycling
in future [14,16].
The high recalcitrant nature of plastics, including PET, is a major bottleneck for bio-
logical recycling. Enzymatic recycling of recalcitrant plastic PET has been investigated for
more than two decades, and this research is now attracting more and more attention. PET
monomers are linked by ester linkages, which can be hydrolyzed by various hydrolytic
enzymes found in nature. Theoretically, PET is more susceptible to nature degradation than
oleﬁnic polymers, such as PE, PS, PP , and PVC [14,77,78]. The highly stable carbon–carbon
bonds of the polymer backbones make these polyoleﬁns have extremely low biodegrad-
ability, as there are no known enzymes that can directly cleave the carbon–carbon linkages.
Other factors, including crystallinity of the polymer chain and hydrophobicity of the sur-
face, also adversely affect the enzyme degradation [ 79]. As a semicrystalline polymer,
the micro-structural arrangement of the PET consists of both amorphous and crystalline
domains with a strong effect on its biodegradability. In comparison to the crystalline
regions, the ﬂexible amorphous domains of the polymer are generally more accessible to
an enzymatic attack and initiate depolymerization [80]. It suggests that the biodegradation
rate of plastics decreases with increasing crystallinity [81,82]. Moreover, with a high ratio of
repeating aromatic terephthalate units corresponding to the limited mobility of the polymer
chains, PET has extremely low biodegradability of the backbone ester linkages [ 83,84].
Therefore, early efforts have focused on the screening and identiﬁcation of the hydrolases
capable of cleaving the PET backbone ester linkages in the amorphous domain [85,86].
To date, numerous PET-hydrolyzing enzymes have been biochemically characterized,
but their capacity to degrade PET and use it as a carbon source for the microbial organism
has not been presented [87,88]. Enzymes displaying PET hydrolyzing activities are typically
serine hydrolases and are characterized by a catalytic triad in their active site that consists
of serine, histidine, and aspartate amino acids, which mainly belong to the α/βhydrolase
superfamily and have evolved in a different context and for a different function [89,90]. The
majority of this type of enzymes are included in the general class of carboxylic ester hydro-
lases (Enzyme Commission (EC) number 3.1.1), such as cutinases [91–94], lipases [95,96],
and esterases [ 97,98], among others. These polyester hydrolases have originated from
bacteria (e.g., Thermobiﬁda fusca, Thermomonospora curvata and Ideonella sakaiensis) and fungi
(e.g., Fusarium solani, Humicola insolens and Aspergillus oryzae). Most of the PET-hydrolyzing
enzymes have been functionally conﬁrmed to contain a C-terminal disulﬁde bond that
contributes to their thermodynamic and kinetic stability [99–101]. From a biotechnological
perspective, the discovery of PET-hydrolyzing enzymes appears to be an emerging strategy,
particular with respect to the biorecycling, biocatalysis, bioremediation, and sustainable
polymer modiﬁcations.
5.1. PET-Hydrolyzing Enzymes from Actinobacteria
Since the discovery of a PET hydrolase, poly(butylene terephthalate-co-adipate) (BTA-
1) hydrolase, from the culture supernatant of Thermobiﬁda fusca in 2005 [86], various ther-
mostable PET hydrolases and their homologs from the cutinase group (EC 3.1.1.74, a
subgroup of carboxyl ester hydrolases) toward waste PET have been investigated. A
variety of cutinases have been characterized from bacterial strains of thermophilic acti-
nomycetes, especially T. fusca, T. alba [102], T. cellulosilytica [103], T. curvata [89], and
Saccharomonospora viridis AHK190 (Cut190) [ 104]. Cutinases (EC 3.1.1.74) are inducible
extracellular enzymes secreted by microorganisms that are capable of degrading plant cell
walls [105]. Strictly speaking, cutinases are able to hydrolyze cutin, an insoluble aliphatic
polyester excreted from the plant cuticle. Besides cutin, cutinases have been shown to hy-
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 11 of 27
drolyze various polyesters at temperature between 40–70 ◦C and pH 7–9, without the need
for cofactors [106,107]. Notably, the substrate speciﬁcity of cutinases is broad, which exhibit
hydrolytic activities for both water-insoluble long-chain triacylglycerides (typical substrates
for lipases, EC 3.1.1.3) and water-soluble esters (substrates for esterases). Despite the fact
that several types of lipases are also able to catalyze the PET hydrolysis, their catalytic efﬁ-
ciency is low [96,108,109]. In comparison with lipases, esterases usually act on esters with
short-chain aliphatic region. However, only a few esterases, such as p-nitrobenzylesterases
from Bacillus subtilis (BsEstB), display the hydrolytic activity on PET [110].
Thermobiﬁda fusca is one of the multiple Actinobacterial strains that has been recognized
as a producer of PET hydrolysis enzymes, exhibiting a remarkable degradation capability
for aliphatic-aromatic copolyesters [ 99,111]. The possibility of enzymatic hydrolysis of
commercial PET ﬁlms was reported from T. fusca by a German research group [86]. T. fusca
DSM 43793 has been found to produce two nearly identical extracellular hydrolases, BTA1
(commonly referred to as TfH) and BTA2, with an amino acid identity of 92% [ 112,113].
BTA1 has been shown to depolymerize the melt-pressed PET ﬁlms from a commercial
beverage bottle over three weeks at 55 ◦C in phosphate buffer at pH 7, with a weight loss
of approximately 50% (corresponding to a weight loss of 10 mg) [ 86]. The degradation
of the inner block of PET ﬁlm was signiﬁcantly higher than that of surface hydrolysable
residues. These ﬁndings offered a marked improvement not only in reducing the unwanted
side products but also in generating high purity of monomer for repolymerization [114].
Alignment of BTA1 and BTA2 sequences has revealed several highly conserved regions, one
of which contains a Gly-His/Tyr-Ser-Met-Gly motif typical of serine hydrolase, suggesting
that BTA1 and BTA2 may utilize a serine residue as a nucleophile, and an oxyanion hole
formed in part by Gly and Ser residues. Moreover, BTA1 also shares a 65% similarity to
a triacylglycerol lipase from Streptomyces albus G and 62% similarly to a triacylglycerol
acylhydrolase from Streptomyces sp. M11 [112,115,116]. Despite the sequence homology, the
function of BTA1 and lipases are signiﬁcantly different. Lipases can only break ester bonds
at the hydrophobic surface, however, BTA1 also exhibits an activity against dissolved esters.
The complete genomic DNA sequence of T. fusca YX has been determined and a num-
ber of putative esterases have been identiﬁed [ 117]. Two secreted triacylglycerol lipases
(i.e., Tfu_0882 and Tfu_0883) display very similar enzymatic properties capable of catalyz-
ing the breakdown of triolein and the artiﬁcial chromogenic substrate p-nitrophenyl bu-
tyrate (pNPB) with a temperature optimum around 60◦C [99,118]. A moderate thermophile,
T. fusca KW3 (DSM 6013), has previously been shown to produce the highly hydrophobic
carboxylesterases (Tf Cut1 and Tf Cut2) that are able to hydrolyze the pNPB, PET ﬁbers and
synthetic cyclic polyesters with an optimal activity at 60 ◦C and a pH of 6 [103,119,120].
However, Tf Cut2 exhibited almost double catalytic efﬁciency towards PET as compared
to Tf Cut1 despite their high sequence identity of about 93% [99]. Another cutinase from
T. cellulolysitica DSM44535 (Thc_Cut1 and Thc_Cut2) was cloned and characterized [ 95].
Thc_Cut1 and Thc_Cut2 showed distinct hydrolytic properties. Upon incubation with the
3PET, Thc_Cut1 released signiﬁcantly higher amounts of soluble products TPA, MHET,
hydroxyethyl benzoate, and benzoic acid than Thc_Cut2 and Thf42_Cut1 (from T. fusca
DSM44342). When incubated with PET ﬁlm, TPA was the major hydrolysis product for
Thc_Cut1, whereas MHET was the most abundant product for Thc_Cut2. Furthermore,
two cutin-induced pNPB hydrolases, Cut1 and Cut2, were originally isolated from T. fusca
NRRL B-8184 with an optimum activity at 55 ◦C and pH 8.0 [118,121]. Overall, an advan-
tage of Thermobiﬁda cutinases over other cutinases is that they show higher thermostability,
great tolerance of surfactant and organic solvent, versatile hydrolytic activity against a
variety of synthetic polyesters, and high activity in broad pH range, which could have
great biotechnological promise in many industrial applications.
Two genes coding for the polyester hydrolases Tcur1278 and Tcur0390 by genome
mining of Thermomonospora curvata DSM43183 were identiﬁed, which was shown to exhibit
catalytic and structural features similar to enzymes fromT. fuscaand T. cellulosilytica[89,122].
Tcur1278 and Tcur0390 shared 62% sequence identity with BTA1. The optimal pH for both
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 12 of 27
enzymes was at pH8.5. Compared to Tcur1278, Tcur0390 revealed a higher hydrolytic
activity against both soluble pNPB and insoluble PET nanoparticles as substrates at reaction
temperatures of up to 50◦C, due to the stronger substrate afﬁnity. Tcur1278 hydrolyzed PET
nanoparticles at 55 ◦C and 60 ◦C. However, both enzymes exhibited poor thermostability
at their optimal reaction temperature, with an irreversible loss of more than 65% of their
initial activities following incubation for 10 min.
Kawai et al. cloned a novel PET-hydrolyzing enzyme, Cut190, from thermophile Sac-
charomonospora viridis AHK190 and heterologously expressed inEscherichia coli Rosetta-gami
B (DE3) [104]. Site-directed mutagenesis studies revealed that mutant Cut190S226P/R228S,
with substitution of Ser226 with proline and Arg228 with serine, yielded signiﬁcantly higher
activity and thermostability compared with Cut190. The Cut190S226P/R228S displayed the
thermal activation at 50~65 ◦C and degraded the PET ﬁlms above 60 ◦C. Notably, the cal-
cium ions are required to enhance the enzyme activity and thermostability of the wild-type
and mutant Cut190, which likely bind to surface acidic amino acids and not the active-site
amino acids. Likewise, Streptomyces griseus leucine aminopeptidase is a calcium-activated
and calcium-stabilized enzyme, and its activation by calcium correlates with substrate
speciﬁcity, in which two surface amino acids play critical roles in modulating the enzyme
via calcium [123].
Almeida et al. employed an in silico-based screening approach on the biotechno-
logically relevant genus Streptomyces to search the PETase homologs [124]. From total of
52 genomes analyzed, a candidate PETase-like gene, SM14est, was identiﬁed inStreptomyces
sp. SM14. Alignment of SM14est and well-characterized IsPETase sequences indicated that
the serine hydrolase motif (Gly-X1-Ser-X2-Gly) and the catalytic triad (Ser-Asp-His) were
conserved in both sequences. Further molecular docking experiments showed that the
SM14est possessed the capacity to bind plastics as substrates. Polyester-degrading activity
of SM14est was conﬁrmed using a polycaprolactone (PCL) plate clearing assay. Another
study also found that the genome of plant pathogenS. scabies, the predominant causal agent
of potato common scab, encodes a potential cutinase, Sub1, which was overexpressed in
E. coli for subsequent puriﬁcation and characterization [125]. Sub1was shown to be versatile
because it hydrolyzes a number of natural and synthetic substrates, such as p-nitrophenyl
esters, PET, cutin, and suberin. Additionally, the hydrolyzing activity of the Sub1 on the
PET was markedly enhanced by the addition of Triton X-100 and was shown to be stable at
37 ◦C for at least 20 days.
For an efﬁcient biocatalytic PET hydrolysis, a high reaction temperature, optimally
higher than the glass transition temperature (Tg) of PET, is mandatory [114,126,127]. The
Tg value of PET is approximately 70~80 ◦C in air, but 10 ◦C lowered due to the involvement
of water molecules diffusing between polymer chains; this will weaken hydrogen bonds,
randomize polymer chains, and increase chain mobility. Enzymatic reactions are performed
in aqueous solutions, in which Tg values of PET are 60~65 ◦C [ 104]. Notably, as the
temperature approaches the Tg of PET, the chain mobility increases, resulting in more rapid
enzymatic hydrolysis of this plastic [108]. Accordingly, most PET-hydrolyzing enzymes
generally exhibit high thermostability and retain their activity at over 65 ◦C that might be
most useful in industrial applications, which are applicable to the surface modiﬁcation
of PET ﬁbers in the textile industry [ 96] and the breakdown process of PET polymers
during chemical recycling [84]. Although thermophilic cutinases have been applied to the
enzymatic recycling of PET at higher temperatures for accelerating rates of PET degradation,
these cutinases could also be used for PET surface treatment at lower temperatures but
tardy responses.
5.2. Ideonella sakaiensis Enzymes
A team of Japanese researchers have proposed three systems for PET degradation:
(i) microbial consortium No. 46; (ii) Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6, and (iii) a system consisting
of two novel enzymes, which are applicable for the bioremediation and biorecycling of
PET waste together with other potential applications, such as microplastic and microbead
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 13 of 27
degradation, bioconversion, as well as PET-surface modiﬁcation [128]. In order to screen
PET-degrading microorganisms producing superior PET-speciﬁc degrading enzymes, it
seems the more practical way is to ﬁnd microorganisms that are able to grow directly on
PET as carbon sources. Although various lipases, esterases, depolymerases, and cutinases
have been previously reported as PET-hydrolyzing enzymes, these enzymes can only
accomplish limited degradation of PET [89,97,107,109,129,130].
5.2.1. Microbial Consortium No. 46
After an extensive searching of environmental samples for such PET-degrading mi-
croorganisms for over a decade, a microbial consortium No. 46 was found to both degrade
PET completely and assimilate the degradation products into CO 2 and water. Over 250
PET-debris-contaminated environmental samples, including wastewater, sediment, soil,
and activated sludge, from the site surrounding a PET bottle recycling plant were screened,
the microbial consortium No. 46 was isolated from one of the sediment samples collected
at Sakai city, Osaka, Japan [64]. Consortium No. 46, consisting of bacteria, protozoa, and
yest-like cells, was shown to adhere onto PET ﬁlm during cultivation and create a drastic
change in its morphology. PET ﬁlm degradation occurred at a rate of 0.13 mg/cm2/day,
with 75% of the carbon being catabolized into CO2 under ambient temperature conditions,
which could be visualized as whitening of the PET ﬁlm surface and/or decay of the PET
ﬁlm. Furthermore, consortium No. 46 was able to maintain its PET degradation activity for
at least 10 weeks and could be re-cultivated after freezing without losing activity, which
indicated the PET degradation activity of No. 46 could be retained and reproduced.
Among the assorted kinds of bacteria, protozoa, and yeast-like cells found in the
microbial consortium No. 46 as revealed by light microscopy, approximate 20 types of
bacteria have been investigated. The individual roles of the identiﬁed bacteria within
consortium No. 46 involved in a series of degradation process were investigated. At the
beginning of the PET degradation, Bacillus megaterium develops a bioﬁlm on the PET ﬁlm
surface. Within the bioﬁlm, Rhizopus sp. cleaves the ester linkages of the PET polymer into
bis(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (BHET), which is further degraded into the monomers
TPA and EG by Pseudomonas sp. Subsequently, the TPA and EG were assimilated by
Pigmentiphaga sp. and Mycobacterium sp., respectively [128].
5.2.2. Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6 from Microbial Consortium No. 46
A novel Gram-negative bacterial species Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6, which was later
isolated from the microbial consortium No. 46, provided the basis for the next degradation
system [131]. The growth of I. sakaiensis 201-F6 on minimal medium containing PET ﬁlm
has been shown to be much greater than on control medium without PET. This comparison
suggested that the I. sakaiensis 201-F6 has an exceptionally rare ability to degrade PET as a
major carbon source and energy source for its growth rather than glucose utilization.
Besides, in the liquid culture, detection of PET hydrolysis products was negligible,
which indicated that I. sakaiensis 201-F6 is capable of completely degrading and assimilating
the PET into CO 2 as the complete oxidation product under aerobic conditions. Strain
201-F6 could degrade PET about twice as fast as the consortium No. 46 from which it
was isolated. Furthermore, these unique bacterial cells were found to adhere on PET ﬁlm
during growth via appendages that may also assist in the delivery of secreted enzymes
into the ﬁlm [ 64,128]. Discovery of I. sakaiensis 201-F6 creates a potential low-energy
solution for bioremediation to tackle plastic waste, which further highlights the possible
value in searching for PETase-like enzymes from the Acidovorax delaﬁeldii [132], Polyangium
brachysporum [133], and Burkholderiales bacterium [ 134] as their evolutions are similar
in manner.
5.2.3. Identiﬁcation of PETase and MHETase in Ideonella sakaiensis 201-F6
The ﬁnal system is based on employing the novel PET-hydrolyzing enzymes discov-
ered in PET-assimilating bacterium, I. sakaiensis 201-F6. One identiﬁed open reading frame
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 14 of 27
(ISF6_4831), revealed by genome sequence of I. sakaiensis, has been found to encode a puta-
tive lipase that shares 51% amino acid sequence identity with a TfH from T. fusca [86,128].
The corresponding recombinant I. sakaiensis proteins created cater-like pitting on the PET
ﬁlm surface and released the PET degradation products into aqueous medium. This
I. sakaiensis cutinase-like enzyme, namely PETase or IsPETase, was subsequently assigned
to the new EC 3.1.1.101. The mono(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalic acid (MHET) is the major
product released by the IsPETase, together with minor amounts of TPA and BHET. In com-
parison with the hydrolytic activities toward p-nitrophenol-linked aliphatic esters and PET
among the known PET-hydrolyzing enzymes, such as TfH, leaf-branch compost cutinase
(LCC) [92] and F. solani fungal cutinase (FsC) [135], IsPETase has been shown to have the
highest catalytic preference for PET but the lowest hydrolytic activity for aliphatic esters.
After 18 h incubation at 30 ◦C and pH7.0, the activity of IsPETase against low-crystallinity
(1.9%) PET ﬁlm was assessed to be 120, 5.5, and 88 times as high as that of TfH, LCC, and
FsC, respectively [64]. Likewise, the IsPETase was also more active than TfH, LCC, and FsC
against highly crystallized, commercial bottle-derived PET (hcPET) in pH9.0 bicine-NaOH
buffer for 18 h at 30 ◦C, even though the hcPET greatly reduces the enzymatic hydrolysis of
its ester linkages. The IsPETase displaying the highest substrate speciﬁcity and prominent
hydrolytic activity for PET at ambient temperature makes it a promising candidate for
new biodegradation strategies. However, IsPETase accomplishes the PET degradation well
under moderate (mesophilic) temperature conditions (between 20~40 ◦C) but is heat-labile,
whereas the other PET-hydrolyzing enzymes are optimally active at higher temperatures
owing to their thermophilicity.
The primary product of IsPETase hydrolysis is MHET, which is broken down into the
monomers, TPA and EG, by a second enzyme (ISF6_0224) identiﬁed from I. sakaiensis. This
enzyme was designated as MHET hydrolase (termed MHETase) and was also assigned
a new EC number (3.1.1.102) [64]. MHETase is a member of the tannase family and has
been shown to efﬁciently hydrolyze MHET with a turnover rate ( kcat) of 31 ±0.8 S−1
and Michaelis constant ( Km) of 7.3 ±0.6 µM, but it displays little activity against PET,
BHET, aliphatic esters, or typical aromatic ester compounds. The biochemical properties of
PETase and MHETase, along with their predicted localization, revealed the PET metabolic
mechanism by I. sakaiensis (Figure 6). IsPETase and MHETase catalyze similar reactions
in different locations. IsPETase, which acts extracellularly, is responsible for hydrolytic
conversion of PET into oligomers that include MHET as the major component and TPA. The
PET hydrolysates are then transported into the periplasmic space via an outer membrane
protein (e.g., porin) and MHETase further hydrolyzes MHET into PET monomers, TPA and
EG. MHETase is predicted to be an outer membrane anchored lipoprotein [64]. Interestingly,
a gene cluster in I. sakaiensis is highly identical with two TPA degradation gene clusters
identiﬁed in Comamonas sp. strain E6 [136]. The expression of this cluster in I. sakaiensis is
signiﬁcantly upregulated under the presence of TPA. Subsequently, TPA is taken up into
the cytoplasm via TPA transporter coupled with a TPA-binding protein [ 137], and then
enters the central TCA cycle via protocatechuic acid (PCA) [138,139]. Likewise, EG is also
metabolized in the TCA cycle via glyoxylate [74,140].
Integration of protein sequence and structure information is essential in providing a
good starting point for protein engineering, which may contribute to the enzyme redesign-
ing to make them more amenable for industrial applications. The enzyme modiﬁcations
can facilitate the discovery of new paths of molecular evolution, designing of efﬁcient
enzymes, locating active sites and crucial residues, shifting the substrate speciﬁcity, and
changing cofactor speciﬁcity [141]. Crystal structures of recombinant PETase have been
determined in several groups [88,142,143]. Three-dimensional structures of IsPETase reveal
the features shared by bacterial lipases and cutinases, along with unique characteristics that
differentiate the enzyme from cutinases. IsPETase shares ~50% amino acid identity with
those of cutinases from T. fusca KW3 (Tf Cut2), S. viridis (Cut190), and T. alba (TaCut) [144].
As predicted from the sequence homology to the lipase and cutinase families, IsPETase
adopts the canonical α/β-hydrolase fold and employs the catalytic triad residues consisting
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 15 of 27
of Ser160, His237, and Asp206, suggesting a charge-relay system [ 88,128,145]. Notably,
IsPETase has a highly polarized surface charge, creating a dipole across the molecule (iso-
electric point (pI) of 9.6); whereas T. fusca cutinase, in common with other cutinases, has
a number of small patches of both acidic and basic residues distributed over the surface
(pI of 6.3) [88]. Furthermore, in light of recent studies that suggest MHETase, the second
key enzyme isolated from I. sakaiensis, possesses a α/β-hydrolase domain essential for
catalysis and a lid domain conferring substrate speciﬁcity, and is predicted to be a fairly
acidic protein (pI of 5.2) [146].
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 16 of 29 
 
 
Figure 6. PET metabolic pathway by Ideonella sakaiensis [128]. 
Integration of protein sequence and structure information is essential in providing a 
good starting point for protein engineering, which may contribute to the enzyme rede-
signing to make them more amenable for in dustrial applications. The enzyme modifica-
tions can facilitate the discovery of new paths of molecular evolution, designing of effi-
cient enzymes, locating active sites and crucial residues, shifting the substrate specificity, 
and changing cofactor specificity [141]. Crys tal structures of recombinant PETase have 
been determined in several groups [88,142,143]. Three-dimensional structures of IsPETase 
reveal the features shared by bacterial lipases and cutinases, along with unique character-
istics that differentiate the enzyme from cutinases. IsPETase shares ~50% amino acid iden-
tity with those of cutinases from T. fusca KW3 ( TfCut2), S. viridis (Cut190), and T. alba 
(TaCut) [144]. As predicted from the sequence homology to the lipase and cutinase fami-
lies, IsPETase adopts the canonical 𝛼/𝛽-hydrolase fold and employs the catalytic triad 
residues consisting of Ser160, His237, an d Asp206, suggesting a charge-relay system 
[88,128,145]. Notably, IsPETase has a highly polarized su rface charge, creating a dipole 
across the molecule (isoelectric point (pI) of 9.6); whereas T. fusca cutinase, in common 
with other cutinases, has a number of small patches of both acidic and basic residues dis-
tributed over the surface (pI of 6.3) [88]. Furthermore, in light of recent studies that suggest 
MHETase, the second key enzyme isolated from I. sakaiensis, possesses a 𝛼/𝛽-hydrolase 
domain essential for catalysis and a lid domain conferring substrate specificity, and is 
predicted to be a fairly acidic protein (pI of 5.2) [146]. 
Figure 6. PET metabolic pathway by Ideonella sakaiensis [128].
In terms of the active site, relative broadening of the active-site cleft is observed in
IsPETase (cleft width was calculated from the distance between the van der Waals surface
of Thr88 and Ser238, 8.46 Å) in comparison with the T. fusca cutinase (distance between the
Thr61 and Phe209, 2.98 Å), suggesting IsPETase provides more space to accommodate PET
as a substrate and enabling more efﬁcient PET depolymerization [ 88]. Another striking
difference between IsPETase and the closest cutinase homologs is the existence of two
disulﬁde bonds in IsPETase, one adjacent to the active-site and one near the C terminus
of the protein. Almost all of the known bacterial cutinases have one disulﬁde bond near
the C terminus; the disulﬁde bond is formed between Cys281 and Cys299 in Tf Cut2,
between Cys287 and Cys302 in Cut190, and between Cys276 and Cys294 in TaCut. This
disulﬁde bond is also conserved in IsPETase formed between Cys273 and Cys289 near
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 16 of 27
the C terminus, and an additional one is between Cys203 and Cys239 at the vicinity of
the active site [ 147]. In order to understand the effect of the additional disulﬁde bond
near the active site, Cys203 and Cys239 were substituted by alanine (IsPETaseC203A/C239A).
Taniguchi et al. (2009) demonstrated that the activity and melting temperature (Tm) were
markedly decreased in the double mutation. This ﬁnding supported the importance of the
presence of active-site disulﬁde for the thermal stability of IsPETase.
Interestingly, other signiﬁcant structural differences were also observed between
Tf Cut2 and IsPETase, namely that His169 and Phe249 residues in Tf Cut2 are located at the
corresponding positions of Trp159 and Ser238 inIsPETase. To determine the role of these
two residues, Trp159 and Ser238 residues were replaced with His and Phe, respectively. The
IsPETaseW159H and the IsPETaseS238F variants exhibited dramatically decreased hydrolytic
activities from both uses of BHET and PET as substrate [144]. Through site-directed muta-
genesis, Trp159 and Ser238 residues play a crucial role in the high PET-degrading activity of
IsPETase. Surprisingly, in contrast to the single mutant, narrowing the binding cleft via mu-
tation of these two active-site residues to conserved amino acids (IsPETaseW159H/S238F) in
cutinase-like active-site cleft accommodates more productive substrate-binding interaction
and enables improved PET and poly(ethylene furanoate) (PEF) degradation capacity [88].
Overall, these ﬁndings open up an exciting platform for protein engineering of PETase to
increase the efﬁciency and substrate range, as well as to provide clues of how to further
engineer thermophilic cutinases in practical industrial applications.
5.3. PET-Hydrolyzing Enzymes from Fungi
Although bacterial PET-hydrolyzing enzyme catalytic properties and mechanism are
similar to the fungal cutinase, sequential and structural differences place the T. fusca en-
zymes into a different subfamily of cutinase from the fungal enzymes. Cutinases from some
phytopathogenic and non-phytopathogenic fungi, such as Fusarium solani pisi [148–150],
Humicola insolens [107], Botrytis cinerea [151], Colletotrichum gloeosporioides [152], Monilinia
fructicola [153,154], Magnaporthe grisea [155], Aspergillus oryzae [156], and Thielavia ter-
restris [157,158], have been investigated by biochemical and structural approaches. The
fungal cutinases have been shown to be critical for pathogen–host compatible interac-
tion due to the disruption of some cutinase genes’ decreasing virulence or eliminating
pathogenicity on host plants [159–162]. Most fungi have multiple copies of cutinase genes
and the role of each cutinase gene in disease could be different. For instance, Sweigard et al.
have identiﬁed a cutin-degrading enzyme, encoded by the M. grisea CUT1, that was pre-
viously shown to be dispensable for pathogenicity [ 163]. However, the expression of
M. grisea CUT2 was dramatically upregulated during infection. Disruption of CUT2 dis-
played anomalous germling morphology and severely impaired host penetration, thus
drastically attenuated fungal virulence [164]. Morphological and pathogenicity defects in
the CUT2 mutant could be fully restored to wild-type levels by adding pharmacological
activators of the cAMP-protein kinase A and diacylglycerol-protein kinase C signaling
cascades [164,165].
Fusarium solani pisi cutinase (FsC) was the ﬁrst to be biochemically characterized in
detail, especially after its cloning and expression in a heterologous host, which also led to
the determination of its three-dimensional structure [166,167]. The catalytic activities of
three different cutinases from ﬁlamentous fungus H. insolens (HiC), F. solani pisi (FsC), and
bacterium Pseudomonas mendocina (PmC) have been previously studied on low-crystallinity
and biaxially oriented PET ﬁlms as model substrates, containing 7% and 35% crystallinity,
respectively [107]. Cutinases exhibited about 10-fold higher activity for the low-crystallinity
than for the biaxially oriented PET ﬁlms, which were assayed using a pH-stat to measure
sodium hydroxide consumption that directly monitors released acid during ester cleav-
age [107]. This result is consistent with previous reports by many others using different
enzyme–polymer systems, an increase in PET crystallinity negatively affects the PET degra-
dation rate due to decreased polymer chain mobility [80,168–170]. Moreover, incubation
of HiC with low-crystallinity PET ﬁlms resulted in 97% ﬁlm weight loss at 70 ◦C within
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 17 of 27
96 h [107]. In contrast, only 5% weight loss was achieved by the FsC and PmC on the low-
crystallinity PET ﬁlms at 40 ◦C and at 50 ◦C, respectively. The reason for HiC’s signiﬁcant
high activity for PET hydrolysis is largely attributed to the higher thermal stability of HiC,
which is close to the Tg value of the PET. By remaining active at the PET’sTg, HiC beneﬁts
from higher mobility of the chains in the amorphous phase, resulting in increasing the
accessibility of HiC to PET ester groups. Therefore, the potential to completely convert
commercial low crystallinity PET materials to water-soluble products was demonstrated.
Indeed, most of the PET recycling is concentrated in the bottle manufacturing industry,
which uses low crystallinity PET to achieve high bottle transparency [86,171].
Generally, the stability of free cutinase is poor, thus the soluble enzymes have to be
immobilized to be reused for long lengths of time in industrial reactors [ 172]. Several
polymers are used as carrier materials in the enzyme immobilization to achieve the highest
possible catalytic activity of a biocatalyst [173]. For instance, FsC was immobilized on a
biomimetic triazine-scaffolded synthetic afﬁnity ligand to achieve enzyme stabilization.
This ligand was able to strongly bind FsC and led to an impressive 57-fold increase in half-
life as compared with the free FsC at 60 ◦C for 34 h [174]. Similarly, the immobilization of
FsC onto magnetic chitosan beads, using genipin as the crosslinker, exhibited outstanding
recyclability as it could maintain more than 50% residual activity after 10 cycles [ 175].
Another Fusarium oxysporum cutinase loaded nanoporous gold-polyethyleneimine has
been fabricated for the application in simultaneous removal of di(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate
and Pb(II) from contaminated water, which can be used more than ﬁve times before
regeneration [176]. Furthermore, the extracellular cutinase of Aspergillus sp. RL2Ct was
stabilized in an active conformation by immobilization on acrylamide-grafted copolymer of
chitosan and chitin [172]. This immobilized cutinase exhibited enhanced thermal stability
and improved efﬁciency, which can be recycled up to 64 times without considerable loss
of activity. The improved thermal stability of the immobilized cutinase indicates that the
polymer as matrix provides conformational stability to the enzyme upon immobilization as
the free enzyme gains thermal inactivation easily, owing to breaking of intermolecular forces
responsible for the three-dimensional structure required for its catalytic activity [177,178].
Besides cutinase, lipase has also been used by several researchers for PET hydrolysis.
Effective degradation of polyester-nanoparticles using lipases from yeastCandida cylindracea
(CcL) and bacterium Pseudomonas sp. (PsL) has been previously reported [179]. By employ-
ing the BHET inducer to the culture medium, the extracellular lipase activity produced by
A. oryzae was directed toward the hydrolysis of PET [180]. Moreover, using PET and BHET
as substrates revealed Candida antarctica lipase B (CALB) and H. insolens cutinase (HiC) as
potential biocatalysts [181]. CALB showed completely converted BHET to TPA, although
lower efﬁciency toward initial PET biodegradation. In contrast, HiC demonstrated better
performance for PET hydrolysis, but accumulated considerable amounts of the MHET in-
termediate. However, the combination of CALB and HiC enzymes synergistically improve
the complete PET depolymerization to TPA, resulting in a 7.7-fold increase in TPA yield
from PET [181,182].
5.4. Metagenome-Derived PET-Hydrolyzing Enzymes
Metagenomics offer an enormous opportunity to understand and discover the func-
tions that the uncultured fraction of microbes bring to the environment [183]. Advances in
metagenomic analysis have created the possibility of obtaining complete or nearly com-
plete genome sequences from uncultured microorganisms, broadening the extent to which
genetic information can be explored [184,185]. Currently, only a small number of microbial
genera and enzymes have been described to possess the ability to degrade PET. Danso et al.
developed a search algorithm that identiﬁed over 800 putative PET hydrolase candidate
genes through screening the existing genome and metagenome databases across the marine
and terrestrial [186]. From the obtained homologous sequences, 13 potential PET hydrolase
homologs, namely PET1–PET13, were chosen due to their sequence similarities to known
PET hydrolase. Four novel PET hydrolase genes (PET2, PET5, PET6, and PET12) were
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 18 of 27
functionally veriﬁed by cloning and expressing them heterologously in E. coli, with active
clones producing halos on PET nanoparticles or PCL. Among these active enzymes, PET2
was derived from a marine metagenomics dataset [187], and PET6 was derived from Vibrio
gazogenes strain DSM-21264 [188]. Both enzymes showed traits of thermostability, with
optimal temperature at 70 ◦C for PET2 and 55 ◦C for PET6. Remarkably, PET2 retained 80%
of its relative activity at 90 ◦C after incubation for over 5 h. Furthermore, all of the newly
identiﬁed PET hydrolases originated mainly from three bacterial phyla, Proteobacteria, Acti-
nobacteria, and Bacteroidetes. It is worth noting that the Bacteroides have not been associated
with PET depolymerization to date, but the Bacteroides have been increasingly regarded as
very efﬁcient degraders of other polymers [189–191].
Sulaiman et al. identiﬁed that the gene encoding a novel cutinase homolog, leaf-branch
compost cutinase (LCC), was cloned from the leaf-branch compost metagenome library
by functional screening using tributyrin agar plates [ 92]. LCC showed the amino acid
sequence identity of 59.7% to T. curvata lipase and 57.4% to T. fusca cutinase [145]. LCC
was heterologously overexpressed in E. coli and exhibited the activity to hydrolyze various
fatty acid monoesters with acyl chain lengths 2 to 18, with a preference for short-chain
substrates (C4) most optimally at pH 8.5 and 50 ◦C [92]. LCC also had an ability to degrade
the PET and PCL ﬁlms, at a rate of 12 mg/h/mg and 300 mg/h/mg of enzyme, respectively.
Moreover, when using crystalline bottle-grade PET as a substrate and the temperature
of system was 65 ◦C, the PET degradation rate of LCC (93.2 mg/h/mg of enzyme) has
outperformed most other enzymes, such as T. fusca BTA1 and BTA2,F. solani pisi FsC, and
I. sakaiensis IsPETase, by at least 33-fold [94]. However, the decomposition rate of PET by
LCC remains insufﬁcient to catch up with the production rate of plastic waste.
Owing to the high potential of the LCC enzyme in degrading persistent semi-aromatic
polyesters such as PET, it inspired more efforts to seek some strategies to make the LCC
work more efﬁciently. Detailed structural and functional analysis of LCC facilitates un-
derstanding of the mechanism by which LCC hydrolyzes PET and thereby leads to the
development of a more efﬁcient enzyme. In order to improve both the activity and the
thermostability of LCC, Tournier et al. [94] generated all 209 possible variants through site-
speciﬁc saturation mutagenesis. Of such LCC mutant variants, two variants, namely ICCG
(F243I/D238C/S283C/Y127G) and WCCG (F243W/D238C/S283C/Y127G), demonstrated
improved deactivation temperatures and increased PET depolymerization by 82% and 85%
in 20 h and 15 h at pH 8 and 72◦C, respectively. Compared with ICCG and WCCG variants,
wild-type LCC showed the reduced thermostability and only 53% PET depolymerization at
20 h. Moreover, with an enzyme concentration of 3 milligrams per gram of PET, both ICCG
and WCCG variants achieved a minimum of 90% PET depolymerization and a mean TPA
productivity of 16.7 g/L/h over 10 h. By further optimizing the developed process, 863 kg
of TPA were recycled from 1 ton of PET waste, which were further successfully re-used
to synthesize the virgin PET after puriﬁcation. Bottles blown from this kind of PET had
similar mechanical properties to those of commercial bottles. This progress is an excellent
example addressing the issue of PET plastic disposal to achieve sustainable goals and the
idea of a circular economy.
In view of the high speciﬁcity of the enzyme, although the LCC variants have exhibited
superior biodegradability, it is not applicable to degrade other types of non-ester polymers
(e.g., PE, PP and PS) [192]. From this perspective, it is necessary to discovery other enzymes
for different types of plastics through metagenomic tools and optimize their properties
through enzyme engineering.
6. Future Opportunities and Challenges for Biorecycling of PET Plastic
Biorecycling can be achieved via both microbial degradation and enzymatic degra-
dation processes, followed by a further chemical or biological conversion of the degraded
monomers into polymers or other value-added chemicals. Biodegradation is limited by
the organisms and the enzymes used, inherent polymer properties, and the choice of pre-
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 19 of 27
treatment of plastics. The future success of this process will rely on optimization and/or
modiﬁcation of these factors.
The advances in in modern biology and biotechnology have brought great opportu-
nities for creating transformative biorecycling strategies in future. First, new synthetic
biology tools and metabolic engineering strategies provide a great potential to reengi-
neer and improve the currently identiﬁed microorganisms that can efﬁciently decompose
the solid plastic wastes and directly use the degraded products as the carbon source for
biomanufacturing. Second, site-directed mutagenesis has been routinely used to redesign
enzymes, but the achievements of this technology basically depend on the availability of
three-dimensional protein structures. Numerous PET-hydrolyzing enzymes have been
successfully enhanced with enzyme engineering technologies [ 88]. Third, new protein
engineering strategies, such as direct evolution and AI-guided protein design and mutation,
may provide more opportunities to generate novel enzymes that have extremely high activ-
ity, speciﬁcity, stability, thermal tolerance, and resistance to inhibitors or impurities [141].
Other techniques based on cross-referenced plastic substrate structures and comparison
with protein alignment data have also been used.
However, several challenges still remain to achieve the biorecycling of PET and other
types of plastic wastes at large scale. First, the impact of difﬁdent physical properties of
PET on biodegradation efﬁciency is profound and needs to be further studied to design
a more efﬁcient biodegradation process. PET plastics are inherently difﬁcult to bond and
coat because they are hydrophobic, non-polar materials, chemically inert, and have poor
surface wettability. Since biodegradation of polymers is a surface process, the adsorption of
enzymes on the surface of plastics may play an important role. To overcome the limitations
in the process, we can either engineer the enzyme to make it more suitable for a speciﬁc type
of plastic or pretreat the plastic materials to improve the properties for biodegradation. For
example, IsPETase is highly speciﬁc to PET, however, it shows poor catalytic activity and
is difﬁcult to be used in industrial processes. Besides enzyme engineering, pre-treatment
of PET plastics provides a feasibility to promote the interaction between the enzymes and
plastics. It was found that the hydrolytic activity of PETase could be improved by 120-fold
by surface coating of the low-crystallinity PET ﬁlm with anionic surfactants [ 193]. The
binding of surfactants to the PET ﬁlm makes the surface anionic, thereby recruiting more
cationic PETase.
The second major challenge is the uncertainties in process conditions and the require-
ments for the pretreatments that are caused by the variations in PET waste sources. The
PET wastes from different applications may have signiﬁcantly different impurities and
physical properties, such as shape, crystallinity, glass transition temperature, and mechanic
strength, which may lead to signiﬁcantly different biodegradation efﬁciency under the
same process and reaction conditions. Further study on different sources of PET should
be conducted.
The third major challenge is the lack of enough knowledge and experience in scaling
up current biodegradation technology. There is still no or little research on the reaction en-
gineering and reactor design studies for major factors or parameters that are critical for the
scale-up process. For example, large quantities of TPA released from the PET degradation
may be insoluble in the reaction solution, we expect that avoiding the limitations in mixing
and mass transfer in the enzymatic degradation of PET should be addressed so that we
can eventually develop a biorecycling process with efﬁcient degradation, product removal,
and product puriﬁcation at commercial scale. In addition, production of enzymes at high
productivity should also be investigated to minimize the enzyme cost.
7. Conclusions
PET is the most abundant polyester manufactured globally and it is typically recycled
at a rate of nearly 25%. Although this is the highest rate of all plastic categories, product
quality and supply chain economics are still limitations. Many end applications of PET
are not suited to closed-loop recycling, thus a signiﬁcant portion of used PET leaks into
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 20 of 27
the environment. The need for improved PET plastic circularity is obvious, and much
work has been devoted to dealing with this challenge for several decades. Currently,
mechanical and chemical recycling are the two major recycling methods for PET, but
the former may lead to lower quality as compared to the original plastic and the latter
faces new challenges in additional economic and environmental costs. Fortunately, recent
advances in modern biotechnology opens a door for potentially a more sustainable and
economical solutions. Biorecycling of PET can be achieved by biodegradation with either
engineered microorganisms or enzymes under mild reaction conditions, followed by further
recycling of the degraded monomers to PET or upcycling them to other more valuable
products. Enzymatic degradation of PET by using an engineered enzyme, such as leaf-
branch compost cutinase (LCC), may achieve 90% or higher degradation in two days
or shorter time for certain amorphas PET. The new possibilities for the bioconversion
of post-consumer PET plastics into environmentally benign monomers, as discussed in
this review, can be used as drop ins at existing industrial facilities. Though signiﬁcant
progresses have been made to overcome the technological hurdles for biodegradation,
several challenges still remain to commercialize biorecycling technology, including process
scale up and further improvements in both biocatalyst activity and process robustness. It is
our expectation that the prospects for a circular bio-based economy of PET will eventually
lead to a pathway to a sustainable plastic industry in the future.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Y.-H.V .S. and D.X.; writing—original draft preparation,
Y.-H.V .S.; writing—review and editing Y.-H.V .S. and D.X.; supervision, D.X.; project administration,
M.J.S.; funding acquisition, D.X. and M.J.S. All authors have read and agreed to the published version
of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was ﬁnancially supported by the Department of Energy/EERE (Award
number EE0008930).
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data presented in this study are available on request from the
corresponding author.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Carl Lawton and Jin Xu in Massachusetts Biomanufac-
turing Center and all other team members in this DOE-funded project for their great support.
Conﬂicts of Interest: No conﬂicts of interest are declared by the authors.
References
1. Saminathan, P .; Sripriya, A.; Nalini, K.; Sivakumar, T.; Thangapandian, V . Biodegradation of plastics by Pseudomonas putida
isolated from garden soil samples. J. Adv. Bot. Zool. 2014, 1, 34–38.
2. Ahmed, T.; Shahid, M.; Azeem, F.; Rasul, I.; Shah, A.A.; Noman, M.; Hameed, A.; Manzoor, N.; Manzoor, I.; Muhammad, S.
Biodegradation of plastics: Current scenario and future prospects for environmental safety. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2018, 25,
7287–7298. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Andrady, A.L. Plastics and Environmental Sustainability; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2015.
4. Nkwachukwu, O.I.; Chima, C.H.; Ikenna, A.O.; Albert, L. Focus on potential environmental issues on plastic world towards a
sustainable plastic recycling in developing countries. Int. J. Ind. Chem. 2013, 4, 34. [CrossRef]
5. Geyer, R.; Jambeck, J.R.; Law, K.L. Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. Sci. Adv. 2017, 3, e1700782. [CrossRef]
6. Hopewell, J.; Dvorak, R.; Kosior, E. Plastics recycling: Challenges and opportunities. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2009, 364,
2115–2126. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Zhao, S.; Wang, T.; Zhu, L.; Xu, P .; Wang, X.; Gao, L.; Li, D. Analysis of suspended microplastics in the Changjiang Estuary:
Implications for riverine plastic load to the ocean. Water Res. 2019, 161, 560–569. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Hundertmark, T.; Mayer, M.; McNally, C.; Simons, T.J.; Witte, C. How Plastics Waste Recycling Could Transform the Chemical
Industry. Available online: https://search-ebscohost-com.umasslowell.idm.oclc.org/login.aspx?direct=true&db=ply&AN=20
190602564&site=eds-live (accessed on 26 December 2021).
9. Rochman, C.M.; Browne, M.A.; Halpern, B.S.; Hentschel, B.T.; Hoh, E.; Karapanagioti, H.K.; Rios-Mendoza, L.M.; Takada, H.; Teh,
S.; Thompson, R.C. Classify plastic waste as hazardous. Nature 2013, 494, 169–171. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 21 of 27
10. Rochman, C.M.; Hoh, E.; Kurobe, T.; Teh, S.J. Ingested plastic transfers hazardous chemicals to ﬁsh and induces hepatic stress.Sci.
Rep. 2013, 3, 3263. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. Wilcox, C.; Van Sebille, E.; Hardesty, B.D. Threat of plastic pollution to seabirds is global, pervasive, and increasing.Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 2015, 112, 11899–11904. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Sussarellu, R.; Suquet, M.; Thomas, Y.; Lambert, C.; Fabioux, C.; Pernet, M.E.J.; Le Goïc, N.; Quillien, V .; Mingant, C.; Epelboin,
Y. Oyster reproduction is affected by exposure to polystyrene microplastics. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2016, 113, 2430–2435.
[CrossRef]
13. Narancic, T.; O’Connor, K.E. Plastic waste as a global challenge: Are biodegradable plastics the answer to the plastic waste
problem? Microbiology 2019, 165, 129–137. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Webb, H.K.; Arnott, J.; Crawford, R.J.; Ivanova, E.P . Plastic degradation and its environmental implications with special reference
to poly (ethylene terephthalate). Polymers 2013, 5, 1–18. [CrossRef]
15. Kint, D.; Muñoz-Guerra, S. A review on the potential biodegradability of poly (ethylene terephthalate). Polym. Int. 1999, 48,
346–352. [CrossRef]
16. Awaja, F.; Pavel, D. Recycling of PET. Eur. Polym. J. 2005, 41, 1453–1477. [CrossRef]
17. Karayannidis, G.P .; Psalida, E.A. Chain extension of recycled poly (ethylene terephthalate) with 2,2 ′-(1,4-phenylene)bis(2-
oxazoline). J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2000, 77, 2206–2211. [CrossRef]
18. Scheirs, J. Polymer Recycling: Science, Technology and Applications; John Wiley & Sons Ltd.: Chichester, UK, 1998; p. 591.
19. Caldicott, R.J. The basics of stretch blow molding PET containers. Plast. Eng. 1999, 55, 35–39.
20. Rosato, D.V . Plastics Processing Data Handbook; Springer Science & Business Media: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2012.
21. Hiraga, K.; Taniguchi, I.; Yoshida, S.; Kimura, Y.; Oda, K. Biodegradation of waste PET: A sustainable solution for dealing with
plastic pollution. EMBO Rep. 2019, 20, e49365. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Barnes, D.K.; Galgani, F.; Thompson, R.C.; Barlaz, M. Accumulation and fragmentation of plastic debris in global environments.
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2009, 364, 1985–1998. [CrossRef]
23. Gregory, M.R. Environmental implications of plastic debris in marine settings—Entanglement, ingestion, smothering, hangers-on,
hitch-hiking and alien invasions. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2009, 364, 2013–2025. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Oehlmann, J.; Schulte-Oehlmann, U.; Kloas, W.; Jagnytsch, O.; Lutz, I.; Kusk, K.O.; Wollenberger, L.; Santos, E.M.; Paull, G.C.;
Van Look, K.J. A critical analysis of the biological impacts of plasticizers on wildlife. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 2009, 364,
2047–2062. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Jambeck, J.R.; Geyer, R.; Wilcox, C.; Siegler, T.R.; Perryman, M.; Andrady, A.; Narayan, R.; Law, K.L. Plastic waste inputs from
land into the ocean. Science 2015, 347, 768–771. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. McArthur, E. The New Plastics Economy: Rethinking the Future of Plastics & Catalysing Action; Ellen MacArthur Foundation: Cowes,
UK, 2017; p. 68.
27. Zhang, H.; Wen, Z.-G. The consumption and recycling collection system of PET bottles: A case study of Beijing, China. Waste
Manag. 2014, 34, 987–998. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28. Prata, J.C.; Silva, A.L.P .; Da Costa, J.P .; Mouneyrac, C.; Walker, T.R.; Duarte, A.C.; Rocha-Santos, T. Solutions and integrated
strategies for the control and mitigation of plastic and microplastic pollution. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 2411.
[CrossRef]
29. Schneider, D.R.; Ragossnig, A. Recycling and incineration, contradiction or coexistence? Waste Manag. Res. 2015, 33, 693–695.
[PubMed]
30. Calcott, P .; Walls, M. Can downstream waste disposal policies encourage upstream “design for environment”?Am. Econ. Rev.
2000, 90, 233–237. [CrossRef]
31. Teuten, E.L.; Saquing, J.M.; Knappe, D.R.; Barlaz, M.A.; Jonsson, S.; Björn, A.; Rowland, S.J.; Thompson, R.C.; Galloway, T.S.;
Yamashita, R. Transport and release of chemicals from plastics to the environment and to wildlife. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.
2009, 364, 2027–2045. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Liu, Z.; Adams, M.; Walker, T.R. Are exports of recyclables from developed to developing countries waste pollution transfer or
part of the global circular economy? Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 2018, 136, 22–23. [CrossRef]
33. Arena, U. Process and technological aspects of municipal solid waste gasiﬁcation. A review. Waste Manag. 2012, 32, 625–639.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Lombardi, L.; Carnevale, E.; Corti, A. A review of technologies and performances of thermal treatment systems for energy
recovery from waste. Waste Manag. 2015, 37, 26–44. [CrossRef]
35. Zevenhoven, R.; Karlsson, M.; Hupa, M.; Frankenhaeuser, M. Combustion and gasiﬁcation properties of plastics particles. J. Air
Waste Manag. Assoc. 1997, 47, 861–870. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Gilpin, R.K.; Wagel, D.J.; Solch, J.G. Production, Distribution, and Fate of Polychlorinated Dibenzo-p-dioxins, Dibenzofurans and
Related Organohalogens in the Environment. In Dioxins and Health; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2003; pp. 55–87.
37. Curlee, T.R.; Das, S. Plastic Wastes: Management, Control, Recycling and Disposal; William Andrew Publishing/Noyes Data Corp.:
Park Ridge, NJ, USA, 1991.
38. Okan, M.; Aydin, H.M.; Barsbay, M. Current approaches to waste polymer utilization and minimization: A review. J. Chem.
Technol. Biotechnol. 2019, 94, 8–21. [CrossRef]
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 22 of 27
39. Royte, E. Is Burning Plastic Waste a Good Idea? Available online: https://www.nationalgeographic.com/environment/article/
should-we-burn-plastic-waste (accessed on 26 December 2021).
40. Achilias, D.S. Chemical recycling of polymers. The case of poly (methyl methacrylate). In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Energy & Environmental Systems, Chalkida, Greece, 8–10 May 2006.
41. Saphire, D.; Bluestone, M. Case Reopened: Reassessing Reﬁllable Bottles; Inform: Atlanta, GA, USA, 1994.
42. Feron, V .; Jetten, J.; De Kruijf, N.; Van Den Berg, F. Polyethylene terephthalate bottles (PRBs): A health and safety assessment.
Food Addit. Contam. 1994, 11, 571–594. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Schmidt, L. PET recycling: The view from NAPCOR. Resour. Recycl. 1998, 17, 37–42.
44. Albrecht, P .; Brodersen, J.; Horst, D.; Scherf, M.Reuse and Recycling Systems for Selected Beverage Packaging from a Sustainability
Perspective; PricewaterhouseCoopers AG WPG: Berlin, Germany, 2011.
45. Paszun, D.; Spychaj, T. Chemical recycling of poly (ethylene terephthalate). Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 1997, 36, 1373–1383. [CrossRef]
46. Burillo, G.; Clough, R.L.; Czvikovszky, T.; Guven, O.; Le Moel, A.; Liu, W.; Singh, A.; Yang, J.; Zaharescu, T. Polymer recycling:
Potential application of radiation technology. Radiat. Phys. Chem. 2002, 64, 41–51. [CrossRef]
47. Majauskien˙e, R.; Miknius, L. Properties of residual marine fuel produced by thermolysis from polypropylene waste. Mater. Sci.
2015, 21, 249–254.
48. Dimitris, S.; Achilias, L. Recent advances in the chemical recycling of polymers (PP , PS, LDPE, HDPE, PVC, PC, Nylon, PMMA).
Mater. Recycl. Trends Perspect 2014, 3, 64.
49. Jagtap, M.; Khatavkar, M.; Quazi, T. Methods for waste plastic recycling. Int. J. Recent Technol. Mech. Electr. Eng. 2015, 2, 120–122.
50. Sinha, V .; Patel, M.R.; Patel, J.V . PET waste management by chemical recycling: A review. J. Polym. Environ. 2010, 18, 8–25.
[CrossRef]
51. Garcia, J.M.; Robertson, M.L. The future of plastics recycling. Science 2017, 358, 870–872. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Al-Salem, S.M.; Lettieri, P .; Baeyens, J. Recycling and recovery routes of plastic solid waste (PSW): A review.Waste Management
2009, 29, 2625–2643. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Schulte, P .A.; McKernan, L.T.; Heidel, D.S.; Okun, A.H.; Dotson, G.S.; Lentz, T.J.; Geraci, C.L.; Heckel, P .E.; Branche, C.M.
Occupational safety and health, green chemistry, and sustainability: A review of areas of convergence. Environ. Health 2013,
12, 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Idumah, C.I.; Nwuzor, I.C. Novel trends in plastic waste management. SN Appl. Sci. 2019, 1, 1402. [CrossRef]
55. Mourshed, M.; Masud, M.H.; Rashid, F.; Joardder, M.U.H. Towards the effective plastic waste management in Bangladesh: A
review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2017, 24, 27021–27046. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Glaser, J.A. Biological degradation of polymers in the environment. In Plastics in the Environment; IntechOpen: London, UK, 2019.
57. Khoo, K.S.H.; Ho, L.Y.; Lim, H.R.; Leong, H.Y.; Chew, K.W. Plastic waste associated with the COVID-19 pandemic: Crisis or
opportunity? J. Hazard. Mater. 2021, 417, 126108. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Chia, W.Y.; Ying Tang, D.Y.; Khoo, K.S.; Kay Lup, A.N.; Chew, K.W. Nature’s ﬁght against plastic pollution: Algae for plastic
biodegradation and bioplastics production. Environ. Sci. Ecotechnol. 2020, 4, 100065. [CrossRef]
59. Lucas, N.; Bienaime, C.; Belloy, C.; Queneudec, M.; Silvestre, F.; Nava-Saucedo, J.-E. Polymer biodegradation: Mechanisms and
estimation techniques—A review. Chemosphere 2008, 73, 429–442. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
60. Dussud, C.; Ghiglione, J.-F. Bacterial degradation of synthetic plastics. InCIESM Workshop Monographs; CIESM Publisher: Monaco
City, Monaco, 2014.
61. Jaiswal, S.; Sharma, B.; Shukla, P . Integrated approaches in microbial degradation of plastics. Environ. Technol. Innov. 2020,
17, 100567. [CrossRef]
62. Shah, A.A.; Hasan, F.; Hameed, A.; Ahmed, S. Biological degradation of plastics: A comprehensive review. Biotechnol. Adv. 2008,
26, 246–265. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Barth, M.; Wei, R.; Oeser, T.; Then, J.; Schmidt, J.; Wohlgemuth, F.; Zimmermann, W. Enzymatic hydrolysis of polyethylene
terephthalate ﬁlms in an ultraﬁltration membrane reactor. J. Membr. Sci. 2015, 494, 182–187. [CrossRef]
64. Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Takehana, T.; Taniguchi, I.; Yamaji, H.; Maeda, Y.; Toyohara, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Kimura, Y.; Oda, K. A
bacterium that degrades and assimilates poly (ethylene terephthalate). Science 2016, 351, 1196–1199. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Nowak, B.; Paj ˛ ak, J.; Łabu˙zek, S.; Rymarz, G.; Talik, E. Biodegradation of poly (ethylene terephthalate) modiﬁed with polyester
“Bionolle®” by Penicillium funiculosum. Polimery 2011, 56, 35–44. [CrossRef]
66. Sharon, C.; Sharon, M. Studies on biodegradation of polyethylene terephthalate: A synthetic polymer. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. Res.
2012, 2, 248–257.
67. Kawai, F.; Kawabata, T.; Oda, M. Current state and perspectives related to the polyethylene terephthalate hydrolases available for
biorecycling. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2020, 8, 8894–8908. [CrossRef]
68. Frazee, R.W.; Livingston, D.; LaPorte, D.; Lipscomb, J. Cloning, sequencing, and expression of the Pseudomonas putida
protocatechuate 3, 4-dioxygenase genes. J. Bacteriol. 1993, 175, 6194–6202. [CrossRef]
69. Kasai, D.; Fujinami, T.; Abe, T.; Mase, K.; Katayama, Y.; Fukuda, M.; Masai, E. Uncovering the protocatechuate 2, 3-cleavage
pathway genes. J. Bacteriol. 2009, 191, 6758–6768. [CrossRef]
70. Maruyama, K.; Shibayama, T.; Ichikawa, A.; Sakou, Y.; Yamada, S.; Sugisaki, H. Cloning and characterization of the genes
encoding enzymes for the protocatechuate meta-degradation pathway of Pseudomonas ochraceae NGJ1. Biosci. Biotechnol.
Biochem. 2004, 68, 1434–1441. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 23 of 27
71. Johnson, C.W.; Salvachúa, D.; Khanna, P .; Smith, H.; Peterson, D.J.; Beckham, G.T. Enhancing muconic acid production from
glucose and lignin-derived aromatic compounds via increased protocatechuate decarboxylase activity. Metab. Eng. Commun.
2016, 3, 111–119. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. Salvador, M.; Abdulmutalib, U.; Gonzalez, J.; Kim, J.; Smith, A.A.; Faulon, J.-L.; Wei, R.; Zimmermann, W.; Jimenez, J.I. Microbial
genes for a circular and sustainable bio-PET economy. Genes 2019, 10, 373. [CrossRef]
73. Trifunovi´ c, D.; Schuchmann, K.; Müller, V . Ethylene glycol metabolism in the acetogenAcetobacterium woodii. J. Bacteriol. 2016,
198, 1058–1065. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74. Mückschel, B.; Simon, O.; Klebensberger, J.; Graf, N.; Rosche, B.; Altenbuchner, J.; Pfannstiel, J.; Huber, A.; Hauer, B. Ethylene
glycol metabolism by Pseudomonas putida. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2012, 78, 8531–8539. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75. Franden, M.A.; Jayakody, L.N.; Li, W.-J.; Wagner, N.J.; Cleveland, N.S.; Michener, W.E.; Hauer, B.; Blank, L.M.; Wierckx, N.;
Klebensberger, J. Engineering Pseudomonas putida KT2440 for efﬁcient ethylene glycol utilization. Metab. Eng. 2018, 48, 197–207.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Kumar, R.V .; Kanna, G.R.; Elumalai, S. Biodegradation of polyethylene by green photosynthetic microalgae. J. Bioremediat.
Biodegrad. 2017, 8, 2.
77. Zheng, Y.; Yanful, E.K.; Bassi, A.S. A review of plastic waste biodegradation.Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 2005, 25, 243–250. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
78. Krueger, M.C.; Harms, H.; Schlosser, D. Prospects for microbiological solutions to environmental pollution with plastics.Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2015, 99, 8857–8874. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79. Nishida, H.; Tokiwa, Y. Distribution of poly (β-hydroxybutyrate) and poly (ε-caprolactone) aerobic degrading microorganisms in
different environments. J. Environ. Polym. Degrad. 1993, 1, 227–233. [CrossRef]
80. Parikh, M.; Gross, R. The effect of crystalline morphology on enzymatic degradation kinetics. Polym. Mater. Sci. Eng. (PMSE)
1992, 66, 408–410.
81. Marten, E.; Müller, R.-J.; Deckwer, W.-D. Studies on the enzymatic hydrolysis of polyesters I. Low molecular mass model esters
and aliphatic polyesters. Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2003, 80, 485–501. [CrossRef]
82. Marten, E.; Müller, R.-J.; Deckwer, W.-D. Studies on the enzymatic hydrolysis of polyesters. II. Aliphatic–aromatic copolyesters.
Polym. Degrad. Stab. 2005, 88, 371–381. [CrossRef]
83. Tokiwa, Y.; Calabia, B.P .; Ugwu, C.U.; Aiba, S. Biodegradability of plastics. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2009, 10, 3722–3742. [CrossRef]
84. Wei, R.; Zimmermann, W. Microbial enzymes for the recycling of recalcitrant petroleum-based plastics: How far are we? Microb.
Biotechnol. 2017, 10, 1308–1322. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Vertommen, M.; Nierstrasz, V .; Van Der Veer, M.; Warmoeskerken, M. Enzymatic surface modiﬁcation of poly (ethylene
terephthalate). J. Biotechnol. 2005, 120, 376–386. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Müller, R.J.; Schrader, H.; Profe, J.; Dresler, K.; Deckwer, W.D. Enzymatic degradation of poly (ethylene terephthalate): Rapid
hydrolyse using a hydrolase from T. fusca. Macromol. Rapid Commun. 2005, 26, 1400–1405. [CrossRef]
87. Mohanan, N.; Montazer, Z.; Sharma, P .K.; Levin, D.B. Microbial and Enzymatic Degradation of Synthetic Plastics.Front. Microbiol.
2020, 11, 2837. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88. Austin, H.P .; Allen, M.D.; Donohoe, B.S.; Rorrer, N.A.; Kearns, F.L.; Silveira, R.L.; Pollard, B.C.; Dominick, G.; Duman, R.; El
Omari, K. Characterization and engineering of a plastic-degrading aromatic polyesterase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2018, 115,
E4350–E4357. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89. Wei, R.; Oeser, T.; Then, J.; Kühn, N.; Barth, M.; Schmidt, J.; Zimmermann, W. Functional characterization and structural modeling
of synthetic polyester-degrading hydrolases from Thermomonospora curvata. AMB Express 2014, 4, 44. [CrossRef]
90. Remington, S.; Franken, S.; Sussman, J.; Frolow, F.; Ollis, D.; Verschueren, K.; Cheah, E.; Cygler, M.; Dijkstra, B.; Harel, M. The
alpha/beta hydrolase fold. Protein Eng. 1992, 5, 197–211.
91. Barth, M.; Oeser, T.; Wei, R.; Then, J.; Schmidt, J.; Zimmermann, W. Effect of hydrolysis products on the enzymatic degradation of
polyethylene terephthalate nanoparticles by a polyester hydrolase from Thermobiﬁda fusca. Biochem. Eng. J. 2015, 93, 222–228.
[CrossRef]
92. Sulaiman, S.; Yamato, S.; Kanaya, E.; Kim, J.-J.; Koga, Y.; Takano, K.; Kanaya, S. Isolation of a novel cutinase homolog with
polyethylene terephthalate-degrading activity from leaf-branch compost by using a metagenomic approach. Appl. Environ.
Microbiol. 2012, 78, 1556–1562. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
93. Kawabata, T.; Oda, M.; Kawai, F. Mutational analysis of cutinase-like enzyme, Cut190, based on the 3D docking structure with
model compounds of polyethylene terephthalate. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 2017, 124, 28–35. [CrossRef]
94. Tournier, V .; Topham, C.; Gilles, A.; David, B.; Folgoas, C.; Moya-Leclair, E.; Kamionka, E.; Desrousseaux, M.-L.; Texier, H.;
Gavalda, S. An engineered PET depolymerase to break down and recycle plastic bottles. Nature 2020, 580, 216–219. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
95. Kim, H.R.; Song, W.S. Lipase treatment of polyester fabrics. Fibers Polym. 2006, 7, 339–343. [CrossRef]
96. Guebitz, G.M.; Cavaco-Paulo, A. Enzymes go big: Surface hydrolysis and functionalisation of synthetic polymers. Trends
Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 32–38. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97. Ribitsch, D.; Herrero Acero, E.; Greimel, K.; Dellacher, A.; Zitzenbacher, S.; Marold, A.; Rodriguez, R.D.; Steinkellner, G.; Gruber,
K.; Schwab, H. A new esterase from Thermobiﬁda halotolerans hydrolyses polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polylactic acid
(PLA). Polymers 2012, 4, 617–629. [CrossRef]
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 24 of 27
98. Sales, J.C.S.; de Castro, A.M.; Ribeiro, B.D.; Coelho, M.A.Z. Supplementation of watermelon peels as an enhancer of lipase and
esterase production by Yarrowia lipolytica in solid-state fermentation and their potential use as biocatalysts in poly (ethylene
terephthalate)(PET) depolymerization reactions. Biocatal. Biotransform. 2020, 38, 457–468. [CrossRef]
99. Roth, C.; Wei, R.; Oeser, T.; Then, J.; Föllner, C.; Zimmermann, W.; Sträter, N. Structural and functional studies on a thermostable
polyethylene terephthalate degrading hydrolase from Thermobiﬁda fusca. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2014, 98, 7815–7823.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
100. Sulaiman, S.; You, D.-J.; Kanaya, E.; Koga, Y.; Kanaya, S. Crystal structure and thermodynamic and kinetic stability of metagenome-
derived LC-cutinase. Biochemistry 2014, 53, 1858–1869. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
101. Then, J.; Wei, R.; Oeser, T.; Barth, M.; Belisário-Ferrari, M.R.; Schmidt, J.; Zimmermann, W. Ca2+ and Mg2+ binding site engineering
increases the degradation of polyethylene terephthalate ﬁlms by polyester hydrolases from Thermobiﬁda fusca. Biotechnol. J.
2015, 10, 592–598. [CrossRef]
102. Thumarat, U.; Nakamura, R.; Kawabata, T.; Suzuki, H.; Kawai, F. Biochemical and genetic analysis of a cutinase-type polyesterase
from a thermophilic Thermobiﬁda alba AHK119. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2012, 95, 419–430. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Herrero Acero, E.; Ribitsch, D.; Steinkellner, G.; Gruber, K.; Greimel, K.; Eiteljoerg, I.; Trotscha, E.; Wei, R.; Zimmermann, W.;
Zinn, M. Enzymatic surface hydrolysis of PET: Effect of structural diversity on kinetic properties of cutinases from Thermobiﬁda.
Macromolecules 2011, 44, 4632–4640. [CrossRef]
104. Kawai, F.; Oda, M.; Tamashiro, T.; Waku, T.; Tanaka, N.; Yamamoto, M.; Mizushima, H.; Miyakawa, T.; Tanokura, M. A novel
Ca2+-activated, thermostabilized polyesterase capable of hydrolyzing polyethylene terephthalate from Saccharomonospora viridis
AHK190. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2014, 98, 10053–10064. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
105. Purdy, R.; Kolattukudy, P . Hydrolysis of plant cuticle by plant pathogens. Puriﬁcation, amino acid composition, and molecular
weight of two isoenzymes of cutinase and a nonspeciﬁc esterase from Fusarium solani f. pisi. Biochemistry 1975, 14, 2824–2831.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Furukawa, M.; Kawakami, N.; Tomizawa, A.; Miyamoto, K. Efﬁcient degradation of poly (ethylene terephthalate) with Thermobi-
ﬁda fusca cutinase exhibiting improved catalytic activity generated using mutagenesis and additive-based approaches. Sci. Rep.
2019, 9, 16038. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Ronkvist, Å.M.; Xie, W.; Lu, W.; Gross, R.A. Cutinase-Catalyzed Hydrolysis of Poly(ethylene terephthalate).Macromolecules 2009,
42, 5128–5138. [CrossRef]
108. Zimmermann, W.; Billig, S. Enzymes for the biofunctionalization of poly (ethylene terephthalate). In Biofunctionalization of
Polymers and Their Applications; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2010; pp. 97–120.
109. Eberl, A.; Heumann, S.; Brückner, T.; Araujo, R.; Cavaco-Paulo, A.; Kaufmann, F.; Kroutil, W.; Guebitz, G.M. Enzymatic surface
hydrolysis of poly (ethylene terephthalate) and bis (benzoyloxyethyl) terephthalate by lipase and cutinase in the presence of
surface active molecules. J. Biotechnol. 2009, 143, 207–212. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
110. Ribitsch, D.; Heumann, S.; Trotscha, E.; Herrero Acero, E.; Greimel, K.; Leber, R.; Birner-Gruenberger, R.; Deller, S.; Eiteljoerg, I.;
Remler, P . Hydrolysis of polyethyleneterephthalate by p-nitrobenzylesterase from Bacillus subtilis.Biotechnol. Prog. 2011, 27,
951–960. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
111. Kleeberg, I.; Hetz, C.; Kroppenstedt, R.M.; Müller, R.-J.; Deckwer, W.-D. Biodegradation of aliphatic-aromatic copolyesters by
Thermomonospora fusca and other thermophilic compost isolates. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1998, 64, 1731–1735. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
112. Kleeberg, I.; Welzel, K.; VandenHeuvel, J.; Müller, R.-J.; Deckwer, W.-D. Characterization of a New Extracellular Hydrolase from
Thermobiﬁda fusca Degrading Aliphatic−Aromatic Copolyesters. Biomacromolecules 2005, 6, 262–270. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Chen, S.; Su, L.; Billig, S.; Zimmermann, W.; Chen, J.; Wu, J. Biochemical characterization of the cutinases from Thermobiﬁda fusca.
J. Mol. Catal. B Enzym. 2010, 63, 121–127. [CrossRef]
114. Oda, M.; Yamagami, Y.; Inaba, S.; Oida, T.; Yamamoto, M.; Kitajima, S.; Kawai, F. Enzymatic hydrolysis of PET: Functional roles of
three Ca 2+ ions bound to a cutinase-like enzyme, Cut190*, and its engineering for improved activity. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
2018, 102, 10067–10077. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
115. Cruz, H.; Pérez, C.; Wellington, E.; Castro, C.; Servín-González, L. Sequence of the Streptomyces albus G lipase-encoding gene
reveals the presence of a prokaryotic lipase family. Gene 1994, 144, 141–142. [CrossRef]
116. Pérez, C.; Juárez, K.; García-Castells, E.; Soberón, G.; Servín-González, L. Cloning, characterization, and expression in Strepto-
myces lividans 66 of an extracellular lipase-encoding gene from Streptomyces sp. M11. Gene 1993, 123, 109–114. [CrossRef]
117. Lykidis, A.; Mavromatis, K.; Ivanova, N.; Anderson, I.; Land, M.; DiBartolo, G.; Martinez, M.; Lapidus, A.; Lucas, S.; Copeland, A.;
et al. Genome sequence and analysis of the soil cellulolytic actinomycete Thermobiﬁda fusca YX. J. Bacteriol. 2007, 189, 2477–2486.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
118. Chen, V .B.; Arendall, W.B.; Headd, J.J.; Keedy, D.A.; Immormino, R.M.; Kapral, G.J.; Murray, L.W.; Richardson, J.S.; Richardson,
D.C. MolProbity: All-atom structure validation for macromolecular crystallography. Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D Biol. Crystallogr.
2010, 66, 12–21. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
119. Alisch-Mark, M.; Herrmann, A.; Zimmermann, W. Increase of the hydrophilicity of polyethylene terephthalate ﬁbres by hydrolases
from Thermomonospora fusca and Fusarium solani f. sp. pisi. Biotechnol. Lett. 2006, 28, 681–685. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 25 of 27
120. Feuerhack, A.; Alisch-Mark, M.; Kisner, A.; Pezzin, S.; Zimmermann, W.; Andreaus, J. Biocatalytic surface modiﬁcation of knitted
fabrics made of poly (ethylene terephthalate) with hydrolytic enzymes from Thermobiﬁda fusca KW3b. Biocatal. Biotransform. 2008,
26, 357–364. [CrossRef]
121. Hegde, K.; Veeranki, V .D. Production optimization and characterization of recombinant cutinases fromThermobiﬁda fusca sp.
NRRL B-8184. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol. 2013, 170, 654–675. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Chertkov, O.; Sikorski, J.; Nolan, M.; Lapidus, A.; Lucas, S.; Del Rio, T.G.; Tice, H.; Cheng, J.-F.; Goodwin, L.; Pitluck, S.; et al.
Complete genome sequence of Thermomonospora curvata type strain (B9). Stand. Genom. Sci. 2011, 4, 13–22. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Arima, J.; Uesugi, Y.; Uraji, M.; Yatsushiro, S.; Tsuboi, S.; Iwabuchi, M.; Hatanaka, T. Modulation of Streptomyces leucine
aminopeptidase by calcium: Identiﬁcation and functional analysis of key residues in activation and stabilization by calcium.
J. Biol. Chem. 2006, 281, 5885–5894. [CrossRef]
124. Almeida, E.L.; Carrillo Rinc ón, A.F.; Jackson, S.A.; Dobson, A.D.W. In silico Screening and Heterologous Expression of a
Polyethylene Terephthalate Hydrolase (PETase)-Like Enzyme (SM14est) with Polycaprolactone (PCL)-Degrading Activity, From
the Marine Sponge-Derived Strain Streptomyces sp. SM14. Front. Microbiol. 2019, 10, 2187. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
125. Jabloune, R.; Khalil, M.; Ben Moussa, I.E.; Simao-Beaunoir, A.-M.; Lerat, S.; Brzezinski, R.; Beaulieu, C. Enzymatic Degradation of
p-Nitrophenyl Esters, Polyethylene Terephthalate, Cutin, and Suberin by Sub1, a Suberinase Encoded by the Plant Pathogen
Streptomyces scabies. Microbes Environ. 2020, 35, ME19086. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
126. Alves, N.; Mano, J.F.; Balaguer, E.; Dueñas, J.M.; Ribelles, J.G. Glass transition and structural relaxation in semi-crystalline poly
(ethylene terephthalate): A DSC study. Polymer 2002, 43, 4111–4122. [CrossRef]
127. Kikkawa, Y.; Fujita, M.; Abe, H.; Doi, Y. Effect of water on the surface molecular mobility of poly (lactide) thin ﬁlms: An atomic
force microscopy study. Biomacromolecules 2004, 5, 1187–1193. [CrossRef]
128. Taniguchi, I.; Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Miyamoto, K.; Kimura, Y.; Oda, K. Biodegradation of PET: Current status and application
aspects. ACS Catal. 2019, 9, 4089–4105. [CrossRef]
129. Dimarogona, M.; Nikolaivits, E.; Kanelli, M.; Christakopoulos, P .; Sandgren, M.; Topakas, E. Structural and functional studies of a
Fusarium oxysporum cutinase with polyethylene terephthalate modiﬁcation potential. Biochim. Biophys. Acta (BBA) Gen. Subj.
2015, 1850, 2308–2317. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
130. Gamerith, C.; Vastano, M.; Ghorbanpour, S.M.; Zitzenbacher, S.; Ribitsch, D.; Zumstein, M.T.; Sander, M.; Herrero Acero, E.;
Pellis, A.; Guebitz, G.M. Enzymatic degradation of aromatic and aliphatic polyesters by P . pastoris expressed cutinase 1 from
Thermobiﬁda cellulosilytica. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 938. [CrossRef]
131. Tanasupawat, S.; Takehana, T.; Yoshida, S.; Hiraga, K.; Oda, K. Ideonella sakaiensis sp. nov., isolated from a microbial consortium
that degrades poly (ethylene terephthalate). Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol. 2016, 66, 2813–2818. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
132. Uchida, H.; Shigeno-Akutsu, Y.; Nomura, N.; Nakahara, T.; Nakajima-Kambe, T. Cloning and sequence analysis of poly
(tetramethylene succinate) depolymerase from Acidovorax delaﬁeldii strain BS-3. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 2002, 93, 245–247. [CrossRef]
133. Tang, B.; Yu, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Zhao, G.; Ding, X. Complete genome sequence of the glidobactin producing strain [Polyangium]
brachysporum DSM 7029. J. Biotechnol. 2015, 210, 83–84. [CrossRef]
134. Anantharaman, K.; Brown, C.T.; Hug, L.A.; Sharon, I.; Castelle, C.J.; Probst, A.J.; Thomas, B.C.; Singh, A.; Wilkins, M.J.; Karaoz, U.
Thousands of microbial genomes shed light on interconnected biogeochemical processes in an aquifer system. Nat. Commun.
2016, 7, 1–11. [CrossRef]
135. Silva, C.M.; Carneiro, F.; O’Neill, A.; Fonseca, L.P .; Cabral, J.S.; Guebitz, G.; Cavaco-Paulo, A. Cutinase—A new tool for
biomodiﬁcation of synthetic ﬁbers. J. Polym. Sci. Part A Polym. Chem. 2005, 43, 2448–2450. [CrossRef]
136. Sasoh, M.; Masai, E.; Ishibashi, S.; Hara, H.; Kamimura, N.; Miyauchi, K.; Fukuda, M. Characterization of the terephthalate
degradation genes of Comamonas sp. strain E6. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2006, 72, 1825–1832. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
137. Hosaka, M.; Kamimura, N.; Toribami, S.; Mori, K.; Kasai, D.; Fukuda, M.; Masai, E. Novel tripartite aromatic acid transporter
essential for terephthalate uptake in Comamonas sp. strain E6. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2013, 79, 6148–6155. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
138. Pérez-Pantoja, D.; Donoso, R.; Agulló, L.; Córdova, M.; Seeger, M.; Pieper, D.H.; González, B. Genomic analysis of the potential
for aromatic compounds biodegradation in Burkholderiales. Environ. Microbiol. 2012, 14, 1091–1117. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
139. Wilkes, R.A.; Aristilde, L. Degradation and metabolism of synthetic plastics and associated products by Pseudomonas sp.:
Capabilities and challenges. J. Appl. Microbiol. 2017, 123, 582–593. [CrossRef]
140. Li, W.J.; Jayakody, L.N.; Franden, M.A.; Wehrmann, M.; Daun, T.; Hauer, B.; Blank, L.M.; Beckham, G.T.; Klebensberger, J.;
Wierckx, N. Laboratory evolution reveals the metabolic and regulatory basis of ethylene glycol metabolism by Pseudomonas putida
KT2440. Environ. Microbiol. 2019, 21, 3669–3682. [CrossRef]
141. Tiwari, V . In vitro engineering of novel bioactivity in the natural enzymes. Front. Chem. 2016, 4, 39. [CrossRef]
142. Fecker, T.; Galaz-Davison, P .; Engelberger, F.; Narui, Y.; Sotomayor, M.; Parra, L.P .; Ramírez-Sarmiento, C.A. Active site ﬂexibility
as a hallmark for efﬁcient PET degradation by I. sakaiensis PETase. Biophys. J. 2018, 114, 1302–1312. [CrossRef]
143. Liu, B.; He, L.; Wang, L.; Li, T.; Li, C.; Liu, H.; Luo, Y.; Bao, R. Protein crystallography and site-direct mutagenesis analysis of the
poly (ethylene terephthalate) hydrolase PETase fromIdeonella sakaiensis. ChemBioChem 2018, 19, 1471–1475. [CrossRef]
144. Joo, S.; Cho, I.J.; Seo, H.; Son, H.F.; Sagong, H.-Y.; Shin, T.J.; Choi, S.Y.; Lee, S.Y.; Kim, K.-J. Structural insight into molecular
mechanism of poly (ethylene terephthalate) degradation. Nat. Commun. 2018, 9, 382. [CrossRef]
145. Chen, S.; Tong, X.; Woodard, R.W.; Du, G.; Wu, J.; Chen, J. Identiﬁcation and characterization of bacterial cutinase.J. Biol. Chem.
2008, 283, 25854–25862. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 26 of 27
146. Palm, G.J.; Reisky, L.; Böttcher, D.; Müller, H.; Michels, E.A.; Walczak, M.C.; Berndt, L.; Weiss, M.S.; Bornscheuer, U.T.; Weber, G.
Structure of the plastic-degrading Ideonella sakaiensis MHETase bound to a substrate. Nat. Commun. 2019, 10, 1717. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
147. Matak, M.Y.; Moghaddam, M.E. The role of short-range Cys171–Cys178 disulﬁde bond in maintaining cutinase active site
integrity: A molecular dynamics simulation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2009, 390, 201–204. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
148. Egmond, M.R.; De Vlieg, J. Fusarium solani pisi cutinase. Biochimie 2000, 82, 1015–1021. [CrossRef]
149. Cunha, M.T.; Costa, M.J.; Calado, C.R.; Fonseca, L.P .; Aires-Barros, M.R.; Cabral, J.M. Integration of production and aqueous
two-phase systems extraction of extracellularFusarium solanipisi cutinase fusion proteins.J. Biotechnol.2003, 100, 55–64. [CrossRef]
150. Longhi, S.; Cambillau, C. Structure-activity of cutinase, a small lipolytic enzyme. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1999, 1441, 185–196.
[CrossRef]
151. Gindro, K.; Pezet, R. Puriﬁcation and characterization of a 40.8-kDa cutinase in ungerminated conidia of Botrytis cinerea Pers.: Fr.
FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 1999, 171, 239–243. [CrossRef]
152. Chen, Z.; Franco, C.F.; Baptista, R.P .; Cabral, J.M.S.; Coelho, A.V .; Rodrigues, C.J.; Melo, E.P . Puriﬁcation and identiﬁcation of
cutinases from Colletotrichum kahawae and Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2007, 73, 1306–1313. [CrossRef]
153. Wang, G.Y.; Michailides, T.J.; Hammock, B.D.; Lee, Y.M.; Bostock, R.M. Molecular cloning, characterization, and expression of a
redox-responsive cutinase from Monilinia fructicola (Wint.) Honey. Fungal Genet. Biol. 2002, 35, 261–276. [CrossRef]
154. Wang, G.Y.; Michailides, T.J.; Hammock, B.D.; Lee, Y.M.; Bostock, R.M. Afﬁnity puriﬁcation and characterization of a cutinase
from the fungal plant pathogen Monilinia fructicola (Wint.) honey. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2000, 382, 31–38. [CrossRef]
155. Sweigard, J.A.; Carroll, A.M.; Farrall, L.; Chumley, F.G.; Valent, B. Magnaporthe grisea pathogenicity genes obtained through
insertional mutagenesis. Mol. Plant Microbe Interact. 1998, 11, 404–412. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
156. Maeda, H.; Yamagata, Y.; Abe, K.; Hasegawa, F.; Machida, M.; Ishioka, R.; Gomi, K.; Nakajima, T. Puriﬁcation and characterization
of a biodegradable plastic-degrading enzyme from Aspergillus oryzae. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2005, 67, 778–788. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
157. Xu, H.; Yan, Q.; Duan, X.; Yang, S.; Jiang, Z. Characterization of an acidic cold-adapted cutinase from Thielavia terrestris and its
application in ﬂavor ester synthesis. Food Chem. 2015, 188, 439–445. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
158. Yang, S.; Xu, H.; Yan, Q.; Liu, Y.; Zhou, P .; Jiang, Z. A low molecular mass cutinase ofThielavia terrestris efﬁciently hydrolyzes
poly(esters). J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2013, 40, 217–226. [CrossRef]
159. Rogers, L.M.; Flaishman, M.A.; Kolattukudy, P .E. Cutinase gene disruption inFusarium solani f sp pisi decreases its virulence on
pea. Plant Cell 1994, 6, 935–945. [PubMed]
160. Li, D.; Ashby, A.M.; Johnstone, K. Molecular Evidence that the Extracellular Cutinase Pbc1 Is Required for Pathogenicity of
Pyrenopeziza brassicae on Oilseed Rape. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 2003, 16, 545–552. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
161. Liu, T.; Hou, J.; Wang, Y.; Jin, Y.; Borth, W.; Zhao, F.; Liu, Z.; Hu, J.; Zuo, Y. Genome-wide identiﬁcation, classiﬁcation and
expression analysis in fungal–plant interactions of cutinase gene family and functional analysis of a putative ClCUT7 inCurvularia
lunata. Mol. Genet. Genom. 2016, 291, 1105–1115. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
162. Wang, Y.; Chen, J.; Li, D.-W.; Zheng, L.; Huang, J. CglCUT1 gene required for cutinase activity and pathogenicity ofColletotrichum
gloeosporioides causing anthracnose of Camellia oleifera. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 2017, 147, 103–114. [CrossRef]
163. Sweigard, J.A.; Chumley, F.G.; Valent, B. Disruption of aMagnaporthe grisea cutinase gene. Mol. Gen. Genet. 1992, 232, 183–190.
[CrossRef]
164. Skamnioti, P .; Gurr, S.J. Magnaporthe grisea Cutinase2 Mediates Appressorium Differentiation and Host Penetration and Is
Required for Full Virulence. Plant Cell 2007, 19, 2674–2689. [CrossRef]
165. Wilson, R.A.; Talbot, N.J. Under pressure: Investigating the biology of plant infection byMagnaporthe oryzae. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.
2009, 7, 185–195. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
166. Martinez, C.; De Geus, P .; Lauwereys, M.; Matthyssens, G.; Cambillau, C.Fusarium solani cutinase is a lipolytic enzyme with a
catalytic serine accessible to solvent. Nature 1992, 356, 615–618. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
167. Nikolaivits, E.; Kanelli, M.; Dimarogona, M.; Topakas, E. A Middle-Aged Enzyme Still in Its Prime: Recent Advances in the Field
of Cutinases. Catalysts 2018, 8, 612. [CrossRef]
168. Nishida, H.; Tokiwa, Y. Effects of higher-order structure of poly (3-hydroxybutyrate) on its biodegradation. II. Effects of crystal
structure on microbial degradation. J. Environ. Polym. Degrad. 1993, 1, 65–80. [CrossRef]
169. Abe, H.; Doi, Y. Structural effects on enzymatic degradabilities for poly[(R)-3-hydroxybutyric acid] and its copolymers. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 1999, 25, 185–192. [CrossRef]
170. Seretoudi, G.; Bikiaris, D.N.; Panayiotou, C. Synthesis, characterization and biodegradability of poly(ethylene succinate)/poly+µ-
caprolactone) block copolymers. Polymer 2002, 43, 5405–5415. [CrossRef]
171. Pudack, C.; Stepanski, M.; Fässler, P . PET Recycling—Contributions of Crystallization to Sustainability. Chem. Ing. Tech. 2020, 92,
452–458. [CrossRef]
172. Mateo, C.; Palomo, J.M.; Fernandez-Lorente, G.; Guisan, J.M.; Fernandez-Lafuente, R. Improvement of enzyme activity, stability
and selectivity via immobilization techniques. Enzym. Microb. Technol. 2007, 40, 1451–1463. [CrossRef]
173. Kumari, V .; Kumar, S.; Kaur, I.; Bhalla, T.C. Graft copolymerization of acrylamide on chitosan-co-chitin and its application for
immobilization of Aspergillus sp. RL2Ct cutinase. Bioorganic Chem. 2017, 70, 34–43. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Bioengineering 2022, 9, 98 27 of 27
174. Sousa, I.T.; Lourenço, N.M.T.; Afonso, C.A.M.; Taipa, M.A. Protein stabilization with a dipeptide-mimic triazine-scaffolded
synthetic afﬁnity ligand. J. Mol. Recognit. 2013, 26, 104–112. [CrossRef]
175. Wang, Z.; Su, T.; Zhao, J. Immobilization of Fusarium solani Cutinase onto Magnetic Genipin-Crosslinked Chitosan Beads.
Catalysts 2021, 11, 1158. [CrossRef]
176. Zhang, C.; Zeng, G.; Huang, D.; Lai, C.; Huang, C.; Li, N.; Xu, P .; Cheng, M.; Zhou, Y.; Tang, W. Combined removal of di
(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) and Pb (II) by using a cutinase loaded nanoporous gold-polyethyleneimine adsorbent. Rsc Adv.
2014, 4, 55511–55518. [CrossRef]
177. Obregón, W.D.; Cisneros, J.S.; Ceccacci, F.; Quiroga, E. A highly stable biocatalyst obtained from covalent immobilization of a
non-commercial cysteine phytoprotease. J. Bioprocess. Biotech. 2015, 5, 1000211.
178. Gupta, M. Thermostabilization of proteins. Biotechnol. Appl. Biochem. (USA) 1991, 14, 1–11.
179. Ma, M.M.; Wang, L.Y.; Zhu, H.Y. Enzymatic degradation of polyester-nanoparticles by lipases and adsorption of lipases on the
polyester-nanoparticles. In Advanced Materials Research; Trans Tech Publications: Stafa-Zurich, Switzerland, 2012.
180. Wang, X.; Lu, D.; Jönsson, L.J.; Hong, F. Preparation of a PET-Hydrolyzing Lipase from Aspergillus oryzae by the Addition of
Bis(2-hydroxyethyl) Terephthalate to the Culture Medium and Enzymatic Modiﬁcation of PET Fabrics. Eng. Life Sci. 2008, 8,
268–276. [CrossRef]
181. Carniel, A.; Valoni, É.; Nicomedes, J.; Gomes, A.d.C.; Castro, A.M.d. Lipase from Candida antarctica (CALB) and cutinase from
Humicola insolens act synergistically for PET hydrolysis to terephthalic acid. Process Biochem. 2017, 59, 84–90. [CrossRef]
182. de Castro, A.M.; Carniel, A.; Nicomedes Junior, J.; da Conceiç ão Gomes, A.; Valoni, É. Screening of commercial enzymes for
poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET) hydrolysis and synergy studies on different substrate sources. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol.
2017, 44, 835–844. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
183. Henderson, B.; Curtis, M.; Seymour, R.; Donos, N. Periodontal Medicine and Systems Biology; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ,
USA, 2009.
184. Garza, D.R.; Dutilh, B.E. From cultured to uncultured genome sequences: Metagenomics and modeling microbial ecosystems.
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2015, 72, 4287–4308. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
185. Parages, M.L.; Gutiérrez-Barranquero, J.A.; Reen, F.J.; Dobson, A.D.; O’Gara, F. Integrated (Meta) Genomic and Synthetic Biology
Approaches to Develop New Biocatalysts. Mar. Drugs 2016, 14, 62. [CrossRef]
186. Danso, D.; Schmeisser, C.; Chow, J.; Zimmermann, W.; Wei, R.; Leggewie, C.; Li, X.; Hazen, T.; Streit, W.R.; Parales, R.E. New
Insights into the Function and Global Distribution of Polyethylene Terephthalate (PET)-Degrading Bacteria and Enzymes in
Marine and Terrestrial Metagenomes. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2018, 84, e02773-17. [CrossRef]
187. Meilleur, C.; Hupé, J.-F.; Juteau, P .; Shareck, F. Isolation and characterization of a new alkali-thermostable lipase cloned from a
metagenomic library. J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2009, 36, 853–861. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
188. Baumann, P .; Baumann, L.; Bang, S.S.; Woolkalis, M.J. Reevaluation of the taxonomy ofVibrio, beneckea, and Photobacterium:
Abolition of the genus Beneckea. Curr. Microbiol. 1980, 4, 127–132. [CrossRef]
189. Dodd, D.; Mackie, R.I.; Cann, I.K.O. Xylan degradation, a metabolic property shared by rumen and human colonic Bacteroidetes.
Mol. Microbiol. 2011, 79, 292–304. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
190. Thomas, F.; Hehemann, J.-H.; Rebuffet, E.; Czjzek, M.; Michel, G. Environmental and Gut Bacteroidetes: The Food Connection.
Front. Microbiol. 2011, 2, 93. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
191. Foley, M.H.; Cockburn, D.W.; Koropatkin, N.M. The Sus operon: A model system for starch uptake by the human gut Bacteroidetes.
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 2016, 73, 2603–2617. [CrossRef]
192. Zhou, D.; Chen, J.; Wu, J.; Yang, J.; Wang, H. Biodegradation and catalytic-chemical degradation strategies to mitigate microplastic
pollution. Sustain. Mater. Technol. 2021, 28, e00251. [CrossRef]
193. Furukawa, M.; Kawakami, N.; Oda, K.; Miyamoto, K. Acceleration of enzymatic degradation of poly (ethylene terephthalate) by
surface coating with anionic surfactants. ChemSusChem 2018, 11, 4018–4025. [CrossRef] [PubMed]