Citation: Jang, H.; Yim, S.S. Toward
DNA-Based Recording of Biological
Processes. Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25,
9233. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms25179233
Academic Editor: Alicja Wegrzyn
Received: 2 July 2024
Revised: 21 August 2024
Accepted: 24 August 2024
Published: 26 August 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
 International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences
Review
Toward DNA-Based Recording of Biological Processes
Hyeri Jang 1 and Sung Sun Yim 1,2,3,4, *
1 Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST),
Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
2 Graduate School of Engineering Biology, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST),
Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
3 KAIST Institute for BioCentury, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST),
Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
4 Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
* Correspondence: sungsunyim@kaist.ac.kr
Abstract: Exploiting the inherent compatibility of DNA-based data storage with living cells, various
cellular recording approaches have been developed for recording and retrieving biologically relevant
signals in otherwise inaccessible locations, such as inside the body. This review provides an overview
of the current state of engineered cellular memory systems, highlighting their design principles,
advantages, and limitations. We examine various technologies, including CRISPR-Cas systems,
recombinases, retrons, and DNA methylation, that enable these recording systems. Additionally, we
discuss potential strategies for improving recording accuracy, scalability, and durability to address
current limitations in the field. This emerging modality of biological measurement will be key to
gaining novel insights into diverse biological processes and fostering the development of various
biotechnological applications, from environmental sensing to disease monitoring and beyond.
Keywords: DNA-based data storage; molecular recording; cellular memory; synthetic biology
1. Introduction
Biological processes are inherently complex and dynamic. Living organisms interact
with each other and their environments by generating diverse biomolecules and metabolites,
and these interactions continuously change over time. For example, microbial cells in the
gut microbiome constantly sense environmental changes and respond by regulating the
expression of specific genes necessary for their survival [1]. In multicellular organisms, the
intricate regulation of numerous genes controls the differentiation of multiple cell types
throughout development [2]. However, many of these dynamics remain poorly understood
since native biological environments are often inaccessible, and tracking multiple biological
events over time is still challenging [3].
While several approaches such as temporal RNA-seq [4–6] and biosensors [7–9] have
been devised to address these challenges in biological measurement, they are still con-
strained by their temporal resolution and the number of channels available for data ac-
quisition. Utilizing DNA as a data storage medium provides high-capacity storage, high
density, and long-term stability to encode various types of data [10,11]. Advanced next-
generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have facilitated convenient, cost-effective, and
high-throughput decoding of information stored in DNA [12]. Furthermore, the inherent
compatibility between DNA data storage and living systems has spurred the development
of various DNA-based cellular recording techniques, which have the potential to acquire
multiple and temporal biological information without disrupting cells (Figure 1a) [ 3].
Many different applications of DNA-based cellular recording have been demonstrated,
such as diagnosing disease biomarkers [13,14], capturing horizontal gene transfer (HGT)
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25179233 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 2 of 17
events [15,16], tracking cellular lineages throughout embryonic development [17,18], stor-
ing digital data [19,20], and constructing genetic circuits for therapeutic applications [21]
(Figure 1b).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 16 
 
 
(HGT) events [15,16], tracking cellular lineages throughout embryonic development 
[17,18], storing digital data [19,20], and constructing genetic circuits for therapeutic appli-
cations [21] (Figure 1b). 
 
Figure 1. (a) In DNA-based cellular recording, various environmental or cellular signals activate 
molecular recorders. Once activated, these recorders alter the DNA sequence or epigenetic states to 
store the data. The recorded data can be retrieved through sequencing or reporter gene expression. 
(b) Examples of DNA-based cellular recording applications include diagnosing cellular states, un-
derstanding horizontal gene tran sfer (HGT) events within the microbiome, tracking cellular line-
ages, storing digital data, and constructing genetic circuits for therapeutic purposes. 
In this review, we explore the principles of genome editing-based cellular recording 
systems, highlighting their benefits and a pplications across various fields. We also 
Figure 1. (a) In DNA-based cellular recording, various environmental or cellular signals activate
molecular recorders. Once activated, these recorders alter the DNA sequence or epigenetic states to
store the data. The recorded data can be retrieved through sequencing or reporter gene expression.
(b) Examples of DNA-based cellular recording applications include diagnosing cellular states, under-
standing horizontal gene transfer (HGT) events within the microbiome, tracking cellular lineages,
storing digital data, and constructing genetic circuits for therapeutic purposes.
In this review, we explore the principles of genome editing-based cellular recording
systems, highlighting their benefits and applications across various fields. We also examine
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 3 of 17
potential strategies to overcome current limitations in this area. This emerging method
of biological measurement is crucial for obtaining new insights into diverse biological
processes and advancing various biotechnological applications.
2. Recombination-Based Cellular Recording
Recombinases are enzymes that mediate site-specific recombination by catalyzing
excision, inversion, and integration of specific target DNA sequences, depending on the
orientation of flanking homologous regions. These site-specific DNA recombinases have
been utilized to construct various genetic circuits for cellular recording, such as permanent
genetic memories and reversible genetic switches, which can be analyzed by recombi-
nation site sequences or reporter gene expression [ 22–27]. For the development of the
recombination-based genetic memory system with >1-byte capacity, Yang et al. bioinfor-
matically identified orthogonal phage integrases with their cognate recognition (attB-attP)
sites and constructed a ‘memory array’ by linearly concatenating the recognition sites
for each integrase [ 23]. With the orthogonal recombinase–recombination site pairs, the
recording of temporally ordered signals could also be demonstrated as ‘recombinase-based
state machines’ (RSMs) (Figure 2a) [ 28]. In the RSM concept, sequence states could be
generated on DNA registers (memory arrays) made up of overlapping and orthogonal
recombinase recognition sites. Depending on the order of a set of chemical inputs, corre-
sponding recombination events could result in expected sequence states of the two-input
five-state and three-input 16-state registers and cellular behaviors.
Beyond recording the occurrence (presence or absence) of events, the recombinase-
based approach could also encode the duration and intensity of biological events. The
‘synthetic cellular recorders integrating biological events’ (SCRIBE) system was devel-
oped to record analog information, such as the magnitude and time course of inputs,
within living cell populations by converting transcriptional signals into the production
of single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), followed by ssDNA-based genome editing [29]. In the
SCRIBE system, retrons, composed of a non-coding RNA (ncRNA) region with multicopy
single-stranded RNA (msr) and multicopy single-stranded DNA (msd), as well as retron
reverse transcriptase (retron RT) [30], are utilized to produce the ssDNAs [31–33]. And the
ssDNAs write information at specific genomic loci as recombination frequencies within
cell populations when single-strand annealing proteins (SSAPs) are co-expressed. Recently,
the recombination efficiency of ssDNA retrons was improved by knocking out or knock-
ing down cellular ssDNA-specific exonucleases, which affect the intracellular stability of
ssDNA, enabling a broader range of applications for the system [16].
While recombinase-based recording systems have primarily been established within
model bacterial systems, their implementations have been successfully demonstrated in
non-model bacteria and even in eukaryotes, including human and plant cells [ 34–36].
However, scalability remains challenging due to the limited number of available orthog-
onal recombinases. To address this, computational mining of efficient and orthogonal
recombinases from microbial genomes could further expand the recombinase toolbox [37].
Alternatively, exploiting recombinases with orthogonal attachment sites and synthetic
transcription factors together could increase memory capacity for each recombinase and
enable much faster recombination [38].
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 4 of 17
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 16 
 
 
 
Figure 2. The principles of DNA-based recording systems are illustrated. ( a) Recombinase-based 
state machines (RSMs): Orthogonal recombinases are activated in response to multiple signals. De-
pending on the order of signals, recombinases facilitate either excision or inversion of the RSM reg-
ister, enabling the recording of the temporal order of multiple signals. ( b) Genome editing of syn-
thetic target arrays for lineage tracing (GESTALT): A contiguous array of target barcodes is edited 
by Cas9 nuclease-sgRNA throughout cell development. The accumulated patterns of deletions and 
insertions enable the reconstruction of lineage tree. ( c) Mammalian synthetic cellular recorders in-
tegrating biological events (mSCRIBE): Multiple self-targeting guide RNAs (stgRNAs) and Cas9 nu-
cleases are used to edit the stgRNA gene itself for monitoring biological signals. Within the cell 
population, self-targeting patterns correlate with ei ther the duration or intensity of the signals. ( d) 
CRISPR-mediated analog multi-event recording apparatus (CAMERA): Inducible base editors and 
sgRNAs generate C∙G to T∙A point mutations at recording sites. The editing frequencies depend on 
signal amplitude or duration, and the editing patterns indicate the order of events. (e) T7 polymer-
ase-driven continuous editing system: T7 polymerase fused to cytidine deaminase transcribes a spe-
cific gene downstream, continuously generating substitution patterns. ( f) DNA Typewriter: The 
pegRNA, consisting of key sequences, barcodes, and type guide sequences, is expressed under a 
promoter. The prime editor insert s the key and barcode sequences adjacent to the PAM site in a 
unidirectional manner, enabling temporal recording within cells. ( g) Temporal recording in arrays 
by CRISPR expansion (TRACE): Biological signals activate replication proteins, facilitating the rep-
lication of the pTrig plasmid. The Cas1–Cas2 complex integrates trigger DNA into the CRISPR array 
at a higher frequency compared to reference sequences. The unidirectionality of CRISPR acquisition 
allows for the temporal recording of multiple signals. (h) Record-seq: Expressed intracellular RNA 
is reverse transcribed into DNA sequences by RT. The resulting double-stranded DNA is then inte-
grated into the CRISPR array by the Cas1–Cas2 co mplex. This system enables transcriptome-scale 
recording. (i) DCM-time machine (DCM-TM): The fusion protein of DCM methyltransferase and 
RNA polymerase is activated by an inducible signal. When the RNA polymerase acts on genes and 
active enhancers, DCM methyltransferase marks the methylation patterns along the sequences. 
3. Implementation of Genome Editing for Molecular Recording 
Genome editing involves the precise alteration of genomic sequences in living organ-
isms by generating targeted insertions, deletions, and substitutions. While various 
Figure 2. The principles of DNA-based recording systems are illustrated. (a) Recombinase-based state
machines (RSMs): Orthogonal recombinases are activated in response to multiple signals. Depending
on the order of signals, recombinases facilitate either excision or inversion of the RSM register,
enabling the recording of the temporal order of multiple signals. ( b) Genome editing of synthetic
target arrays for lineage tracing (GESTALT): A contiguous array of target barcodes is edited by Cas9
nuclease-sgRNA throughout cell development. The accumulated patterns of deletions and insertions
enable the reconstruction of lineage tree. ( c) Mammalian synthetic cellular recorders integrating
biological events (mSCRIBE): Multiple self-targeting guide RNAs (stgRNAs) and Cas9 nucleases are
used to edit the stgRNA gene itself for monitoring biological signals. Within the cell population, self-
targeting patterns correlate with either the duration or intensity of the signals. (d) CRISPR-mediated
analog multi-event recording apparatus (CAMERA): Inducible base editors and sgRNAs generate
C·G to T·A point mutations at recording sites. The editing frequencies depend on signal amplitude or
duration, and the editing patterns indicate the order of events. (e) T7 polymerase-driven continuous
editing system: T7 polymerase fused to cytidine deaminase transcribes a specific gene downstream,
continuously generating substitution patterns. ( f) DNA Typewriter: The pegRNA, consisting of
key sequences, barcodes, and type guide sequences, is expressed under a promoter. The prime
editor inserts the key and barcode sequences adjacent to the PAM site in a unidirectional manner,
enabling temporal recording within cells. ( g) Temporal recording in arrays by CRISPR expansion
(TRACE): Biological signals activate replication proteins, facilitating the replication of the pTrig
plasmid. The Cas1–Cas2 complex integrates trigger DNA into the CRISPR array at a higher frequency
compared to reference sequences. The unidirectionality of CRISPR acquisition allows for the temporal
recording of multiple signals. ( h) Record-seq: Expressed intracellular RNA is reverse transcribed
into DNA sequences by RT. The resulting double-stranded DNA is then integrated into the CRISPR
array by the Cas1–Cas2 complex. This system enables transcriptome-scale recording. ( i) DCM-
time machine (DCM-TM): The fusion protein of DCM methyltransferase and RNA polymerase is
activated by an inducible signal. When the RNA polymerase acts on genes and active enhancers,
DCM methyltransferase marks the methylation patterns along the sequences.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 5 of 17
3. Implementation of Genome Editing for Molecular Recording
Genome editing involves the precise alteration of genomic sequences in living organ-
isms by generating targeted insertions, deletions, and substitutions. While various genome-
editing techniques, such as zinc-finger nucleases (ZFN) and transcription activator-like
effector nuclease (TALEN), have demonstrated potential for effective genome engineer-
ing [39,40], the emergence of CRISPR technology has facilitated programmable genome
engineering, leading to the development of diverse DNA-based recording systems [41–43].
3.1. CRISPR-Cas9 Barcoding-Based Lineage Tracing
The CRISPR-Cas9 system, a prokaryotic adaptive immune system, is composed of the
Cas9 nuclease and single-guide RNA (sgRNA). CRISPR-Cas9 is a robust technology that fa-
cilitates genome engineering, screening, and transcription regulation by precisely recogniz-
ing and cleaving specific locations and editing target sequences within the genome [44–48].
The CRISPR-Cas9 nuclease causes DNA double-stranded breaks (DSBs) at specific locations,
leading to irreversible insertions or deletions during the repair processes. The accumulation
of these mutations could be utilized as unique barcodes for individual cells or cellular
events in DNA-based cellular recording.
CRISPR-barcoding has been utilized for cellular recording, especially lineage tracing,
by accumulating mutations such as deletions and insertions during cell division. For
example, the ‘genome editing of synthetic target arrays for lineage tracing’ (GESTALT)
strategy demonstrated this potential by applying CRISPR-Cas9 barcodes to fertilized
zebrafish (Danio rerio) eggs for cumulative lineage barcoding (Figure 2b) [17]. Their lineage-
informative barcodes were deciphered through DNA sequencing, allowing for the elu-
cidation of lineage relationships based on mutation patterns. Similarly, the ‘memory by
engineered mutagenesis with optical in situ readout’ (MEMOIR) system generates an irre-
versible collapse of a set of barcoded scratchpads by Cas9 targeted to the scratchpads during
cell proliferation, enabling the recording of gene expression dynamics [49,50]. The states
of these collapsed scratchpads were identified through multiplex single-molecule RNA
fluorescence hybridization (smFISH) using sequential barcoding to multiplex different
mRNAs by sequential hybridization [51].
To further improve CRISPR-Cas9 barcoding-based lineage tracing, combining CRISPR-
Cas9 barcoding with single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) allows for the acquisition of
cellular transcriptomes and cell-type identification, facilitating robust lineage tracing of
embryonic development [52–55] and tumor evolution [56]. While CRISPR-Cas9 barcoding
is an effective method for cellular lineage tracing, the activity of the Cas9 nuclease can
result in an off-target effect. Furthermore, scalability is restricted by the number of target
arrays or barcodes, limiting its applications to early developmental processes [17].
3.2. Applications of Self-Targeting gRNA
Self-targeting CRISPR, also known as homing CRISPR, is a modified CRISPR-Cas9
system where the Cas9-gRNA complex directs its activity to the gRNA locus itself [57]. As
self-targeting guide RNA (stgRNA) or homing guide RNA (hgRNA) contains a protospacer-
adjacent motif (PAM) directly recognized by the Cas9 nuclease, it provides both guiding
ability and target sites. When the stgRNA barcoding elements detect their target sequences
to trigger mutations, the diversity of stgRNAs can be generated for barcoding and lineage
tracing purposes [18]. While canonical CRISPR-Cas9 barcoding approaches capture only
specific trajectories or moments due to their dependency on barcode sequences, stgRNA
approaches establish a more independent barcoding system and produce substantially
diverse barcodes.
The stgRNA approaches have shown potential for mapping cell development. For
barcoding and recording cell lineages in mice, the Mouse for Actively Recording Cells 1
(MARC1) line carried multiple stgRNAs in its genome sequences and was crossed with
Cas9 knock-in mouse [ 18,58]. In their offspring, the activation of stgRNAs generated
diverse mutation patterns, which were passed to daughter cells with additional mutations.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 6 of 17
This MARC1 system could construct a stable mouse line for barcoding and minimize
the unwanted loss of patterns from large deletions. Additionally, self-targeting CRISPR
approaches have been utilized to record biological events. For example, the ‘mammalian
synthetic cellular recorders integrating biological events’ (mSCRIBE) system accumulates
mutations in their stgRNA containing PAM sequences by linking the expression of stgRNA
or Cas9 to specific biological events (Figure 2c) [59]. The frequency of accumulated stgRNA
mutations within cell populations is correlated with the duration or magnitude of the
biological signals. Moreover, beyond the relative duration of signals, the elapsed time of
biological signals could also be gauged using stgRNAs that decay the intact target sequence
frequency [60]. Most self-targeting CRISPR approaches have provoked deletions for their
marking but face the risk of erasing existing records. Instead, terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase (TdT) has been introduced to add new DNA sequences, thereby avoiding
progressive erasure [ 13]. However, the increased lengths of stgRNA mediated by the
insertions could also decrease editing efficiencies, limiting the scalability of the systems.
3.3. Base Editing-Based Cellular Recording
Deletions or insertions formed through the DSB repair pathway, including non-
homologous end joining (NHEJ) or homologous recombination (HR) [ 61], may lead to
cellular toxicity and the risk of overwriting new barcodes in existing recordings. Base
editing, a CRISPR-based genome editing technique, differs from others by not relying on
Cas9 nuclease, instead employing dead Cas9 (dCas9) or nickase Cas9 (nCas9). Both lose the
ability to cleave double-stranded DNA, reducing cellular toxicity but retaining the ability
to bind target sequences guided by gRNAs. These modified Cas9 nucleases have been
fused with base editors such as cytidine deaminase or adenine deaminase to modulate
point mutations [62–64].
CRISPR-based base editing has facilitated the cellular recording of extracellular signals,
especially effective for long-term analog recording due to its substantial storage capacity.
Base editing-based recording has been demonstrated in both bacteria and mammalian cells.
For example, in the ‘CRISPR-mediated analog multi-event recording apparatus’ (CAMERA)
system, engineered bacteria demonstrated their recording ability in response to various
stimuli, such as chemical signals, viral infections, and light exposure, by activating multiple
gRNAs in response to these stimuli (Figure 2d) [ 65]. Simultaneously, the system was
applied in mammalian cells, enabling the recording of chemical signals and Wnt signals.
In CAMERA, expressed gRNAs direct a base editor composed of dCas9 and cytidine
deaminase to targeted DNA sequences, facilitating C·G to T·A mutations. These mutation
frequencies within populations indicate the magnitude or duration of specific signals.
The sequential and temporal logics of multiple signals could also be constructed by more
complex circuits [66]. In addition, dead Cas12a (dCas12a) has also been fused with a base
editor for single nucleotide editing [67]. To enhance the efficiency of multiplex modulation,
dCas12a was engineered through structure-guided protein engineering [ 68]. With an
adenine base editor, it could effectively record much information in human cells [21]. With
base editing-based recording approaches, analog characteristics such as the magnitude and
duration of exogenous signals were reconstructed by the frequency of specific mutations at
target sites within populations [21,65,66]. However, simultaneously distinguishing both
remains challenging. Furthermore, most base editing approaches have focused on cellular
recording at the population level. To address this, cellular recording at the single-cell level
has been demonstrated through long-read sequencing of a ‘canvas’ with multiple target
sites for base editing [69] or editing endogenous interspersed repeat regions for lineage
tracing [70]. Additionally, recording multiple endogenous transcripts at the single-cell
level could be performed by sensing transcripts with reprogrammed tracrRNAs (Rptrs)
to convert the target endogenous mRNAs into gRNAs and mediate base editing to target
DNA [71].
Base-editing-based approaches have also adopted other DNA-binding proteins to
guide the target sequences. For example, the T7 polymerase-driven continuous editing
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 7 of 17
system demonstrated that transcriptional activities under the T7 promoter can be recorded
through continuous nucleotide substitution mutations by exploiting T7 RNA polymerase
(T7 RNAP) fused to cytidine deaminase (Figure 2e) [72]. The T7 promoter was integrated
into genomic loci of specific genes, allowing the T7 RNAP-cytidine deaminase complex to
constitutively access the T7 promoter and its downstream region, facilitating transcription
and sequence editing. Furthermore, base-editing is not limited to DNA; it also enables tran-
scriptional and temporal recording in RNA by utilizing RNA-specific adenosine deaminase
with an RNA-binding domain [73,74].
3.4. Prime Editing-Based Recording Methods
Prime editing is a genome editing technique where target DNA is replaced by new
genetic sequences [75,76]. It has the advantage of excluding bystander editing and Cas-
independent off-target effects, which are challenges of base editing. The prime editor,
comprising nCas9 fused to reverse transcriptase (RT), induces single-stranded breaks (SSBs)
at specific locations directed by prime editor guide RNA (pegRNA). The pegRNA carries
an editing sequence adjacent to the binding sequence as a template for reverse transcription.
Specific sequences generated by RT are encoded by the prime editor, allowing for precise
editing, such as DNA substitutions, insertions, and deletions, at targeted sites without
requiring DSBs or donor DNA templates
Prime editing has been employed for robust temporally resolved cellular recording
by producing sequential arrays with incorporated barcodes in the edited sequences. In-
dividual pegRNAs with unique barcodes are inserted sequentially into specific genomic
loci [20,77]. The ‘prime editing cell history recording by ordered insertion’ (peCHYRON)
inserts 20 bp sequences, consisting of 3 bp signature mutations as the barcode and 17 bp
constant propagator sequences adjacent to the PAM site [ 77]. With each cycle of inser-
tion, the previous binding sequences are inactivated by being moved away from the PAM
site. Another prime editing-based approach, DNA Typewriter, accomplished sequential
recording by inserting short key sequences and barcodes into a tandem array of monomers
containing the PAM sequence, subsequently shifting the position of the type of guide
sequence (Figure 2f) [20,78]. Exploiting this sequential barcoding in the array mediated the
encoding and decoding of short text messages within cell populations, collecting diverse
encoded single cells. Within single cells, 3 bp barcodes were assigned to characters among
alphabets, numbers, and symbols, and the barcode position in the tandem array encoded
the order in sets of four characters.
For further multiplex recording, the ‘enhancer-derived genomic recording of transcrip-
tional activity in multiplex’ (ENGRAM) integrates multiple signals and enhancer-specific
barcodes into pegRNA [79]. This allowed for the scalable insertion of specific barcodes,
capturing multiple transcriptional activities simultaneously. Despite their multiplexing and
order dependency, the low efficiency of prime editing-based recording remains challenging.
To improve the efficiency and precision of prime editing, engineered prime editors have
been developed. For example, pegRNAs were modified to include structured 3 ′ motif
sequences that enhance RNA stability and prevent degradation, thereby increasing prime
editing efficiencies [80]. Additionally, engineered RT and Cas9 nuclease were developed
through phage-assisted evolution to further enhance prime editing efficiency [81]. These
advancements in the prime editing approach can facilitate the incorporation of barcodes
for rare events, thereby enhancing the reliability and accuracy of temporal recording.
4. CRISPR Adaptation for Temporal Recording
The CRISPR-Cas system functions as an adaptive immune response in prokaryotes,
encompassing three main stages: adaptation or acquisition, expression and maturation, and
interference. The CRISPR adaptation process involves recognizing foreign DNA sequences
and integrating them into the CRISPR array to establish a genetic memory of viral infections.
These CRISPR arrays consist of a leader sequence, short repeat sequences, and spacers
derived from foreign DNA. These arrays are transcribed into CRISPR RNA (crRNA) and
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 8 of 17
subsequently processed to facilitate interference activity. The CRISPR integrases and Cas1–
Cas2 complex incorporate DNA sequences, typically ranging from 30 to 40 bp, as new spacer
sequences into the CRISPR array [82,83]. The new spacer sequences are integrated at the
leader end of the CRISPR array, positioning the newest spacer ahead of older spacers [84].
Unidirectional CRISPR adaptation has facilitated the temporal recording of cellular
events. Arbitrary DNA sequences of a specific size can be acquired as spacers in the
CRISPR arrays by expressing CRISPR integrases Cas1 and Cas2 [85,86]. Recently, methods
for capturing biological events have been developed by integrating intracellular DNA
sequences. For example, the ‘temporal recording in arrays by CRISPR expansion’ (TRACE)
system records temporal environmental signals into the CRISPR arrays by utilizing a copy
number-inducible trigger plasmid (pTrig), which contains the phage P1 lytic replication
initiation protein coding gene downstream of an inducible promoter (Figure 2g) [87]. In
response to environmental signals, the increase in pTrig copy number led to a higher
frequency of trigger DNA acquisition in the CRISPR array compared to reference sequences
such as genomic and plasmid DNA. Furthermore, in the TRACE system, multiplex record-
ing of three environmental signals was demonstrated by using a three-barcoded sensor
population. This further enabled the encoding of arbitrary digital data in the CRISPR array
by electronic stimulation of the trigger plasmid, maintaining robust long-term records in
living cells [19].
The complex of RT and Cas1–Cas2 has been employed to record transcriptional
events through CRISPR adaptation. The Record-seq strategy showed transcriptome-scale
molecular recording by leveraging RT-Cas1 and Cas2 to directly capture transcripts into
the CRISPR array (Figure 2h) [ 88]. As the acquisition frequencies of spacers depend on
the source RNA abundance, highly expressed genes were captured more frequently in the
CRISPR arrays. To detect rarely acquired spacers, the ‘selective amplification of expanded
CRISPR arrays’ (SENECA) method was developed to specifically amplify the acquired
spacers for deep sequencing [ 89]. Record-seq demonstrated its ability to noninvasively
assess cellular transcriptional events in the intestines of mice under different dietary or
environmental conditions [14]. More recently, the Retro-Cascorder system utilized retrons,
previously mentioned in the SCRIBE system, to reverse transcribe engineered ncRNA
barcodes into ssDNA. Then, two generated ssDNA hybridized to form duplex DNA for
CRISPR acquisition [90,91]. The expression of distinct barcoded ncRNA under different
inducible promoters enabled CRISPR acquisition of different duplex sequences, mediating
multiplex temporal recording.
CRISPR adaptation-based approaches are powerful for temporal information record-
ing; however, their recording efficiencies and applicable host range remain constrained.
Enhancing CRISPR adaptation efficiency by utilizing internal nucleases or evolved CRISPR
integrases holds promise for expanding the recording capacity and applicability of these
systems, making them more versatile and effective across diverse biological contexts. For
example, Cas4 nucleases or endonucleases such as DnaQ and ExoT inherently control
the size and orientation of integrated spacers via asymmetric trimming [ 92–94]. These
nucleases coordinate with CRISPR integrases, facilitating efficient CRISPR adaptation. Fur-
thermore, evolving CRISPR integrases through directed evolution and enriching the mutant
integrases by perpetual DNA packaging and transduction (PeDPaT) offer the potential to
improve CRISPR-adaptation-based recording [95,96].
5. Using DNA Methylation for Biological Recording
DNA methylation is a major epigenetic process characterized by the addition of a
methyl group to nucleic acid bases, such as cytosine and adenine, without altering the orig-
inal sequences. This reversible modification mediates the regulation of gene expression in
development and disease [97,98]. DNA methyltransferases also play a role in the prokary-
otic defense system associated with the restriction-modification (RM) system [99,100]. Three
prevalent methylation patterns, including 5-methylcytosine (5mC), N4-methylcytosine
(4mC), and N6-methyladenine (6mA), are controlled by their catalytic writer, reader, and
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 9 of 17
eraser enzymes. Recent advances in DNA methylome mapping technologies have enabled
the analysis of these methylation profiles [101–103].
Synthetic epigenetic circuits, especially those involving targeted DNA methylation,
have regulated specific gene expression levels and durably retained cellular epigenetic
memory [104–107]. While CRISPRa and CRISPRi methods transiently manipulate gene
function, targeted DNA methylation can provide long-term regulations. For example,
an engineered bacterial 6mA regulatory system could be utilized to record biological
events and control transcriptional events in mammalian cells, since 6mA modification is
not common in eukaryotes [108]. In response to environmental signals, a 6mA writer, a
fusion of an engineered Dam methylase, and an engineered zinc finger for DNA binding
mediated targeted methylation at GATC motifs to construct epigenetic memory, recording
the presence of environmental signals [109].
Genome-wide transcriptome recording could also be demonstrated using the DCM-
time machine (DCM-TM) system through epigenome editing (Figure 2i) [110]. This system
analyzed methylation patterns by methylated DNA sequencing (MeD-seq) based on Lp-
nPI digestion of DCM methylated position [ 111]. An inducible fusion protein of DCM
methyltransferase and the RNA polymerase 2 subunit b labeled methylation patterns on
transcribed genes and active enhancers when the gene was transcribed by RNA polymerase.
This strategy was utilized to understand the genetic activity and temporal dynamics of
intestinal stem cells (ISCs) during their differentiation into enterocytes. DNA methylation-
based approaches could further increase their utility by using methyltransferase and
demethylase for reversible epigenetic modification, as demonstrated in the CRISPRoff and
CRISPRon systems [112].
While methylation-based recording approaches offer extensive scalability for record-
ing transcriptomes by using the whole genome sequence as a recording site, they still
have certain limitations. Notably, methylation-based techniques for recording the temporal
order of various signals and analog characteristics have not been demonstrated. Addition-
ally, the requirement for specific recognition sites for each methyltransferase may limit
their applications.
6. Outlook and Discussion
DNA-based cellular recordings using DNA recombination, CRISPR systems, and DNA
methylation have enabled the generation of permanent memories of environmental and
biological events in living cells. In this review, we examined various DNA-based cellular
recording systems, focusing on their principles, advantages, and limitations (Table 1). Un-
like existing reviews on cellular recording [3,113–116], we covered the most recent cellular
recording techniques, such as prime editing-based multiplexed temporal recording systems.
Additionally, we introduced methylation-based cellular recording strategies alongside the
commonly discussed recombinase, CRISPR nuclease, and CRISPR integrase systems.
Molecular recording of cellular events can be applied to diagnosing cellular states,
capturing HGT events, tracking cell lineage, storing digital data in DNA, and developing
cellular therapeutics. Selecting an appropriate recording system will be necessary for
specific applications because each strategy has different advantages and scalability. For
instance, the CRISPR-Cas spacer acquisition strategy possesses a distinctive ability to
record horizontal gene transfer (HGT) across a cell population by directly capturing mobile
DNA from complex environments [15]. When combined with genetic logic computation or
sophisticated computational algorithms, DNA-based cellular recording approaches have
the potential to mediate the control of cellular functions based on cellular memory [117]
and to reconstruct cellular lineages [118].
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 10 of 17
Table 1. Summary of major DNA-based cellular recording systems.
System Approach Information
Type
Sensitivity
(Timescales of
Cellular
Recording)
Scalability Durability Temporal
Information Storage Place Features Citation
RSM Recombination of DNA
register Chemical Hour scale
(Fast) Medium Short Yes Plasmid
Applied to build
state-dependent gene
regulation programs
[28]
SCRIBE Recombination of retron
RT-DNA into genomic DNA Chemical, Light Day scale (Slow) Medium Long No Genome
Encoding of analog
memory, reversible
system
[29]
GESTALT CRISPR-Cas9 targeted to
synthetic target arrays
Cell
differentiation Day scale (Slow) Low Long Yes Genome
Mapping cell lineage
information, vulnerable
to off-target effect
[17]
mSCRIBE
CRISPR-Cas9 and
self-targeting guide RNA
targeted itself
Inflammation,
Chemical Day scale (Slow) Medium Long Yes Genome
Encoding of analog
memory, vulnerable to
off-target effect
[59]
CAMERA Cas9 nuclease or base editor
targeted to recording site
Chemical, Phage
infection, Light,
Cellular state
Hour scale
(Fast) Medium Long Yes Plasmid,
Genome
Encoding of analog
memory, reversible
system, universal system
between bacteria and
mammalian cells
[65]
HyperCas12a
base editor
system
Cas12a base editor targeted
to recording circuit
Chemical,
Cellular state
Hour scale
(Fast) Medium Long No Plasmid,
Genome
Encoding of analog
memory, applied to
sense-and-respond
circuits
[21]
T7 polymerase-
driven base
editing
Base editor fused to T7 RNA
polymerase targeted to T7
promoter-controlled gene
sequence
Transcription Hour scale
(Fast) Low Long No Plasmid,
Genome
Accompanied continuous
mutagenesis to target site [72]
DNA
Typewriter
Sequential prime editng of
target sequences
Transfection,
Cell
differentiation
Day scale (Slow) High Long Yes Genome
Applied to record
complex event histories
and short digital data
[20]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 11 of 17
Table 1. Cont.
System Approach Information
Type
Sensitivity
(Timescales of
Cellular
Recording)
Scalability Durability Temporal
Information Storage Place Features Citation
ENGRAM
Prime editor programmed to
insert CRE-specific barcode
sequence
Enhancer
activity, Cellular
state
Day scale (Slow) High Long Yes Genome
Could be coupled with
DNA Typewriter system
for temporal recording
[79]
TRACE
CRISPR adaptation of copy
inducible plasmid into
CRISPR array
Chemical Hour scale
(Fast) Medium Long Yes Genome
Applied to record
temporal
biological/digital data
[87]
Record-seq
RT-Cas1 and Cas2-based
acquisition of RNA
transcripts into CRISPR array
Transcription Hour scale
(Fast) High Long Yes Genome
Genome-wide
transcriptional
information
[88]
Retro-Cascorder CRISPR adaptation of retron
RT-DNA into CRISPR array Chemical Hour scale
(Fast) Medium Long Yes Genome
Identification of
molecular events and
their orders in individual
cells
[90]
DCM-TM
Methyltransferase DCM
fused to RNA polymerase
targeted to transcript
Transcription,
Enhancer
activity
Day scale (Slow) High Long No Genome Applied to track cellular
state in mouse intestine [110]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 12 of 17
We anticipate that improving DNA-based cellular recorders by enhancing their sensi-
tivity, scalability, and durability will be key to utilizing molecular recording across various
applications. While the sensitivity of most molecular recorders is limited to an hour or
day scale, it is important to address stimuli that occur on a second or minute scale for
responding to instant signals. Developing methods to increase the sensitivity for cellular
recording at such high temporal resolution will provide real-time monitoring capabilities,
which are essential for applications such as detecting rapid changes in cellular states or en-
vironmental conditions. A recent study with minute resolution demonstrated the potential
for highly sensitive encoding of environmental signals [119]. Engineered TdT transduced
these signals by incorporating specific nucleotides in response to cation concentrations,
such as Co2+, Ca2+, and Zn2+, and temperature changes within 1 min in vitro. Similar to
this engineered TdT, exploiting highly sensitive enzymes could improve the resolution of
cellular recording.
Furthermore, expanding the capability for multiplexing and temporal recording will
be necessary as these characteristics tend to be inversely proportional. Encoding temporal
information of two or three environmental signals is relatively straightforward; however,
managing temporal transcriptional recording on a genome-wide scale is still challenging
and requires significant experimental and computational advancements. Expanded scal-
ability to support long-term genome-wide transcriptional recording with high temporal
resolution will allow for comprehensive monitoring of complex biological processes and
interactions over time. A potential approach to enhance these capabilities is to combine
the multiplexed and quantitative recording capacity of ENGRAM with the sequential
recording capacity of DNA Typewriter [20,79]. The pegRNAs linked to signal-responsive
cis-regulatory elements (CREs) that are targeted to a tandem array of partial target sites
could potentially mediate unidirectional insertions of barcodes for temporal recording by
shifting the editable positions.
Finally, enhancing the durability and robustness of recorded data by minimizing off-
target effects and ensuring long-term stability will provide reliable data for extended studies
and applications, such as longitudinal tracking of cellular changes. The off-target effects can
occur not only in approaches using CRISPR-Cas nucleases but also in those using CRISPR
adaptation machineries [ 120]. To overcome these challenges, better control of CRISPR
off-target effects and the integration of robust memory maintenance mechanisms will be
essential. To minimize off-target effects, engineered sgRNAs can increase the specificity
of CRISPR activity by varying the hairpin structure of sgRNAs [ 121] or by delivering
off-target-directed short gRNA while maintaining on-target efficiencies [122]. Furthermore,
engineered enzymes can reduce the risks of off-target effects [123]. We expect this emerging
DNA-based modality of biological measurement will be key to gaining novel insights into
diverse biological processes and fostering the development of various biotechnological
applications, from environmental sensing to disease monitoring and beyond.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, H.J. and S.S.Y.; writing, H.J. and S.S.Y.; funding acquisition,
S.S.Y. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded
by the Korea government (MSIT) (RS-2024-00358175, RS-2024-00399424) and KAIST (G04220037,
N10230105, N11230043, N10240028, N10240039).
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Zheng, D.; Liwinski, T.; Elinav, E. Interaction between microbiota and immunity in health and disease. Cell Res.2020, 30, 492–506.
[CrossRef]
2. Joung, J.; Ma, S.; Tay, T.; Geiger-Schuller, K.R.; Kirchgatterer, P .C.; Verdine, V .K.; Guo, B.; Arias-Garcia, M.A.; Allen, W.E.; Singh,
A.; et al. A transcription factor atlas of directed differentiation. Cell 2023, 186, 209–229.e26. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Sheth, R.U.; Wang, H.H. DNA-based memory devices for recording cellular events. Nat. Rev. Genet.2018, 19, 718–732. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 13 of 17
4. Schofield, J.A.; Duffy, E.E.; Kiefer, L.; Sullivan, M.C.; Simon, M.D. TimeLapse-seq: Adding a temporal dimension to RNA
sequencing through nucleoside recoding. Nat. Methods2018, 15, 221–225. [CrossRef]
5. La Manno, G.; Soldatov, R.; Zeisel, A.; Braun, E.; Hochgerner, H.; Petukhov, V .; Lidschreiber, K.; Kastriti, M.E.; Lönnerberg, P .;
Furlan, A.; et al. RNA velocity of single cells. Nature 2018, 560, 494–498. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Chen, W.; Guillaume-Gentil, O.; Rainer, P .Y.; Gäbelein, C.G.; Saelens, W.; Gardeux, V .; Klaeger, A.; Dainese, R.; Zachara, M.;
Zambelli, T.; et al. Live-seq enables temporal transcriptomic recording of single cells. Nature 2022, 608, 733–740. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
7. Gootenberg, J.S.; Abudayyeh, O.O.; Lee, J.W.; Essletzbichler, P .; Dy, A.J.; Joung, J.; Verdine, V .; Donghia, N.; Daringer, N.M.; Freije,
C.A.; et al. Nucleic acid detection with CRISPR-Cas13a/C2c2. Science 2017, 356, 438–442. [CrossRef]
8. Kim, J.; Lee, S.; Jung, K.; Oh, W.C.; Kim, N.; Son, S.; Jo, Y.; Kwon, H.-B.; Heo, W.D. Intensiometric biosensors visualize the activity
of multiple small GTPases in vivo. Nat. Commun.2019, 10, 211. [CrossRef]
9. Kaczmarczyk, A.; van Vliet, S.; Jakob, R.P .; Teixeira, R.D.; Scheidat, I.; Reinders, A.; Klotz, A.; Maier, T.; Jenal, U. A genetically
encoded biosensor to monitor dynamic changes of c-di-GMP with high temporal resolution. Nat. Commun. 2024, 15, 3920.
[CrossRef]
10. Matange, K.; Tuck, J.M.; Keung, A.J. DNA stability: A central design consideration for DNA data storage systems. Nat. Commun.
2021, 12, 1358. [CrossRef]
11. Doricchi, A.; Platnich, C.M.; Gimpel, A.; Horn, F.; Earle, M.; Lanzavecchia, G.; Cortajarena, A.L.; Liz-Marz án, L.M.; Liu, N.;
Heckel, R.; et al. Emerging Approaches to DNA Data Storage: Challenges and Prospects. ACS Nano2022, 16, 17552–17571.
[CrossRef]
12. Hu, T.; Chitnis, N.; Monos, D.; Dinh, A. Next-generation sequencing technologies: An overview. Hum. Immunol.2021, 82, 801–811.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Loveless, T.B.; Grotts, J.H.; Schechter, M.W.; Forouzmand, E.; Carlson, C.K.; Agahi, B.S.; Liang, G.; Ficht, M.; Liu, B.; Xie, X.; et al.
Lineage tracing and analog recording in mammalian cells by single-site DNA writing. Nat. Chem. Biol. 2021, 17, 739–747.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Schmidt, F.; Zimmermann, J.; Tanna, T.; Farouni, R.; Conway, T.; Macpherson, A.J.; Platt, R.J. Noninvasive assessment of gut
function using transcriptional recording sentinel cells. Science 2022, 376, eabm6038. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Munck, C.; Sheth, R.U.; Freedberg, D.E.; Wang, H.H. Recording mobile DNA in the gut microbiota using an Escherichia coli
CRISPR-Cas spacer acquisition platform. Nat. Commun.2020, 11, 95. [CrossRef]
16. Farzadfard, F.; Gharaei, N.; Citorik, R.J.; Lu, T.K. Efficient retroelement-mediated DNA writing in bacteria. Cell Syst. 2021,
12, 860–872.e5. [CrossRef]
17. McKenna, A.; Findlay, G.M.; Gagnon, J.A.; Horwitz, M.S.; Schier, A.F.; Shendure, J. Whole-organism lineage tracing by combinato-
rial and cumulative genome editing. Science 2016, 353, aaf7907. [CrossRef]
18. Kalhor, R.; Kalhor, K.; Mejia, L.; Leeper, K.; Graveline, A.; Mali, P .; Church, G.M. Developmental barcoding of whole mouse via
homing CRISPR. Science 2018, 361, eaat9804. [CrossRef]
19. Yim, S.S.; McBee, R.M.; Song, A.M.; Huang, Y.; Sheth, R.U.; Wang, H.H. Robust direct digital-to-biological data storage in living
cells. Nat. Chem. Biol.2021, 17, 246–253. [CrossRef]
20. Choi, J.; Chen, W.; Minkina, A.; Chardon, F.M.; Suiter, C.C.; Regalado, S.G.; Domcke, S.; Hamazaki, N.; Lee, C.; Martin, B.; et al. A
time-resolved, multi-symbol molecular recorder via sequential genome editing. Nature 2022, 608, 98–107. [CrossRef]
21. Kempton, H.R.; Love, K.S.; Guo, L.Y.; Qi, L.S. Scalable biological signal recording in mammalian cells using Cas12a base editors.
Nat. Chem. Biol.2022, 18, 742–750. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Siuti, P .; Yazbek, J.; Lu, T.K. Synthetic circuits integrating logic and memory in living cells.Nat. Biotechnol. 2013, 31, 448–452.
[CrossRef]
23. Yang, L.; Nielsen, A.A.; Fernandez-Rodriguez, J.; McClune, C.J.; Laub, M.T.; Lu, T.K.; Voigt, C.A. Permanent genetic memory with
>1-byte capacity. Nat. Methods2014, 11, 1261–1266. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Courbet, A.; Endy, D.; Renard, E.; Molina, F.; Bonnet, J. Detection of pathological biomarkers in human clinical samples via
amplifying genetic switches and logic gates. Sci. Transl. Med.2015, 7, 289ra83. [CrossRef]
25. Chiu, T.-Y.; Jiang, J.-H.R. Logic Synthesis of Recombinase-Based Genetic Circuits. Sci. Rep.2017, 7, 12873. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Kim, T.; Weinberg, B.; Wong, W.; Lu, T.K. Scalable recombinase-based gene expression cascades.Nat. Commun.2021, 12, 2711.
[CrossRef]
27. Huang, B.D.; Kim, D.; Yu, Y.; Wilson, C.J. Engineering intelligent chassis cells via recombinase-based MEMORY circuits. Nat.
Commun. 2024, 15, 2418. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28. Roquet, N.; Soleimany, A.P .; Ferris, A.C.; Aaronson, S.; Lu, T.K. Synthetic recombinase-based state machines in living cells.Science
2016, 353, aad8559. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Farzadfard, F.; Lu, T.K. Genomically encoded analog memory with precisein vivo DNA writing in living cell populations. Science
2014, 346, 1256272. [CrossRef]
30. Millman, A.; Bernheim, A.; Stokar-Avihail, A.; Fedorenko, T.; Voichek, M.; Leavitt, A.; Oppenheimer-Shaanan, Y.; Sorek, R.
Bacterial Retrons Function in Anti-Phage Defense. Cell 2020, 183, 1551–1561.e12. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 14 of 17
31. Schubert, M.G.; Goodman, D.B.; Wannier, T.M.; Kaur, D.; Farzadfard, F.; Lu, T.K.; Shipman, S.L.; Church, G.M. High-throughput
functional variant screens via in vivo production of single-stranded DNA. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA2021, 118, e2018181118.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Lopez, S.C.; Crawford, K.D.; Lear, S.K.; Bhattarai-Kline, S.; Shipman, S.L. Precise genome editing across kingdoms of life using
retron-derived DNA. Nat. Chem. Biol.2022, 18, 199–206. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Liu, W.; Zuo, S.; Shao, Y.; Bi, K.; Zhao, J.; Huang, L.; Xu, Z.; Lian, J. Retron-mediated multiplex genome editing and continuous
evolution in Escherichia coli. Nucleic Acids Res.2023, 51, 8293–8307. [CrossRef]
34. Weinberg, B.H.; Pham, N.T.H.; Caraballo, L.D.; Lozanoski, T.; Engel, A.; Bhatia, S.; Wong, W.W. Large-scale design of robust
genetic circuits with multiple inputs and outputs for mammalian cells. Nat. Biotechnol.2017, 35, 453–462. [CrossRef]
35. Guiziou, S.; Maranas, C.J.; Chu, J.C.; Nemhauser, J.L. An integrase toolbox to record gene-expression during plant development.
Nat. Commun.2023, 14, 1844. [CrossRef]
36. Kalvapalle, P .B.; Sridhar, S.; Silberg, J.J.; Stadler, L.B. Long-duration environmental biosensing by recording analyte detection in
DNA using recombinase memory. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.2024, 90, e02363-23. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Durrant, M.G.; Fanton, A.; Tycko, J.; Hinks, M.; Chandrasekaran, S.S.; Perry, N.T.; Schaepe, J.; Du, P .P .; Lotfy, P .; Bassik, M.C.; et al.
Systematic discovery of recombinases for efficient integration of large DNA sequences into the human genome. Nat. Biotechnol.
2023, 41, 488–499. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Short, A.E.; Kim, D.; Milner, P .T.; Wilson, C.J. Next generation synthetic memory via intercepting recombinase function.Nat.
Commun. 2023, 14, 5255. [CrossRef]
39. Urnov, F.D.; Rebar, E.J.; Holmes, M.C.; Zhang, H.S.; Gregory, P .D. Genome editing with engineered zinc finger nucleases.Nat. Rev.
Genet. 2010, 11, 636–646. [CrossRef]
40. Joung, J.K.; Sander, J.D. TALENs: A widely applicable technology for targeted genome editing. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol.2013,
14, 49–55. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
41. Li, H.; Yang, Y.; Hong, W.; Huang, M.; Wu, M.; Zhao, X. Applications of genome editing technology in the targeted therapy of
human diseases: Mechanisms, advances and prospects. Signal Transduct. Target. Ther.2020, 5, 1. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Doudna, J.A. The promise and challenge of therapeutic genome editing. Nature 2020, 578, 229–236. [CrossRef]
43. Anzalone, A.V .; Koblan, L.W.; Liu, D.R. Genome editing with CRISPR–Cas nucleases, base editors, transposases and prime
editors. Nat. Biotechnol.2020, 38, 824–844. [CrossRef]
44. Cong, L.; Ran, F.A.; Cox, D.; Lin, S.; Barretto, R.; Habib, N.; Hsu, P .D.; Wu, X.; Jiang, W.; Marraffini, L.A.; et al. Multiplex Genome
Engineering Using CRISPR/Cas Systems. Science 2013, 339, 819–823. [CrossRef]
45. Ran, F.A.; Hsu, P .D.; Wright, J.; Agarwala, V .; Scott, D.A.; Zhang, F. Genome engineering using the CRISPR-Cas9 system.Nat.
Protoc. 2013, 8, 2281–2308. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Sander, J.D.; Joung, J.K. CRISPR-Cas systems for editing, regulating and targeting genomes. Nat. Biotechnol.2014, 32, 347–355.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Wang, J.Y.; Doudna, J.A. CRISPR technology: A decade of genome editing is only the beginning. Science 2023, 379, eadd8643.
[CrossRef]
48. Celli, L.; Gasparini, P .; Biino, G.; Zannini, L.; Cardano, M. CRISPR/Cas9 mediated Y-chromosome elimination affects human cells
transcriptome. Cell Biosci.2024, 14, 15. [CrossRef]
49. Frieda, K.L.; Linton, J.M.; Hormoz, S.; Choi, J.; Chow, K.-H.K.; Singer, Z.S.; Budde, M.W.; Elowitz, M.B.; Cai, L. Synthetic recording
and in situ readout of lineage information in single cells. Nature 2017, 541, 107–111. [CrossRef]
50. Wang, Z.; Zhu, J. MEMOIR: A Novel System for Neural Lineage Tracing. Neurosci. Bull.2017, 33, 763–765. [CrossRef]
51. Lubeck, E.; Coskun, A.F.; Zhiyentayev, T.; Ahmad, M.; Cai, L. Single-cell in situ RNA profiling by sequential hybridization.Nat.
Methods 2014, 11, 360–361.
52. Alemany, A.; Florescu, M.; Baron, C.S.; Peterson-Maduro, J.; van Oudenaarden, A. Whole-organism clone tracing using single-cell
sequencing. Nature 2018, 556, 108–112. [PubMed]
53. Raj, B.; Wagner, D.E.; McKenna, A.; Pandey, S.; Klein, A.M.; Shendure, J.; Gagnon, J.A.; Schier, A.F. Simultaneous single-cell
profiling of lineages and cell types in the vertebrate brain. Nat. Biotechnol.2018, 36, 442–450. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
54. Chan, M.M.; Smith, Z.D.; Grosswendt, S.; Kretzmer, H.; Norman, T.M.; Adamson, B.; Jost, M.; Quinn, J.J.; Yang, D.; Jones,
M.G.; et al. Molecular recording of mammalian embryogenesis. Nature 2019, 570, 77–82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Wagner, D.E.; Klein, A.M. Lineage tracing meets single-cell omics: Opportunities and challenges. Nat. Rev. Genet. 2020,
21, 410–427. [CrossRef]
56. Yang, D.; Jones, M.G.; Naranjo, S.; Rideout, W.M.; Min, K.H.; Ho, R.; Wu, W.; Replogle, J.M.; Page, J.L.; Quinn, J.J.; et al. Lineage
tracing reveals the phylodynamics, plasticity, and paths of tumor evolution. Cell 2022, 185, 1905–1923.e25.
57. Kalhor, R.; Mali, P .; Church, G.M. Rapidly evolving homing CRISPR barcodes. Nat. Methods2017, 14, 195–200. [CrossRef]
58. Leeper, K.; Kalhor, K.; Vernet, A.; Graveline, A.; Church, G.M.; Mali, P .; Kalhor, R. Lineage barcoding in mice with homing
CRISPR. Nat. Protoc.2021, 16, 2088–2108.
59. Perli, S.D.; Cui, C.H.; Lu, T.K. Continuous genetic recording with self-targeting CRISPR-Cas in human cells. Science 2016,
353, aag0511. [CrossRef]
60. Park, J.; Lim, J.M.; Jung, I.; Heo, S.J.; Park, J.; Chang, Y.; Kim, H.K.; Jung, D.; Yu, J.H.; Min, S.; et al. Recording of elapsed time and
temporal information about biological events using Cas9. Cell 2021, 184, 1047–1063.e23. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 15 of 17
61. Xue, C.; Greene, E.C. DNA Repair Pathway Choices in CRISPR-Cas9-Mediated Genome Editing. Trends Genet.2021, 37, 639–656.
[CrossRef]
62. Komor, A.C.; Kim, Y.B.; Packer, M.S.; Zuris, J.A.; Liu, D.R. Programmable editing of a target base in genomic DNA without
double-stranded DNA cleavage. Nature 2016, 533, 420–424. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Nishida, K.; Arazoe, T.; Yachie, N.; Banno, S.; Kakimoto, M.; Tabata, M.; Mochizuki, M.; Miyabe, A.; Araki, M.; Hara, K.Y.; et al.
Targeted nucleotide editing using hybrid prokaryotic and vertebrate adaptive immune systems. Science 2016, 353, aaf8729.
[CrossRef]
64. Gaudelli, N.M.; Komor, A.C.; Rees, H.A.; Packer, M.S.; Badran, A.H.; Bryson, D.I.; Liu, D.R. Programmable base editing of A•T to
G•C in genomic DNA without DNA cleavage. Nature 2017, 551, 464–471. [CrossRef]
65. Tang, W.; Liu, D.R. Rewritable multi-event analog recording in bacterial and mammalian cells. Science 2018, 360, eaap8992.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Farzadfard, F.; Gharaei, N.; Higashikuni, Y.; Jung, G.; Cao, J.; Lu, T.K. Single-Nucleotide-Resolution Computing and Memory in
Living Cells. Mol. Cell2019, 75, 769–780.e4. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Li, X.; Wang, Y.; Liu, Y.; Yang, B.; Wang, X.; Wei, J.; Lu, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Wu, J.; Huang, X.; et al. Base editing with a Cpf1–cytidine
deaminase fusion. Nat. Biotechnol.2018, 36, 324–327. [CrossRef]
68. Guo, L.Y.; Bian, J.; Davis, A.E.; Liu, P .; Kempton, H.R.; Zhang, X.; Chemparathy, A.; Gu, B.; Lin, X.; Rane, D.A.; et al. Multiplexed
genome regulation in vivo with hyper-efficient Cas12a. Nat. Cell Biol.2022, 24, 590–600. [CrossRef]
69. Tu, B.; Sundar, V .; Esvelt, K.M. An ultra-high-throughput method for measuring biomolecular activities.bioRxiv 2024. [CrossRef]
70. Hwang, B.; Lee, W.; Yum, S.-Y.; Jeon, Y.; Cho, N.; Jang, G.; Bang, D. Lineage tracing using a Cas9-deaminase barcoding system
targeting endogenous L1 elements. Nat. Commun.2019, 10, 1234. [CrossRef]
71. Jiao, C.; Reckstadt, C.; König, F.; Homberger, C.; Yu, J.; Vogel, J.; Westermann, A.J.; Sharma, C.M.; Beisel, C.L. RNA recording in
single bacterial cells using reprogrammed tracrRNAs. Nat. Biotechnol.2023, 41, 1107–1116. [CrossRef]
72. Chen, H.; Liu, S.; Padula, S.; Lesman, D.; Griswold, K.; Lin, A.; Zhao, T.; Marshall, J.L.; Chen, F. Efficient, continuous mutagenesis
in human cells using a pseudo-random DNA editor. Nat. Biotechnol.2020, 38, 165–168. [CrossRef]
73. Rodriques, S.G.; Chen, L.M.; Liu, S.; Zhong, E.D.; Scherrer, J.R.; Boyden, E.S.; Chen, F. RNA timestamps identify the age of single
molecules in RNA sequencing. Nat. Biotechnol.2021, 39, 320–325. [CrossRef]
74. Lin, Y.; Kwok, S.; Hein, A.E.; Thai, B.Q.; Alabi, Y.; Ostrowski, M.S.; Wu, K.; Floor, S.N. RNA molecular recording with an
engineered RNA deaminase. Nat. Methods2023, 20, 1887–1899. [CrossRef]
75. Anzalone, A.V .; Randolph, P .B.; Davis, J.R.; Sousa, A.A.; Koblan, L.W.; Levy, J.M.; Chen, P .J.; Wilson, C.; Newby, G.A.; Raguram,
A.; et al. Search-and-replace genome editing without double-strand breaks or donor DNA. Nature 2019, 576, 149–157. [CrossRef]
76. Chen, P .J.; Liu, D.R. Prime editing for precise and highly versatile genome manipulation. Nat. Rev. Genet.2023, 24, 161–177.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
77. Loveless, T.B.; Carlson, C.K.; Dentzel Helmy, C.A.; Hu, V .J.; Ross, S.K.; Demelo, M.C.; Murtaza, A.; Liang, G.; Ficht, M.; Singhai,
A.; et al. Open-ended molecular recording of sequential cellular events into DNA. bioRxiv 2024. [CrossRef]
78. Liao, H.; Choi, J.; Shendure, J. Molecular recording using DNA Typewriter. Nat. Protoc.2024. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79. Chen, W.; Choi, J.; Li, X.; Nathans, J.F.; Martin, B.; Yang, W.; Hamazaki, N.; Qiu, C.; Lalanne, J.-B.; Regalado, S.; et al. Symbolic
recording of signalling and cis-regulatory element activity to DNA. Nature 2024. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80. Nelson, J.W.; Randolph, P .B.; Shen, S.P .; Everette, K.A.; Chen, P .J.; Anzalone, A.V .; An, M.; Newby, G.A.; Chen, J.C.; Hsu, A.; et al.
Engineered pegRNAs improve prime editing efficiency. Nat. Biotechnol.2022, 40, 402–410. [CrossRef]
81. Doman, J.L.; Pandey, S.; Neugebauer, M.E.; An, M.; Davis, J.R.; Randolph, P .B.; McElroy, A.; Gao, X.D.; Raguram, A.; Richter,
M.F.; et al. Phage-assisted evolution and protein engineering yield compact, efficient prime editors. Cell 2023, 186, 3983–4002.e26.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Nuñez, J.K.; Lee, A.S.Y.; Engelman, A.; Doudna, J.A. Integrase-mediated spacer acquisition during CRISPR–Cas adaptive
immunity. Nature 2015, 519, 193–198. [CrossRef]
83. Amitai, G.; Sorek, R. CRISPR–Cas adaptation: Insights into the mechanism of action. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2016, 14, 67–76.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
84. McGinn, J.; Marraffini, L.A. Molecular mechanisms of CRISPR–Cas spacer acquisition. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2019, 17, 7–12.
[CrossRef]
85. Shipman, S.L.; Nivala, J.; Macklis, J.D.; Church, G.M. Molecular recordings by directed CRISPR spacer acquisition. Science 2016,
353, aaf1175. [CrossRef]
86. Shipman, S.L.; Nivala, J.; Macklis, J.D.; Church, G.M. CRISPR–Cas encoding of a digital movie into the genomes of a population
of living bacteria. Nature 2017, 547, 345–349. [CrossRef]
87. Sheth, R.U.; Yim, S.S.; Wu, F.L.; Wang, H.H. Multiplex recording of cellular events over time on CRISPR biological tape.Science
2017, 358, 1457–1461. [CrossRef]
88. Schmidt, F.; Cherepkova, M.Y.; Platt, R.J. Transcriptional recording by CRISPR spacer acquisition from RNA. Nature 2018,
562, 380–385. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89. Tanna, T.; Schmidt, F.; Cherepkova, M.Y.; Okoniewski, M.; Platt, R.J. Recording transcriptional histories using Record-seq.Nat.
Protoc. 2020, 15, 513–539. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 16 of 17
90. Bhattarai-Kline, S.; Lear, S.K.; Fishman, C.B.; Lopez, S.C.; Lockshin, E.R.; Schubert, M.G.; Nivala, J.; Church, G.M.; Shipman, S.L.
Recording gene expression order in DNA by CRISPR addition of retron barcodes. Nature 2022, 608, 217–225. [CrossRef]
91. Lear, S.K.; Lopez, S.C.; González-Delgado, A.; Bhattarai-Kline, S.; Shipman, S.L. Temporally resolved transcriptional recording in
E. coli DNA using a Retro-Cascorder. Nat. Protoc.2023, 18, 1866–1892. [CrossRef]
92. Ramachandran, A.; Summerville, L.; Learn, B.A.; DeBell, L.; Bailey, S. Processing and integration of functionally oriented
prespacers in the Escherichia coli CRISPR system depends on bacterial host exonucleases. J. Biol. Chem.2020, 295, 3403–3414.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
93. Wang, J.Y.; Tuck, O.T.; Skopintsev, P .; Soczek, K.M.; Li, G.; Al-Shayeb, B.; Zhou, J.; Doudna, J.A. Genome expansion by a CRISPR
trimmer-integrase. Nature 2023, 618, 855–861. [CrossRef]
94. Hu, C.; Almendros, C.; Nam, K.H.; Costa, A.R.; Vink, J.N.A.; Haagsma, A.C.; Bagde, S.R.; Brouns, S.J.J.; Ke, A. Mechanism for
Cas4-assisted directional spacer acquisition in CRISPR–Cas. Nature 2021, 598, 515–520. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95. Heler, R.; Wright, A.V .; Vucelja, M.; Bikard, D.; Doudna, J.A.; Marraffini, L.A. Mutations in Cas9 Enhance the Rate of Acquisition
of Viral Spacer Sequences during the CRISPR-Cas Immune Response. Mol. Cell2017, 65, 168–175. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96. Yosef, I.; Mahata, T.; Goren, M.G.; Degany, O.J.; Ben-Shem, A.; Qimron, U. Highly active CRISPR-adaptation proteins revealed by
a robust enrichment technology. Nucleic Acids Res.2023, 51, 7552–7562. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
97. Moore, L.D.; Le, T.; Fan, G. DNA Methylation and Its Basic Function. Neuropsychopharmacology 2013, 38, 23–38. [CrossRef]
98. Greenberg, M.V .C.; Bourc’his, D. The diverse roles of DNA methylation in mammalian development and disease.Nat. Rev. Mol.
Cell Biol.2019, 20, 590–607. [CrossRef]
99. S ánchez-Romero, M.A.; Casadesús, J. The bacterial epigenome. Nat. Rev. Microbiol.2020, 18, 7–20. [CrossRef]
100. Seong, H.J.; Han, S.W.; Sul, W.J. Prokaryotic DNA methylation and its functional roles.J. Microbiol.2021, 59, 242–248. [CrossRef]
101. Beaulaurier, J.; Schadt, E.E.; Fang, G. Deciphering bacterial epigenomes using modern sequencing technologies. Nat. Rev. Genet.
2019, 20, 157–172. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Rauluseviciute, I.; Drabløs, F.; Rye, M.B. DNA methylation data by sequencing: Experimental approaches and recommendations
for tools and pipelines for data analysis. Clin. Epigenet.2019, 11, 193. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
103. Zhou, Q.; Zhou, C.; Zhu, Z.; Sun, Y.; Li, G. DNA Methylation (DM) data format and DMtools for efficient DNA methylation data
storage and analysis. bioRxiv 2024. [CrossRef]
104. Maier, J.A.H.; Möhrle, R.; Jeltsch, A. Design of synthetic epigenetic circuits featuring memory effects and reversible switching
based on DNA methylation. Nat. Commun.2017, 8, 15336. [CrossRef]
105. Lei, Y.; Zhang, X.; Su, J.; Jeong, M.; Gundry, M.C.; Huang, Y.-H.; Zhou, Y.; Li, W.; Goodell, M.A. Targeted DNA methylation
in vivo using an engineered dCas9-MQ1 fusion protein. Nat. Commun.2017, 8, 16026. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
106. Van, M.V .; Fujimori, T.; Bintu, L. Nanobody-mediated control of gene expression and epigenetic memory.Nat. Commun.2021,
12, 537. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
107. Sapozhnikov, D.M.; Szyf, M. Unraveling the functional role of DNA demethylation at specific promoters by targeted steric
blockage of DNA methyltransferase with CRISPR/dCas9. Nat. Commun.2021, 12, 5711. [CrossRef]
108. Heyn, H.; Esteller, M. An Adenine Code for DNA: A Second Life for N6-Methyladenine. Cell 2015, 161, 710–713. [CrossRef]
109. Park, M.; Patel, N.; Keung, A.J.; Khalil, A.S. Engineering Epigenetic Regulation Using Synthetic Read-Write Modules. Cell 2019,
176, 227–238.e20. [CrossRef]
110. Boers, R.; Boers, J.; Tan, B.; van Leeuwen, M.E.; Wassenaar, E.; Sanchez, E.G.; Sleddens, E.; Tenhagen, Y.; Mulugeta, E.; Laven,
J.; et al. Retrospective analysis of enhancer activity and transcriptome history. Nat. Biotechnol.2023, 41, 1582–1592. [CrossRef]
111. Boers, R.; Boers, J.; de Hoon, B.; Kockx, C.; Ozgur, Z.; Molijn, A.; van IJcken, W.; Laven, J.; Gribnau, J. Genome-wide DNA
methylation profiling using the methylation-dependent restriction enzyme LpnPI. Genome Res.2018, 28, 88–99. [CrossRef]
112. Nuñez, J.K.; Chen, J.; Pommier, G.C.; Cogan, J.Z.; Replogle, J.M.; Adriaens, C.; Ramadoss, G.N.; Shi, Q.; Hung, K.L.; Samelson,
A.J.; et al. Genome-wide programmable transcriptional memory by CRISPR-based epigenome editing.Cell 2021, 184, 2503–2519.e17.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
113. Schmidt, F.; Platt, R.J. Applications of CRISPR-Cas for synthetic biology and genetic recording.Curr. Opin. Syst. Biol.2017, 5, 9–15.
[CrossRef]
114. Ishiguro, S.; Mori, H.; Yachie, N. DNA event recorders send past information of cells to the time of observation. Curr. Opin. Chem.
Biol. 2019, 52, 54–62. [CrossRef]
115. Masuyama, N.; Mori, H.; Yachie, N. DNA barcodes evolve for high-resolution cell lineage tracing. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol.2019,
52, 63–71. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
116. Lear, S.K.; Shipman, S.L. Molecular recording: Transcriptional data collection into the genome. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.2023,
79, 102855. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
117. Green, A.A.; Kim, J.; Ma, D.; Silver, P .A.; Collins, J.J.; Yin, P . Complex cellular logic computation using ribocomputing devices.
Nature 2017, 548, 117–121. [CrossRef]
118. Konno, N.; Kijima, Y.; Watano, K.; Ishiguro, S.; Ono, K.; Tanaka, M.; Mori, H.; Masuyama, N.; Pratt, D.; Ideker, T.; et al. Deep
distributed computing to reconstruct extremely large lineage trees. Nat. Biotechnol.2022, 40, 566–575. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
119. Bhan, N.; Callisto, A.; Strutz, J.; Glaser, J.; Kalhor, R.; Boyden, E.S.; Church, G.; Kording, K.; Tyo, K.E.J. Recording Temporal Signals
with Minutes Resolution Using Enzymatic DNA Synthesis. J. Am. Chem. Soc.2021, 143, 16630–16640. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2024, 25, 9233 17 of 17
120. Nivala, J.; Shipman, S.L.; Church, G.M. Spontaneous CRISPR loci generation in vivo by non-canonical spacer integration. Nat.
Microbiol. 2018, 3, 310–318. [CrossRef]
121. Kocak, D.D.; Josephs, E.A.; Bhandarkar, V .; Adkar, S.S.; Kwon, J.B.; Gersbach, C.A. Increasing the specificity of CRISPR systems
with engineered RNA secondary structures. Nat. Biotechnol.2019, 37, 657–666. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
122. Coelho, M.A.; De Braekeleer, E.; Firth, M.; Bista, M.; Lukasiak, S.; Cuomo, M.E.; Taylor, B.J.M. CRISPR GUARD protects off-target
sites from Cas9 nuclease activity using short guide RNAs. Nat. Commun.2020, 11, 4132. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
123. Li, A.; Mitsunobu, H.; Yoshioka, S.; Suzuki, T.; Kondo, A.; Nishida, K. Cytosine base editing systems with minimized off-target
effect and molecular size. Nat. Commun.2022, 13, 4531. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.