Article
AlphaDesign: a de novo protein design framework
based on AlphaFold
Michael A Jendrusch 1,2,A l e s s i oLJY a n g1,2, Elisabetta Cacace1,3, Jacob Bobonis 4,
Carlos G P Voogdt 1, Sarah Kaspar 1, Kristian Schweimer 5, Cecilia Perez-Borrajero 1,
Karine Lapouge 6, Jacob Scheurich6,K i mR e m a n s6, Janosch Hennig 1,5, Athanasios Typas 1,
Jan O Korbel 1 ✉ & S Kashif Sadiq 1,7 ✉
Abstract
De novo protein design is of fundamental interest to synthetic
biology, with a plethora of computational methods of various
degrees of generality developed in recent years. Here, we introduce
AlphaDesign, a hallucination-based computational framework for
de novo protein design developed with maximum generality and
usability in mind, which combines AlphaFold with autoregressive
diffusion models to enable rapid generation and computational
validation of proteins with controllable interactions, conformations
and oligomeric state without the requirement for class-dependent
model re-training orﬁne-tuning. We apply our framework to design
and systematically validate in vivo active inhibitors of a family of
bacterial phage defense systems with toxic effectors called retrons,
paving the way towards efﬁcient, rational design of novel proteins
as biologics.
Keywords AlphaFold; Computational Biology; Machine Learning; De Novo
Protein Design; Anti-phage Defense Proteins
Subject CategoriesBiotechnology & Synthetic Biology; Computational
Biology; Structural Biology
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44320-025-00119-z
Received 8 April 2025; Revised 5 May 2025;
Accepted 6 May 2025
Published online: 17 June 2025
Introduction
Evolution has only explored an in ﬁnitesimal portion of the
potential protein sequence landscape (Huang et al, 2016).
Enormous potential, therefore, exists in unlocking the principles
of protein folding (Lindorff-Larsen et al, 2011) and accurate
structure prediction to design and engineer novel proteins that can
exploit this vast space. Established protein engineering methods
have largely focused on tuning naturally occurring proteins through
iterative experimental selection pro c e s s e ss u c ha sd i r e c t e de v o l u t i o n
(Dougherty and Arnold, 2009). Recently there has been rapid
progress in computational methods for protein design. Many
approaches to design protein backbones, such as hallucination-
based methods (Norn et al,2021;F r a n ke ta l ,2024; Tischer et al,
2020;W a n ge ta l ,2022; Wicky et al,2022) and denoising diffusion
probabilistic models (DDPM) (Watson et al, 2023; Lisanza et al,
2024; Ingraham et al,2022; Yim et al,2023), have been developed,
with diffusion models, so far, outperforming most hallucination-
based approaches in design quality. Combined with neural
networks capable of generating native-like sequences folding into
any given protein backbone structure (Ingraham et al, 2019;
Dauparas et al, 2022) these methods have enabled rapid design of
proteins with a variety of properties (Wicky et al,2022; Yeh et al,
2023). Most current studies on machine-learning-based protein
design methods focus mostly on denovo protein design tasks, such
as de novo monomer design (Norn et al,2021; Frank et al,2024;
Yim et al,2023; Lin and AlQuraishi,2023; Lisanza et al,2024)o r
homooligomer design (Wicky et al, 2022). This functionality has
been extended to site-speciﬁc protein binder design by more recent
DDPM-based methods (Watson et al, 2023) but these require
considerable engineering and training efforts to arrive at a usable
model.
While these methods and design capabilities have great
potential, they currently address only a fraction of the functional
properties of natural proteins. Many proteins exhibit multiple
functionally relevant states, either by binding multiple partners
and/or through exhibiting conformational changes across the
course of their natural function.
While prior work has investigated the potential of machine
learning for designing sequences compatible with multiple
conformations, such work has largely relied on the use of
manually-designed structural b lueprints (Praetorius et al, 2023;
Guo et al, 2024), instead of generating multi-state protein
backbones and sequences fully de novo.
Here we describe AlphaDesign, a protein design framework, the
versatility of which enables both standard (single-state) and multi-
state protein design by combining hallucination and diffusion-
1European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany.2Collaboration for joint PhD degree between EMBL and Heidelberg University, Faculty of Biosciences,
Heidelberg, Germany. 3Institute of Microbiology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.4Division of Microbial Ecology, Centre for Microbiology and
Environmental Systems Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.5Chair of Biochemistry IV, Biophysical Chemistry, University of Bayreuth, 95447 Bayreuth, Germany.
6Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation Core Facility, EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany.7DenovAI Biotech Ltd., Rehovot 7670104, Israel.✉E-mail: jan.korbel@embl.de;
kashif@denovai.com
1234567890();,:
1166 Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 © The Author(s)
based approaches. Our approach leverages AlphaFold (AF) (Jumper
et al, 2021) for structure prediction and autoregressive diffusion
models (ADM) (Hoogeboom et al,2022) for sequence optimisation.
To develop a method capable of designing proteins with any given
set of properties, we combine AF structure predictions and
conﬁdence measures into ﬁtness functions encoding various
protein design tasks. Given a sufﬁciently powerful optimiser, the
determining factor for protein design success lies entirely in the
ﬁtness function. While prior work on hallucination-based protein
design optimised various conﬁdence measures for speciﬁcp r o t e i n
design tasks, we expand on this line of research by developing
modular ﬁtness functions which can be combined to achieve
protein complex design, binder d esign, as well as multi-state
protein design.
We utilise an evolutionary algorithm (Sinai et al, 2020)a sa n
optimiser to search for amino acid sequences maximising these
ﬁtness functions (Fig. 1 (red)). This ensures that we can, in
principle, optimise proteins for any combination of properties that
can be predicted by AF, including changes in conformation
between monomeric and complex structures as well as binding to
multiple target proteins.
Optimising sequences for high structure prediction conﬁdence
runs the risk of generating adversarial examples for AF which are
unlikely to be recombinantly expressed in E. coli or adopt the
designed tertiary structure. Indeed, prior work showed that amino
acid sequences designed in a similar way are unlikely to be
expressed (Wicky et al, 2022; Goverde et al, 2022; Verkuil et al,
2022).
In order to avoid this issue and to overcome major challenges in
the ﬁeld associated with solubility and expressibility of de novo
designed proteins (Wicky et al,2022; Frank et al,2024), we further
redesign the sequences of high-ﬁtness candidate proteins using an
ADM (Hoogeboom et al,2022), trained on the PDB (Fig.1 (blue)).
This ADM generates a set of new native-like sequences for each
structure returned by the evolutionary algorithm. We ﬁnd that
sequence redesign is a crucial ingredient for successful protein
design with AlphaFold. We combine this design pipeline with
automated computational validation and design selection by
predicting the structures of our designs with AlphaFold and
ESMfold (Wu et al, 2022). As de novo designed proteins do not
have evolutionary information attached to them, we predict their
structures from their sequence alone without providing a multiple
sequence alignment (MSA). While AlphaFold is known to lose
accuracy on natural proteins in the absence of MSA information,
prior work has shown that single-sequence prediction is effective in
evaluating design success for de novo designed proteins and has
become the de facto standard fo r computational evaluation of
protein designs (Bennett et al,2022; Wicky et al,2022;M a r t i ne ta l ,
2024).
In contrast to most previous approaches, our hybrid framework
produces results that are competitive with DDPM-based methods,
whilst retaining the full ﬂexibility of hallucination-based
approaches. Only recently Frank et al demonstrated a comparable
approach yielding similar results to RFDiffusion on de novo protein
design (Frank et al,2024). We show state-of-the-art performance of
AlphaDesign on computational de novo protein design benchmarks
and demonstrate hallucination-based protein binder design beyond
short peptides (Bryant and Elofsson,2022;R e t t i ee ta l ,2023), which
has been shown to be possible only in one concurrent work on
protein design (Pacesa et al,2024) .O u rm e t h o di sv e r s a t i l ee n o u g h
Figure 1. Overview of the AlphaDesign pipeline.
The AlphaDesign pipeline consists of two main stages: candidate structure generation (red) and sequence redesign (blue). In theﬁrst stage, a pool of random amino acid
sequences has their structures and conﬁdence measures (pLDDT, pAE) predicted using AlphaFold. These are combined into aﬁtness function, which in turn is maximised
using an evolutionary algorithm. Once a sequence’s ﬁtness reaches a threshold, its predicted structure (raw structure) is returned for sequence redesign and
computational validation. The second stage uses an autoregressive diffusion model (ADM) trained on the PDB to generate new sequences for each structure from theﬁrst
stage. These are then re-predicted using multiple structure predictors (predicted structure). Sequences with low-conﬁdence predicted structures or high RMSD to the raw
structure are discarded. Source data are available online for thisﬁgure.
Michael A Jendrusch et al Molecular Systems Biology
© The Author(s) Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 1167
to design proteins with various properties for example, proteins
that are predicted to change conformation upon binding, as well as
proteins predicted to bind multiple homologues of a protein, all
without the requirement for model re-training or ﬁne-tuning.
These features are absent from other machine learning-based tools
for protein design. In addition to extensive computational
validation using accurate structure prediction tools and all-atom
molecular dynamics simulations, we demonstrate the real-world
applicability of our method by systematically designing and
experimentally validating inhibitors of the toxic effector RcaT
found in the most prevalent sub-family of retrons, a newly
discovered bacterial phage defense system (Millman et al, 2020;
Gao et al,2020; Bobonis et al,2022). We conﬁrmed in vivo activity
for 17 out of 88 designs, as well as expression and fold using NMR
structure determination for 2 designs.
Results
Generation of designable monomers and oligomers
As aﬁrst step to demonstrate the capabilities of our framework, we
generated raw sequences and structures of globular monomeric
proteins, oligomers and proteins predicted to change conformation
upon binding (Fig.2A–C). We generated monomers by maximising
AlphaFold conﬁdence, subject to a radiuspenalty (Appendix Table
S2, L
denovo ). We then used an ADM to produce a set of redesigned
sequences for each generated raw structure.
We computationally assessed design success by predicting the
structures of these sequences with AF and ESMfold (Evolutionary
Scale Modelling) (Wu et al, 2022). We used ESMfold as an
additional protein structure predictor for validation in order to
ensure that our designed sequences were not biased for AlphaFold.
A designed sequence was deemed successful if the predicted local
distance difference test (pLDDT) was >70 and the root mean
squared deviation (self-consistent RMSD; scRMSD) between the
raw generated and predicted structure was <2.0 Å — thresholds
chosen in agreement with the state of the art of computational
protein design approaches (Watson et al, 2023). Structure
prediction showed very good agreement between generated and
predicted structures with RMSD < 2 Å for a majority of designs
(Figs. 3A and EV1A,B). More precisely, 97.6% and 98.6% of
designed 50 AA monomers were successful according to AF and
ESMfold, respectively (100 AA: 92.8% and 98.6%, 200 AA: 85.3%
and 89.3%, 300 AA: 72.4% and 86.2%).
Similarly, we were able to design heterodimers and homo-
oligomers by maximising AlphaFold con ﬁdence for jointly
predicting the structure of multiple amino acid sequences. We
once again obtained high rates of success for designed heterodimers
and homooligomers (Figs. 2Ba n d3A) with 79.5% of designed 50
AA heterodimers (respectively, hom o d i m e r s :7 2 . 4 % ,t r i m e r s :7 4 . 3 % ,
tetramers: 70.1%) deemed successful using AF, compared to 60.0%
using ESMfold (respectively, homodimers: 50.8%, trimers: 34.2%,
tetramers: 47.8%). This difference in success-rates mirrors previous
results, and suggests that ESMfold performs worse at complex
structure prediction (Wu et al, 2022) and predicts designed
structures even for suboptimal de novo designed sequences (Martin
et al, 2024).
To test the limits of ourﬁtness function-based design approach,
we optimised pairs of amino acid sequences to minimise the
template modelling score (TM score) between each sequence
predicted as a monomer, and the pair of sequences predicted as a
Figure 2. De novo designed proteins.
(A, B) example structures of de novo designed monomers with sequence length from 50 to 100 amino acids and complexes of 2 to 4 monomers with a sequence length of
50 amino acids. The raw structures for each design are shown in grey; predicted structures are shown in colour. scRMSD between raw and predicted structures are
reported for each design. (C) structures of designed monomers which are predicted to change conformation upon complex formation. The raw structures for each design
are shown in grey; predicted structures are shown in colour. scRMSD and RMSD between monomeric and complex states are reported for each pair of designs. Source data
are available online for thisﬁgure.
Molecular Systems Biology Michael A Jendrusch et al
1168 Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 © The Author(s)
dimer (Fig. 2C). TM-score measures the structural similarity
between two protein structures, with scores below 0.5 indicating
different folds (Zhang and Skolnick, 2004). Thus, a pair of
sequences with low TM-score between monomeric and complex
state is essentially predicted to change conformation upon binding.
While our approach was able to generate designs predicted to
change conformation, it yielded lower success-rates compared to
unconstrained de novo design (Fig. EV2A,B).
Lower TM-scores between the monomeric and bound state of a
design correspond to a more pronounced change in conformation.
By penalising designs with TM-scores above a maximum threshold
(TM-score < 0.1, 0.3, 0.5), we were able to control the degree of
conformational change. For a maximum TM-score of 0.1, we were
able to recover 3.6% of successf ul designs (respectively, TM-
score < 0.3: 12.5%, TM-score < 0.5: 12.0%). This shows that our
m e t h o dc a nd e s i g np r o t e i n sp r e d i c t e dt oc h a n g ec o n f o r m a t i o ni na
highly controllable manner, as assessed by state-of-the-art compu-
tational validation.
In addition to achieving a high de novo design success rate, our
method also produces proteins with diverse and novel structures
with folds ranging from all- α-helical to all- β-sheet (Fig. 2A,B).
Further analysis shows that designs are diverse relative to each
other (Fig. 3B) and a high fraction are novel, relative to the PDB
(Fig. 3C), with median similarity as measured by TM-score (Zhang
and Skolnick, 2004) decreasing with sequence length. Taken
together, these results indicate that our method is indeed capable
of de novo designing diverse and novel proteins.
De novo protein design is competitive with state-of-the-
art approaches
In order to evaluate our approach relative to the state of the art, we
compared the quality of our designs to RFDiffusion (Watson et al,
2023). We found our designed sequences and structures showed
competitive performance across both monomers and oligomers of
various sizes (Fig.3D) as measured by scRMSD and pLDDT. In total,
Figure 3. Design success and diversity.
(A) Scatter plots of scRMSD and pLDDT for monomers (left) and oligomers (right). The threshold for design success is marked with dashed lines for both pLDDT and
scRMSD. The region where designs are deemed successful in terms of both scRMSD and pLDDT is marked in blue. Success rates are reported for each size of monomer
and each complex stoichiometry. AlphaDesign sample sizes throughout thisﬁgure for monomers, 50 AA:N = 1037; 100 AA:N = 540; 200 AA:N = 75; 300 AA:N = 29;
oligomers 1:1: N = 1173; 2: N = 1267; 3: N = 319; 4: N = 251. (B) Scatter plot of redesigned sequence scRMSD and TM-scores computed using TMalign to the closest
foldseek hit in the PDB. Designs are coloured by number of amino acids and median TM-scores are reported for each sequence length. (C) Scatter plot of redesigned
sequence scRMSD and 99th percentile TM-score to any other design of the same size. TM-Score < 0.5 indicates that the two compared proteins adopt a distinct fold.
Designs count as successful (turquoise region) in terms of diversity if TM-Score < 0.5 and scRMSD < 2.0 Å or pLDDT > 70.0. Percentages of successful designs are
reported. (D) Measures of success for designed monomers. Comparison of design self-consistent RMSD and pLDDT for best-of-8 redesigned AlphaDesign sequences (AD
R×8 + ESM/AF) and RFDiffusion+ ProteinMPNN designed sequences (RFD R×8+ AF). Values for monomers are shown in the top row and values for oligomers in the
bottom row. The centre line of each box corresponds to the median, box edges to the upper and lower quartiles, and whiskers to the lowest and highest datapoints
excluding outliers (within 1.5 times the interquartile range).N = 100 samples were drawn from RFdiffusion for each benchmark. (E) Binned secondary structure
distributions for de novo designed monomers of sizes 100–300 amino acids using AlphaDesign (left) and RFDiffusion (right). The fraction of alpha-helix amino acids is
marked on the x-axis; the fraction of beta-sheet amino acids on the y-axis. Source data are available online for thisﬁgure.
Michael A Jendrusch et al Molecular Systems Biology
© The Author(s) Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 1169
the majority of ADM-redesigned sequences are successful with median
scRMSD and pLDDT close to RFDiffusion, showing a slight
improvement for 300 AA monomers and homotetramers (Fig.3D).
In addition, our approach generates structures with a greater variety in
secondary structure content compared to RFDiffusion (Fig.3E). This
indicates that our method produces comparable or improved results to
the state of the art protein diffusion model, while representing a
hallucination-based approach.
Computational complexity
We assessed the computational complexity of our method for de
novo monomer design across different monomer sizes from 50 to
300 amino acids. We found that the number of design iterations
increases rapidly with both the desiredﬁt n e s so fam o n o m e ra n di t s
size (Appendix Fig. S1A). Fitting a polynomial to the data, revealed
that the time needed per design on a single A40 GPU scaled as
OðN3:8Þ with N the length of the amino acid sequence (Appendix
Fig. S1B). Our method at least partly inherits this complexity from
AlphaFold, which scales as OðN3Þ with protein sequence length.
This suboptimal complexity is a shortcoming of our method,
compared to diffusion-based approaches (Table 1). However,
concurrent work has shown that this can be remedied by using
different sequence optimisers (Frank et al, 2024)a sw e l la sm o r e
light-weight protein structure predictors (Jeliazkov et al,2023).
Sequence redesign is crucial for design quality
To assess the impact of ADM redesign on de novo design quality, we
evaluated both raw and redesigned outputs of AlphaDesign in terms of
pLDDT, scRMSD computed using AF and ESMfold, interface
predicted aligned error (ipAE) (Evans et al, 2021) and predicted
solubility (Sormanni et al,2015). We observed an increase in predicted
solubility (Sormanni et al,2015) for 98.6% of redesigned monomers
over raw sequences obtained by optimisation (Fig.4A), coupled with a
decrease in ESMfold scRMSD for 92.2% of designs (Fig.4B).
Compared to ADM-redesigned sequences, scRMSD and pLDDT
using ESMfold of raw sequences rapidly deteriorates with size for
both monomers and oligomers (Fig. 4C,D; red). Consistent with
prior work (Goverde et al,2022; Verkuil et al,2022), this suggests
that optimising sequences for high AlphaFold con ﬁdence may
result in adversarial examples for AlphaFold. In contrast,
redesigned sequences are predicted to fold conﬁdently using both
AlphaFold (Fig. 4C,D; dark blue) and ESMfold (Fig. 4C,D; light
blue), with median scRMSD < 2 Å and pLDDT > 70.
Furthermore, ADM redesign reduces the relative frequency of
large hydrophobic amino acids (PHE, TRP, TYR) associated with
poor protein solubility (Fig.4E,F). Conversely, redesign results in a
higher fraction of polar and charged amino acids in the protein
surface (Fig. 4E) which is predicted to improve designed protein
solubility. This suggests that ADMsequence redesign is indeed vital
to ensure successful design of unbiased sequences as measured by
scRMSD and predicted solubility.
AlphaDesign ADM is comparable to ProteinMPNN with
complementary structure preference
Next, we compared the performance of our ADM on de novo
designed proteins to ProteinMPNN (Dauparas et al,2022)as t a t e -
of-the-art model for protein sequence design. We generated
32 sequences for each protein using either ProteinMPNN or our
ADM and evaluated the best sequences in terms of AlphaFold
scRMSD and pLDDT for both models.
We found that on monomers, ProteinMPNN and our ADM
showed very similar performance in terms of scRMSD and pLDDT
of their respective generated sequences, outperforming each other
on roughly 50% of de novo designed monomers (Fig. 5A). In
aggregate, the percentage of successful designs was almost exactly
t h es a m ef o rb o t h( F i g .5B). For oligomers, ProteinMPNN
outperformed our model in terms of scRMSD in 70% of monomers,
while showing comparable performance in terms of pLDDT
(Fig. 5C), as well as a similar aggregate performance in terms of
design success rate (Fig. 5D). This led us to believe that both
models had learned complementary ways of generating protein
sequences given a protein backbone.
We thus combined 16 sequences per backbone from ADM and
ProteinMPNN to see if we could improve success rates by leveraging
the complementarity of both methods. We found that using sequences
from both ProteinMPNN and ADM improved success rates in all cases
for both monomers and oligomers (Fig.5B,D; red). This indicates that
i n d e e do u rA D Mc a nb eu s e da sa ni n d e p e n d e n tt o o lf o rp r o t e i n
sequence design to complement existing approaches.
Generation of small protein binder designs with
high AF2 success rate
Next, we applied AlphaDesign to design protein binders for a wide
variety of protein targets (immune-related proteins PD-1 & PD-L1;
SARS-CoV2 spike receptor binding domain (RBD); RNase A; S.
enterica-derived retron-encoded toxin RcaT-Sen2 (Bobonis et al,
2022)). We speciﬁed an epitope (blue) on each target protein except
SARS-CoV2 spike RBD, in order to demonstrate a binder design
process without site-speci ﬁc constraints (Fig. 6A). After bench-
marking designed binders with AF, we identiﬁed computationally
successful binders for each target protein. According to standard
computational measures for design success (complex scRMSD < 2
Å, binder pLDDT > 70), 39.1% of designed 50 AA binders
(respectively, 30.6% for 100 A A) were found to be successful
(Fig. 6D,E). Comparing per-target success rates to RFdiffusion, we
found increased computational s uccess-rates for AlphaDesign
binders as compared to RFdiffusion binders for all targets other
than RcaT-Sen2 (Fig. 6D). Even according to more stringent
criteria for computational design success proposed in (Bennett et al,
2022) with complex scRMSD < 1 Å and ipAE < 10 Å, we still
recover 6% of 50 AA designs (2.7% of 100 AA designs). Evaluating
only ipAE, these values increase to 21.8% for 50 AA designs (10.4%
for 100 AA designs) (Fig. EV3A,B).
Additionally, to assess the plausibility of generated sequences
and structures, we subjected the binder designs to all-atom
Table 1. Median time per design for AlphaDesign compared to other
approaches.
Method 50 AA 100 AA 200 AA 300 AA
AlphaDesign 329 s 1001.5 s 7678 s 35167 s
RFdiffusion 157.8 s 167.4 s 262.2 s 312.3 s
Chroma 50.6 s 51.1 s 56.2 s 66.5 s
Molecular Systems Biology Michael A Jendrusch et al
1170 Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 © The Author(s)
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and afﬁnity prediction using
t h eP R O D I G Yp r e d i c t o r( X u ee ta l ,2016). Binders showed low root
mean square ﬂuctuation (RMSF; Fig. 6A–C), a consistent number
of interface contacts (Appendix Fig. S2A), as well as predicted
afﬁnities in theμM to nM range (Fig. EV3C). While PRODIGY was
developed for afﬁnity prediction of existing structural interfaces
and may not necessarily extend to de novo designed interfaces,
reaching reasonable predicted KD across a statistical ensemble of
structures provides an additional check of design plausibility. This
indicates that AlphaDesign produces computationally plausible
binder designs, both according to AF2 prediction and molecular
dynamics simulations.
Bispeciﬁc and conformation-changing binder design
Beyond simple binder design, we generated bispeci ﬁcb i n d e r
designs predicted to bind different homologues of the spike
receptor binding domain (SARS-CoV2 spike RBD for the delta
and omicron variants, as well as MERS spike RBD) and Retron cold
anaerobic Toxin (RcaT-Sen2, Rcat-Eco1) (Figs. 6Ba n dE V 4 A ) ,a s
well as binder designs predicted to change conformation upon
target binding (Figs. 6C and EV4B; Appendix Fig. S2B). As for
conformational change designs, we were able to control the degree
of conformational change by setting a threshold on the TM-score
between the bound and unbound state (Fig. EV4B). Furthermore,
some conformation-changing binder designs exhibit higher RMSD
and RMSF in MD simulations of the monomeric state compared to
the complex state (Appendix Fig. S2B). This indicates a transition
from a ﬂexible monomeric structure to a more rigid complex
structure. While these design tasks yielded a much lower
computational success rate, this is to be expected as the design
problem is more constrained. This demonstrates theﬂexibility of
our method, which allows for machine learning-based multi-state
protein design.
Figure 4. Impact of sequence redesign on de novo designed proteins.
(A) Scatter plot of CamSol (Sormanni et al,2015) solubility scores (higher is better) for AlphaDesign candidate sequences (x-axis,N = 1681) and redesigned sequences (y-
axis). Designs with increased (decreased) solubility are shown in blue (red). (B) Scatter plot of ESMfold scRMSD (lower is better) for AlphaDesign candidate sequences
(x-axis) and redesigned sequences (y-axis). Designs with decreased (increased) scRMSD are shown in blue (red). (C, D) Comparison of monomer (C) and oligomer (D)
design self-consistent RMSD and pLDDT for raw AlphaDesign sequences using ESMfold (AD raw+ ESM), best-of-32 redesigned sequences using ESMfold and AlphaFold
(AD R×32+ ESM, AD R×32+ AF). The centre line of each box in the box plot corresponds to the median, box edges to the upper and lower quartiles, and whiskers to the
lowest and highest data points excluding outliers (within 1.5 times the interquartile range). AlphaDesign sample sizes for monomers, 50 AA:N = 1037; 100 AA:N = 540;
200 AA:N = 75; 300 AA:N = 29; oligomers 1:1:N = 1173; 2:N = 1267; 3:N = 319; 4:N = 251. (E) Amino acid frequency difference between candidate sequences and PDB
(top), as well as redesigned sequences (bottom). Difference for surface residues is shown in blue, for core residues in red. (F) (left) Example AlphaDesign candidate with a
large number of tryptophan (red), cysteine (yellow) and a small number of glutamine (blue). (right) The same protein after redesign, without cysteine and a greatly
reduced number of tryptophans. Source data are available online for thisﬁgure.
Michael A Jendrusch et al Molecular Systems Biology
© The Author(s) Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 1171
De novo designed small protein binders against phage
defense systems
To experimentally demonstrate our ability to design in vivo
functional proteins, we generated inhibitors against RcaT (Retron
cold anaerobic Toxin), a bacterial retron-encoded toxin, which is
used to defend against viral infection (Bobonis et al,2022). Upon
bacteriophage infection, RcaT toxins are activated and inhibit
bacterial growth to stop viral proliferation in infected cells, and
ultimately spread to the population (Bobonis et al,2022).
The RcaT family of toxins provides an essentially ideal test-bed
for inhibitor design, as it comes with a variety of natural inhibitors
and a readily interpretable growth-based assay for inhibitor
screening (Bobonis et al,2022). We designed binders to the active
site (blue) of Salmonella enterica-derived RcaT-Sen2 (72 designs,
Appendix Table S1) and bispeciﬁc binders for RcaT-Sen2 and its
homolog RcaT-Eco1 in E. coli (16 designs, Appendix Table S1).
Currently, only the structure of RcaT-Eco1 has been experi-
mentally determined (Wang et al, 2022; Carabias et al, 2024). In
contrast, no experimental structures exist for RcaT-Sen2 and other
RcaT homologues. Therefore, we used an AF-predicted structure as
the basis for our designs. We assessed the level of RcaT inhibition
of our designs by measuringE. coli colony growth in the presence
of both RcaT and our designed inhibitors (Fig.7A; see Methods).
Experimental measurements of RcaT inhibitor activity revealed that
19.3% of designs (17/88 total, 16/72 or 22.2% of RcaT-Sen2 designs,
13/61 or 21% at 50 AA, 5/11 or 45% at 100 AA; 1/16 or 6.2% of
RcaT-Sen2/RcaT-Eco1 bispeci ﬁc designs) signi ﬁcantly inhibit
RcaT-Sen2 relative to a non-inhibiting control in vivo (Fig.7B,C;
Appendix Table S1, Appendix Fig. S3). Some designed binders
(5.7%, 5/88, Appendix Table S1) inhibit RcaT-Sen2 even at leaky
levels, without induction, suggesting that those are strong binders.
Furthermore, a subset of designed binders also inhibit the activity
of RcaT-Eco9 — a homolog of RcaT-Sen2 — in vivo (Fig. 7C;
Appendix Table S1), showing that our method can yield robust,
broad-spectrum inhibitors for closely related proteins.
While our experimental approach allows us to measure inhibitor
activity, we note it does not take into account stability and
expression levels of our designs.Furthermore, a subset of designs
(29/88, 32%) exhibit signs of toxicity, which results in lower
measured inhibitor activity.
To assess how our computational measures of design success
relate to experimental success, wecompared experimental blocker
activity for 50 amino acid designs with scRMSD < 1.0 Å and those
Figure 5. Comparison of ADM and ProteinMPNN.
(A, C) Scatter plots of scRMSD and pLDDT for AlphaDesign+ADM (x-axis) and AlphaDesign+ProteinMPNN on de novo designed monomers (A, N =1681) and oligomers
(C, N =3010). Designs where ADM is better (worse) are marked in red (blue). (B, D) Design success rates for AlphaDesign+ADM (blue), AlphaDesign+ProteinMPNN (grey)
and a combination of both (red) for monomers (B) and oligomers (D). Sample size as in Fig.3. Source data are available online for thisﬁgure.
Molecular Systems Biology Michael A Jendrusch et al
1172 Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 © The Author(s)
with scRMSD ≥ 1.0 Å. This comparison showed a signi ﬁcantly
larger mean inhibitor activity for low scRMSD designs (t-test,
p = 0.0048, Fig.7D), indicating that AF scRMSD is a meaningful
measure for selecting successful designs. In addition, experimen-
tally successful binders displayed low scRMSD and ipAE, consistent
with predicted binding (Fig.7E), as well as low RMSF in molecular
dynamics simulations (Fig. 7E, inset). Overall, these systematic
validation experiments verify, at the phenotypic level, that our
pipeline is capable of designing and selecting functional protein
binders.
Biophysical characterization of RcaT-Sen2 inhibitors
To check if our active inhibitor designs can be expressed in a soluble
way and adopt the expected tertiary structure, we produced the 11
designs with the highest normalized inhibitor activity inE. coli.W e
were able to overexpress and purify 7/11 designs (Appendix Fig. S4A).
Of these 7 designs, initial circular dichroism (CD) experiments
indicated that one was likely unfolded in the absence of RcaT-Sen2. To
validate the secondary structure content of the remaining 6 designs, we
ran CD spectroscopy experiments and compared the predicted
Figure 6. Protein binder design.
(A) Example binder designs for 4 target proteins (PD-1, PD-L1, SARS-CoV2 Spike RBD, RNase A). The number of successful binders according to strict (scRMSD < 1.0 Å,
pLDDT > 80, ipAE < 10 Å) and lax criteria (scRMSD < 2.0, pLDDT > 70) are reported for each target protein. Target proteins are shown in dark grey, with speciﬁed binding
residues for design shown in blue. Binder designs are shown in light grey, overlaid with the AlphaFold predicted binder structure in red. scRMSD and mean interface pAE
are reported for each binder. The inset box plots in (A–C) show the complex root mean squareﬂuctuation (RMSF) forN = 20,000 snapshots from ensemble molecular
dynamics. The centre line of each box corresponds to the median, box edges to the upper and lower quartiles, and whiskers to the lowest and highest data points excluding
outliers (within 1.5 times the interquartile range). (B) Example bi-speciﬁc binder designs for RcaT-homologues (RcaT-Sen2, RcaT-Eco1) and SARS-CoV2 Spike RBD variants
(delta, omicron). Binder designs are shown in light grey, overlaid with the AlphaFold predicted binder structure in red. scRMSD is reported for each binder. Inset box plots
show complex RMSF as in (A). (C) Example RcaT-Sen2 binders designed to change conformation upon toxin binding. The bound state is shown as in the preceding panels.
The monomeric state is shown in orange. The RMSD between the predicted monomeric and complex states, as well as the scRMSD for the complex state are reported for
each design. Inset box plots show complex RMSF as in (A). (D) Percentage of successful designs out ofN designs generated per target and number of amino acids for
AlphaDesign (light blue: 50 AA, PD1:N = 121, PD-L1:N = 135, RcaT-Sen2:N = 186, SARS-CoV2 Spike RBD:N = 112, RNaseA:N = 126; light red: 100 AA, PD1:N = 26, PD-L1:
N = 51, RcaT-Sen2:N = 42, SARS-CoV2 Spike RBD:N = 34, RNaseA:N = 30) and RFdiffusion (dark blue: 50 AA, dark red: 100 AA,N = 50 for all targets). (E) Scatter plot
of redesigned sequence scRMSD, pLDDT and interface pAE for binder designs to all target proteins considered in this work. Designs are coloured by number of amino
acids and percentages of successful designs are reported. The region of successful designs with scRMSD < 2.0 A and pLDDT > 70.0 is marked in blue. Sourcedata are
available online for thisﬁgure.
Michael A Jendrusch et al Molecular Systems Biology
© The Author(s) Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 1173
secondary structure content of the designs to the secondary structure
content calculated from the measured CD spectra (Appendix Fig.
S4B,C). We found that the secondary structure compositions of all 6
designs were similar to the predicted ones. In addition, we performed
size exclusion chromatography coupled to multi-angle light scattering
(SEC-MALS) measurements, to assess the oligomeric state of designs in
the absence of a target, and check for possible aggregation (Appendix
Fig. S5A,B). We found that none of the tested designs showed
aggregation, and all 50 amino acid designs showed molecular weights
consistent with the presence of dimers, while the 100-amino-acid
design tested (100aa_3_1) was consistent with a monomer (Appendix
Fig. S5B).
Figure 7. RcaT experimental validation.
(A) Schematic of the experimental setup. In the absence of active RcaT-Sen2, normal growth of E. coli colonies is expected (left). In the presence of active RcaT-Sen2 and
absence of an active blocker (or presence of GFP negative control), lowered or ablated growth ofE. colicolonies is expected (centre). In the presence of a designed blocker,
RcaT activity should be partially suppressed, restoring growth (right). The lower row shows patches of plates from each condition in the TIC assay. (B, C) Volcano plot of
RcaT-Sen2 (B) and RcaT-Eco9 (C) toxin inhibition activity relative to a GFP negative control, showing successful 50 AA and 100 AA designs (in red and blue, respectively),
as well as successful bispeciﬁc designs (in purple). Data shown are derived from 3 biological × 2 technical replicates per condition.p-values were calculated using a two-
sided Welch’s t-test comparing blocker activity (n = 6 per blocker) to the activity of a GFP control (n = 16) (see Methods). The hit signiﬁcance cutoff (p-value < 0.01) is
shown as a dotted line. An additional effect-size cutoff is shown as a vertical dotted line (1.1 for RcaT-Sen2, 1.3 for RcaT-Eco9). 19% (17/88) of designed RcaT binders
exhibit signiﬁcant inhibition. (D) Box plot of RcaT-Sen2 normalised blocker scores for 50 amino acid designs with AlphaFold scRMSD < 1.0 Å (red,N = 8 total, N = 7
nontoxic) and scRMSD≥ 1.0 Å (grey,N = 53, N = 30 nontoxic), exhibiting a signiﬁcant difference in the mean withp = 0.0047 for all designs and 0.0036 for nontoxic
designs only. Signiﬁcance was tested for using a two-sided Student’s t-test. The centre line of each box corresponds to the median, box edges to the upper and lower
quartiles, and whiskers to the lowest and highest data points excluding outliers (within 1.5 times the interquartile range). (E) Designed and predicted structures for
example inhibitors (red) of RcaT-Sen2 (dark grey) as determined using a toxin inhibition assay. RcaT-Sen2 is shown in dark grey, with the active-site-adjacent valine (the
closest surface-exposed residue to the active site) used to guide binder design marked in blue. Binder designs are shown in light grey, overlaid with the AlphaFold
predicted binder structure in red. scRMSD and mean interface pAE are reported for each binder. The inset box plots show the complex root mean squareﬂuctuation
(RMSF) forN = 20,000 snapshots from ensemble molecular dynamics. The centre line of each box corresponds to the median, box edges to the upper and lower quartiles,
and whiskers to the lowest and highest data points excluding outliers (within 1.5 times the interquartile range). (F) NMR ensemble of 100 amino acid RcaT-Sen2 inhibitor
100aa_3_1 (grey; PDB 9HSA, BMRB 34973) overlaid with the predicted structure of the inhibitor (coloured) in complex with RcaT-Sen2 (white surface).The predicted
structure is coloured by AF pLDDT. Theﬁrst 18 amino acids of the ensemble are not shown as they were disordered. Low-pLDDT regions in the predicted structure
correspond to ﬂexible regions in the NMR ensemble. (G) Barplot of secondary chemical shifts (δCα /C0δCβ) for bispeciﬁc inhibitor design cpx-50-nr2-run_5_0 (BMRB
52768), together with its sequence, design secondary structure and secondary structure assigned by NMR. Bars are coloured by secondary structure (beta strand: blue,
coil: grey). Source data are available online for thisﬁgure.
Molecular Systems Biology Michael A Jendrusch et al
1174 Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 © The Author(s)
To further validate the structure of a subset of designs, we acquired
NMR spectra of labelled versions of the designs 100aa_3_1 and cpx-
50-nr2-run_5_0. NMR structure determination of 100aa_3_1 resulted
in an ensemble closely matching the designed structure for residues 25
to 100 (Fig.7F). Residues 1 to 24 corresponding to the N-terminus of
100aa_3_1 showed comparatively low pLDDT in the range between
50 and 70 in the designed structure and were determined to be highly
ﬂexible in the NMR ensemble (Fig.7F). However, the C-terminal part
of 100aa_3_1, which was designed to be in contact with the RcaT-Sen2
active site, was reproduced by the ensemble with RMSDs in the range
of 1.45 to 2.01 Å. The ﬁrst 15 residues of cpx-50-nr2-run_5_0
exhibited conformational exchange indicative of ﬂexibility in the
millisecond timescale, which precludes determination of a structural
ensemble (Kleckner and Foster, 2011). However, the secondary
structure obtained from NMR chemical shifts largely matches the
prediction (Fig. 7G). In addition, we could verify the relative
placement of β-strands in the designed structure (Appendix Fig.
S6A), as well as inter-monomer contacts in the predicted dimer using
long-range NOEs (Appendix Fig. S6B). This indicates that the
structure of these designs at ambient temperature is indeed close to
the structure generated by AD.
Discussion
To summarise, we have developed a hybrid hallucination-diffusion
approach for protein design with the versatility to enable complex,
non-standard design tasks without the need for model re-training
or ﬁne tuning. Our approach compares well with diffusion models
on standard tasks such as de novo monomer and oligomer design
as well as the design of potent site-speciﬁc protein binders in vivo.
In addition to this, it also enables multi-state protein design
including generating proteins predicted to bind two related targets
as well as design of proteins that are predicted to change
conformation upon binding, which has not previously been realised
by machine learning-based protein design methods without the use
of manually designed blueprints (Praetorius et al,2023).
We showed competitive performance of our method on
computational protein design benchmarks and demonstrated its
real-world applicability by designing in vivo active inhibitors to a
family of bacterial phage defense proteins with previously-
unknown structure. For the top inhibitor designs, we additionally
veriﬁed folding and structure using CD as well as NMR structure
determination. Our work is theﬁrst to demonstrate de novo design
of phage defense inhibitors at this scale. Future work on de novo
design of anti-phage defense proteins could help engineer phages
that are resistant to multiple defense systems, facilitating future
phage therapy applications.
While solely diffusion-based methods for protein design are
available (Watson et al, 2023; Frank et al, 2024), our method is
sufﬁciently ﬂexible to design proteins according to any ﬁtness
function. Thus, we show that hallucination-based protein design
methods can compete with, and provide an advantage over
generative models for protein de sign. Future improvements in
single-sequence prediction accuracy and speed of protein structure
predictors are expected to have a direct impact on hallucination-
based protein design. As such, our method will likely beneﬁtf r o m
t h e s ef u t u r ed e v e l o p m e n t s .
Despite the versatility of our method it also inherits the primary
challenge of hallucination-based approaches — namely scaling
poorly to larger proteins. This is in part due to the OðN
3Þ
complexity of AlphaFold and, further, due to the number of
iterations required to ﬁnd high- ﬁtness sequences for larger
p r o t e i n s .L a r g e rp r o t e i n sr e q u i r eb o t hah i g h e rn u m b e ro fi t e r a t i o n s
to design and take more time per iteration, leading to even less
optimal scaling behaviour. Therefore, future work could include
accelerating protein structure generation by using lighter-weight
structure predictors, more powe rful optimisation algorithms or
developing ﬁtness-guided generative models to improve structure
generation while maintaining ﬂexibility. However, even with these
computational limitations, our method is capable of designing
small proteins with reasonable computational cost. Similar to other
computational approaches to binder design (Watson et al, 2023;
Pacesa et al, 2024), our method relies on manual target site
selection and target cropping to reduce computational cost by
reducing the total number of predicted amino acids. While such
approaches have been successful thus far, manual target site
selection and cropping has the potential to introduce design errors.
Therefore, future work developing automated target site selection
and cropping procedures could improve computational binder
design methods. In addition, while we were able to demonstrate the
design of in vivo active binders for two members of the RcaT family
of bacterial toxins, it remains to be seen how well our method
transfers to other target proteins. Similarly, this study is limited by
the lack of high-throughput structural validation of generated
structures, which we plan to address in future work.
Taken together, AlphaDesign enables rapid de novo design of
small ordered protein binders while retaining the ﬂexibility of
optimizing arbitrary ﬁtness functions. This way, AlphaDesign can
be adapted to non-standard design tasks including multi-target and
multi-state binder design.
Methods
Reagents and tools table
Reagent/Resource Reference or Source
Identiﬁer or Catalog
Number
Experimental models
E. coli DATC DSMZ DSM 116187
E. coli BW25113 DSMZ DSM 27469
E. coli BW25113 pir116 Typas Group EMBL
E. coli BL21(DE3) Codon Plus
RIL
Agilent / Stratagene Cat #230245
Recombinant DNA
pJB158 Addgene Cat #202601
pJB37 Addgene Cat #202602
pJB117 Typas Group EMBL
pETM11-SUMO3eGFP EMBL PEPCF
Antibodies
Oligonucleotides and other sequence-based reagents
Primer JB563 (5′-
aatgagggcatcgttcccac-3′)
Typas Group EMBL
Michael A Jendrusch et al Molecular Systems Biology
© The Author(s) Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 1175
Reagent/Resource Reference or Source
Identiﬁer or Catalog
Number
Primer JB564 (5′-
cgcatacgctacttgcattacag-3′)
Typas Group EMBL
Primer JB565 (5′-
cagtgataacggaccgcg-3′)
Typas Group EMBL
Primer JB566 (5′-
ccgagcgttctgaacaaatc-3′)
Typas Group EMBL
Chemicals, Enzymes and other reagents
Tryptone Sigma-Aldrich Cat #T7293-1KG
Bacto yeast extract Gibco Cat #212750
Sodium chloride NaCl Merck Cat #1.06404.1000
Glucose Merck Cat #1.04074.1000
Lactose Merck Cat #1.07657.1000
Magnesium sulfate
heptahydrate MgSO
4.7H2O
Merck Cat #1.05886.1000
DAP Sigma-Aldrich Cat #D1377
Spectinomycin Sigma-Aldrich Cat #S9007
Tetracycline hydrochloride Sigma-Aldrich Cat #C4881
Kanamycin Roth Cat #T832.2
Chloramphenicol BioChemica Cat #A1806,0025
IPTG Carl Roth Cat #2316.3
l-Arabinose Sigma-Aldrich Cat #A3256
Gentamicin Sigma-Aldrich Cat #G1264
BsaI-HF-V2 NEB Cat #R3733L
GoTaq Green 2x master mix Promega Cat #M7122
Glycerol VWR Cat #1.04091.1000
Lysozyme Sigma-Aldrich Cat #62971
SmNuclease EMBL PEPCF
cOmplete™, EDTA-free
Protease Inhibitor Cocktail
Sigma-Aldrich Cat #COEDTAF-RO
Tris (Trizma base) Sigma Cat #T1503
Imidazole Merck Cat #1.04716.1000
D
2O Sigma-Aldrich Cat #151882
Ammonium chloride (15N) Merck Cat #299251
D-glucose (13C) Merck Cat #389374
Ni-NTA beads Qiagen Cat #30210
Poly-Prep Chromatography
Columns
Bio-Rad Cat #7311550
His
6-tagged SenP2 protease EMBL PEPCF
1 mL Protino Ni-NTA column Macherey-Nagel Cat #745410.5
Spectra/Por 3 Dialysis
Tubing, 3.5 kD MWCO
Repligen Cat #132720
Amicon Ultra-4 3 kDa
MWCO centrifugal ﬁlter
Merck-Millipore Cat #UFC800308
Superdex™ 75 10/300 GL
column
Cytiva Cat #17517401
Superdex™ 200 Increase 5/
150 GL gel-ﬁltration column
Cytiva Cat #28-9909-45
NMR tubes Norell Cat #ST500-7
Reagent/Resource Reference or Source
Identiﬁer or Catalog
Number
Software
Adobe Photoshop 2023
(v.24.7.0)
Adobe
R v.4.3.1
Astra 8.2.0 Wyatt Technology
NMPipe Delaglio et al, 1995
Cara http://cara.nmr.ch
NMRViewJ Keller, 2005;
Johnson and Blevins,
1994
CYANA 3.98.15 Güntert, 2009
TALOS+ Shen et al,2009
AMBER https://
ambermd.org/
RStudio v. 2023.06.1+ 524 Posit
Other
Singer pinning robot Rotor
HDA
Singer Instruments Cat #ROT-001
Humid incubator MCO-80IC Sanyo MCO-80IC
PlusPlates Singer Instruments Cat #PLU-003
Canon EOS Rebel T3i
camera
Canon
Microﬂuidizer M-110L
FluidProcessor
Microﬂuidics
Optima L-100 XP
Ultracentrifuge
Beckman Coulter
ӒKTA Pure chromatography
system
Cytiva
Jasco J-815 CD
spectrophotometer
Jasco
Agilent 1260 Inﬁnity II HPLC
system
Agilent
MiniDAWN and Optilab Wyatt Technology
Bruker Avance III HD
700 MHz
Bruker
Bruker Avance III HD
900 MHz
Bruker
Bruker Avance III 600 MHz Bruker
Methods and protocols
We frame protein design as a search problem to ﬁnd the set of
protein sequences for which a certain ﬁtness function exceeds a
ﬁxed threshold. To take into account both sequence properties and
all-atom protein structure, we integrate AF (Jumper et al, 2021)
into our ﬁtness functions to provide high-quality structure
prediction and measures of prediction con ﬁdence. We combine
this with state-of-the-art validation using Rosetta ab initio structure
prediction (Leaver-Fay et al, 2011) and all-atom molecular
dynamics simulations.
Molecular Systems Biology Michael A Jendrusch et al
1176 Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 © The Author(s)
AlphaDesign pipeline
The AlphaDesign pipeline consi sts of three separate steps:
Candidate structure generation, sequence redesign and computa-
tional validation. In theﬁrst step, we use an evolutionary algorithm
(Sinai et al, 2020) to identify sequences with high-conﬁdence AF
predictions conforming to a design goal (Methods, “Candidate
structure generation with AlphaFold”;F i g .1, red). In the second
step, we use an autoregressive diffusion model (ADM) (Hooge-
boom et al, 2022) to generate optimised sequences for each
candidate structure (Sec. 4.2.5; Fig.1, blue) and discard candidates
for which no optimised sequence can be found (Methods,
“Sequence redesign with autoregressive diffusion models”). Finally,
we predict the structures of these optimised sequences using AF
and ESMfold, discarding designs with high RMSD to the original
design, or low pLDDT (Methods, “Computational benchmarks”).
The remaining candidates are codon-optimised and can be ordered
as gene fragments for experimental validation (Methods, “Codon
optimisation”).
Fitness functions for protein design tasks
In order to frame protein sequences and structure design as a
search or optimisation problem, we need to specify a ﬁtness
function which encapsulates the end goal of a given design task.
AlphaFold pLDDT and pAE for a prediction correlate with protein
structure quality (Mirdita et al, 2022). Therefore, optimising for
high pLDDT and low pAE should provide a good prior for
generating native-like protein structures. Interface pAE (ipAE)
correlates with the probability of protein –protein interaction
(Evans et al,2021). Optimising for low ipAE between two protein
monomers allows us to design protein –protein interactions. In
combination with additional conﬁdence and geometric constraints
(Table 2), this allows us to specify ﬁt n e s sf u n c t i o n sf o rd en o v o
monomer, oligomer ( Ldenovo ) as well as targeted protein binder
design (Lbinder ). We can also search for sequences for which AF
predicts different monomeric and oligomeric states by designing a
corresponding ﬁt n e s sf u n c t i o n(Lchange ).
Candidate structure generation with AlphaFold
We repurpose AF (Jumper et al, 2021) as a generative model of
protein backbones. By searching for amino acid sequences with
high-conﬁdence predictions we can ext ract native-like protein
structures from AlphaFold (Fig. 1A). To automate this search we
use an evolutionary algorithm to continually update a pool of
amino acid sequences. The sequence pool is initialised uniformly at
random from a set of allowed amino acids. In this study, we exclude
cysteine as it could interfere with protein expression (Wicky et al,
2022; Frank et al, 2024; Kong and Guo, 2014). AF predicts
structures and conﬁdence scores (predicted local distance differ-
ence test, pLDDT; predicted aligned error, pAE) for these
sequences. We then combine these conﬁdence scores into aﬁtness
function with additional constraints on protein sequence, structure
and function (Fig. 1B). The evolutionary algorithm then updates
the sequence pool. In this work, we use an evolutionary algorithm
following (Sinai et al, 2020)t oo p t i m i s et h eﬁtness function.
However, other gradient-free or gradient-based optimisers can be
substituted as desired. Throughout optimisation a protein changes
its structure and both local and global con ﬁdence measures
increase. This process is repeated until a sequence in the pool
reaches a user-deﬁned ﬁtness threshold (see Supporting Methods,
“AlphaDesign design loop pseudocode ”). The speci ﬁed ﬁtness
function (Fig. 1B) dictates the structure and function of protein
structures generated this way.
Fixing protein structures using templates
To enable binder design without requiring MSA inputs for target
proteins, we provide AF with a template structure for proteins
whose structure should remainﬁxed throughout the design process.
To reduce computation as much as possible, we may crop the
structures of target proteins around the desired binding site. We
then feed this cropped sequence and structure as a template into
AF. This keeps computational cost ﬁxed for binder design to
arbitrary size proteins.
Autoregressive diffusion model training
To generate improved sequences forstructure candidates recovered
from AF, we trained a conditional autoregressive diffusion model
(ADM) (Hoogeboom et al, 2022) on protein sequences and
structures in the PDB. Conditional ADM learn to recover the
amino acid sequence of a protein given its structure by optimising
the following loss (Hoogeboom et al,2022):
L
ADM ðθÞ :¼ Es;x/C24 pdata ;s0 /C24 pmask ðs0jsÞ½log pθðsjs0; xÞ/C138
where pθ denotes the output distribution of protein sequences from
the model, pD denotes the data distribution, s denotes a protein
sequence, x a protein structure andpmaskðs0jsÞ denotes a distribution
of masked amino acid sequencess0 conditioned on a ground-truth
sequence s.W ec h o s epmask to be the uniform distribution over
masked sequences. That is, the number of masked positions was
sampled uniformly at random as were the masked positions. We
parameterised p
θðsjs0; xÞ as a productQ
ipθðsijs0; xÞ of independent
categorical distributions for each amino acid as customary for
masked sequence modelling (Hoogeboom et al,2022).
We based the architecture of our ADM on the message-passing
blocks of ProteinMPNN (Dauparas et al,2022). Our model consists
of 6 MPNN blocks with 30 nearest neighbours, 128 node features
and 128 edge features. Before passing the protein backbone to the
MPNN, we add Gaussian noise with meanμ ¼ 0:0a n ds t a n d a r d
deviation σ ¼ 0:3 Å to all atom positions. In contrast to
ProteinMPNN, node features were initialised with the embedding
of the masked amino acid sequence and the model was trained to
directly predict independent prob ability distributions for each
masked amino acid. This made it easier to implement complex
dependencies between amino acids in homooligomers or repeat
proteins during sampling.
The training set consisted of all protein structures from the PDB
(Berman et al,2000) with a resolution better than 3.5 Å deposited
before January 2021. Validation and test sets were drawn from
structures in the PDB deposited before January 2022 with less than
10% sequence identity to the training set. The training set was
clustered at 40% sequence identity. Structures were sampled from
the training set with a probability inversely proportional to cluster
Michael A Jendrusch et al Molecular Systems Biology
© The Author(s) Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 1177
size without replacement. Structures were accumulated into batches
until adding an additional chain would increase the batch size
beyond 10k amino acids. Batches were zero-padded to 10k amino
acids and padded amino acids were masked out during training.
For simplicity of implementation the loss was averaged over all
masked amino acids in a batch, as opposed to averaging
per sequence.
The model was trained for 250k steps using Adam (Kingma and
Ba, 2014)w i t hh y p e r p a r a m e t e r sβ
1 = 0.9 andβ2 = 0.98 and linear
warm-up to a ﬁnal learning rate of 1e−3o v e rt h eﬁrst 10k steps.
These hyperparameters were chosen following ProteinMPNN.
During training, overﬁtting was assessed by monitoring perplexity
of the model on the validation set. As we did not observe an
increase in the validation loss across the entire 250k steps of mode
training, we selected theﬁnal checkpoint for further evaluation.
Sequence redesign with autoregressive diffusion models
We redesign sequences of candidate structures using an ADM
starting from a fully masked sequence. For binder design, only the
sequence of the binder was masked, while the target sequence was
kept intact. At each step of redesign, we sample a random masked
position, compute the probability distribution at that position, set
the probability of forbidden amino acids to zero, re-scale it by an
inverse temperature of 10 and sample an amino acid. If the sampled
position has any sequence constraints associated with it, we also set
the sampled amino acid at all tied positions. We repeat this process
until no more masked amino acids remain. This way, we sampled
100 sequences per candidate structure and ranked them by their
likelihood under the model (see Supporting Methods, “Sequence
design pseudocode”).
Computational benchmarks
To computationally verify the folding of designed proteins, we
predict their structures using AlphaFold and ESMfold in single-
sequence mode with 4 recycling iterations. We compute the mean
pLDDT, pAE,i n t e r f a c epAE (ipAE)a n dpTM for those structures.
We then compute the self-consistent RMSD (scRMSD) and self-
consistent TM-score (scTM) between the original designed
structure (using AlphaDesign or RFDiffusion) and predicted
structures of the corresponding designed sequences. For binder
design, we input a template for the target protein to AlphaDesign,
and initialise recycling with the designed structure of the complex
following (Bennett et al,2022). For multi-state designs (conforma-
tion-changing proteins, bispeci ﬁc binders), we run these bench-
marks once for each state (bound/unbound, binding target 1/2) and
combine the results. In all benchmarks involving sequence rede-
sign, we report results for the bestredesigned sequence, selected by
ﬁrst applying all thresholds for design success and then sorting by
scRMSD. For comparison with RFDiffusion (Fig. 1E,F, bottom
row), we use 8 redesigned sequences (randomly sampled from 100)
to be consistent with the evaluation reported in (Watson et al,
2023). For comparison between raw and redesigned sequences
(Fig. 1E,F, top row) we use 32 redesigned sequences (randomly
sampled from 100). For protein binder design, we use 100 random
redesigned sequences, as sequence generation and benchmarking
are generally cheap compared to candidate generation. Unless
stated otherwise, we consider a designed protein computationally
successful if it fulﬁls pLDDT>70, scRMSD<2 Å. For binder design,
we additionally consider a stricter threshold of pLDDT>80,
scRMSD<1Å a n dipAE<10 Å following (Bennett et al, 2022).
Benchmark code is available at github.com/mjendrusch/
novobench.
ADM benchmarks
To evaluate the suitability of our autoregressive diffusion model for
de novo protein design, we generated 32 sequences for each
m o n o m e ri nas e to f1 6 8 8o fm o n o m e r so f5 0t o3 0 0a m i n oa c i d s
generated by optimisingLdenovo (Table 2), evaluated their scRMSD,
pLDDT and success rate using AlphaFold and compared the results
to 32 sequences generated using ProteinMPNN (Dauparas et al,
2022).
RFDiffusion benchmark protein generation
To compare our method to RFDiffusion, we generated monomers
of sizes 50 AA, 100 AA, 200 AA and 300 AA as well as
heterodimers with 50 AA monomers, homooligomers (dimers to
tetramers) with 50 AA monomers. For AlphaDesign, we generate
candidate structures over 4 days on two Nvidia 3090 GPUs,
resulting in 1688 total monomers and 3010 total oligomers. We
then generated 100 sequences for each structure using our ADM.
For comparison with RFDiffusion, we selected 8 of these redesigned
sequences uniformly at random. F or RFDiffusion, we generated
500 structures for each size of monomers and 500 structures for
each type of oligomers. Monomers and heterodimers were
generated using RFDiffusion’s default settings, while homodimers
were generated with cyclic symmetry enabled. Following (Watson
et al, 2023), we then sampled 8 sequences for each generated
structure using ProteinMPNN (Dauparas et al, 2022). For all
generated structures and their corresponding sequences, we then
predicted pLDDT, pAE and scRMSD as described above. Designed
sequences, structures and benchmark scores were deposited on
Zenodo (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15208893 ).
AlphaDesign sample size
The number of backbones generated in all benchmarks for
AlphaDesign depends on the difﬁculty of the protein design task.
More complex design tasks (e.g. multi-state design) as well as
design tasks result in a lower number of generated backbones.
S i m i l a r l y ,al a r g e rn u m b e ro fa m i n oa c i d st od e s i g nw i l lr e s u l ti na
smaller number of backbones generated. As all experiments in this
study operate on randomly generated and algorithmically selected
protein sequences and structures, additional blinding or randomi-
zation is likely not required to mitigate bias.
RcaT inhibitor design
We predicted the structure of RcaT-Sen2 (Bobonis et al, 2022)
using ColabFold with 96 recycling steps and early stopping with a
tolerance of 0.1 Å (Mirdita et al,2022). We then extracted a 159
amino acid crop around the putative active site for RcaT-Sen2 and
RcaT-Eco1 as a template for ﬁxed-target binder design. Binder
design was constrained to generate binders around V106 for RcaT-
Sen2 and T105 for RcaT-Eco1. We ran AlphaDesign to generate
Molecular Systems Biology Michael A Jendrusch et al
1178 Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 © The Author(s)
candidate structures of 50 and 100 amino acids with ﬁtness
Lbinder ðXjRcaT/C0 Sen2; active/C0 siteÞ, 2 recycling steps, suboptimality
0.1, population size 10. We generated 100 sequences per candidate
structure using our autoregressive diffusion model, keeping the
target sequence ﬁxed. We kept the highest-likelihood sequence and
discard candidates with 1
N
PN
i log pθðsijxÞ< /C0 0:1 nats. We re-
predicted candidate structures with AF at 4 recycling steps,
discarding candidates with pLDDT /C1 pTM<0:5. We predicted
sequence-based candidate solubility scores with CamSol using bulk
sequence prediction on the CamSol Intrinsic webserver at pH = 7
(Sormanni et al, 2015). We then discarded candidates with score
<1. We codon-optimised the remaining candidates for expression
in E. coli. After RcaT binders were designed and benchmarked on
cropped RcaT structures, we used AlphaFold to predict the
structure of the complex between each designed RcaT binder and
the full RcaT-Sen2 by providing a template for the cropped
structure, as well as a template for the full RcaT-Sen2 structure that
we previously predicted. We used these un-cropped complexes for
all downstream molecular dynamics analyses.
Codon optimisation
Designed amino sequences were reverse-translated and codon
optimised using the DNA Chisel package (Zulkower et al,2020).
GC content was constrained to lie between 35% and 65%, sequences
containing pentanucleotide repeats, rare codons and hairpin-
forming sub-sequences were excluded. Sequences were optimised
to match native E. coli codon usage and reduce the amount of
repeat codons.
Bacterial strains, plasmids and growth conditions
Bacteria were grown in lysogeny broth (LB; 10 g/L of tryptone,
5 g/L of yeast extract, and 5 g/L of NaCl) or on LB Lennox agar
(2%) plates. E. coli strain DATC (DAP-Auxotroph Transformation
Conjugation) (DSM 116187) was used to conjugate the designed
blockers cloned in the pJB158 plasmid (Addgene ID 202601) into
the BW25113 pir-116 strain transformed with plasmid pJB37 or
pJB117 (Bobonis et al,2022). BW25113pir-116 was constructed by
replacing the β-glucoside locus ( bgl)w i t hpir-116 in E. coli
BW25113 (DSM 27469), which allows the R6K-containing
pJB158 vectors to replicate in high-copy numbers (~250 copies/
cell) (Metcalf et al,1994). Antibiotics, auxotrophies, and inducers
used were Spectinomycin (100 μg/mL), Tetracycline (10 μg/mL),
Gentamicin (10μg/mL), Diaminopimelic acid (0.3 mM), Isopropyl-
β-D-thiogalactopyranosid (0.1 mM), and L-arabinose (0.2%).
Construction of the genetic library of RcaT blockers
DNA sequences encoding the designed RcaT-Sen2 blockers were
synthesized (IDT) and cloned through Golden Gate Assembly
(Engler, 2008) using BsaI-HF-V2 (NEB) into the IPTG-inducible
pJB158 vector (Addgene: #202601). Each sequence contained Golden
Gate-compatible overhangs at the 5′ (5′-gcgagggtctcggcat-3′) and 3′
(5′-taagcgagacccagatc-3′) end. Golden gate reactions were performed
in 96-well PCR plates in a thermocycler (30 cycles of 2 min at 37 °C
and 5 min at 16 °C, followed by 10 min at 60 °C, and 20 min at 80 °C).
Chemically competentE. coliDATC cells were transformed with 5μL
of Golden Gate reactions. Desired transformants were selected based
Table 2. Fitness function components used in this study.
Fitness component Expression Description
Conﬁdence
LpAEðXÞ 1 /C0 meanðpAEðXÞÞ
pAEmax
Mean normalised pairwise conﬁdence of X
LipAEðX; YÞ 1 /C0 meanðipAEðX;YÞÞ
pAEmax
Mean normalised interface conﬁdence of X and Y
LpLDDT ðXÞ meanðpLDDTðXÞÞ Mean pLDDT ofX
Lconf ðXÞ LpAE ðXÞþLpLDDT ðXÞ
2 Predicted conﬁdence ﬁtness function ofX
Lbind ðXjT;αÞ α /C1 LipAEðX; TÞþð 1 /C0 αÞ/C1 Lconf ðXÞ Interaction conﬁdence ﬁtness function for a binderX
against a targetT
Geometry
LTM ðX; X0Þ maxjmeaniðf ðAEijðX; X0ÞÞÞ; f ðdÞ :¼ 1
1þ d
d0
;
d0 ¼ 1:24ðmaxðlengthðXÞ; 19Þ/C0 15Þ
1
3 /C0 1:8
Approximate template matching score ofX and X'
LsiteðXjT; r; sÞ maxðr; miniðdðXi; TsÞÞÞ /C0 r Thresholded minimum distance of amino acids in
binder X to the target siteTs on T
LRðX; RÞ maxðR;Rg ðXÞÞ/C0 R
R Thresholded constraint on the radius of gyration
Rg ðXÞ,
Combined
LdenovoðX1; :::;XN ; α ¼ 0:7Þ 2 /C1ð α /C1 Lconf ðX1 : ::: : XN Þþð 1 /C0 αÞ/C1 1
N
P
iLconf ðXiÞÞ /C0 LRðX1 : ::: : XN ; Rg Þ De novo designﬁtness function used in this work
LchangeðX; X : Y;αÞ α /C1 Lconf ðX : YÞþð 1 /C0 αÞ/C1 Lconf ðXÞ/C0 ReLUðLTM ðX; X : YÞ/C0 TMmaxÞ Conformational change ﬁtness function used in this
work. XX:Y denotes the structure ofX in the complex
X:Y
Lbinder ðXjT; sÞ Lbind ðXjT;0:7Þ/C0 LsiteðXjT;6Å; sÞ/C0 LRðXÞ Binder design ﬁtness function used in this work
Fitness functions are composed from multiple conﬁdence measures (pAE, interface pAE, pLDDT) (Jumper et al,2021) as well as geometric constraints on the
predicted structure (radius of gyrationRg, maximum distance between pairs of residues). Conﬁdence ﬁtness components provide a prior that ensures generated
structure candidates are native-like (Lconf) and exhibit desired protein–protein interactions (LipAE). Geometry-based ﬁtness components constrain generated
structure candidates to further conform to a desired topology and geometry.
Michael A Jendrusch et al Molecular Systems Biology
© The Author(s) Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 1179
on lack of GFPﬂuorescence using blue light screening and further via
colony PCR using GoTaq Green polymerase (Promega) with primers
JB563 (5′-aatgagggcatcgttcccac-3′) and JB564 (5′-cgcatacgctacttgcat-
tacag-3′). Transformants carrying correctly-sized inserts (as judged by
colony PCR) were validated by Sanger sequencing using primers
JB565 (5′-cagtgataacggaccgcg-3′) and JB566 (5′-ccgagcgttctgaacaaatc-
3′), arrayed into 96-well plates, grown overnight in LB with 0.3 mM
DAP and 10μg/mL tetracycline and frozen at−80 °C after adding
glycerol (12.5% ﬁnal concentration). Per blocker construct, two
separate transformants were selected (biological replicates).
Toxin-inhibition conjugation (TIC) procedure
The TIC assay was done as described in Bobonis et al ( 2024).
Brieﬂy, TIC is a high-throughput genetics screen to identify
inhibitors of TA systems. Arrayed donor libraries carrying
mobilizable gene-overexpression plasmids (the designed RcaT-
Sen2 blockers) were conjugated on recipient bacteria expressing a
toxin plasmid (RcaT-Sen2) and colonyﬁt n e s si sm e a s u r e do np l a t e
in presence/absence of the inducers. TA inhibitors should increase
strain ﬁtness in the presence of the toxin, by inhibiting the toxin.
The TIC assay was adapted from this protocol (Bobonis et al,2024).
By using the Singer ROTOR pinning robot, two 96-well glycerol
stock plates containing the blocker library in the E. coli DATC
donor strain (two biological replicates) were pinned from liquid
glycerol stocks to LB DAP Tetracycline plates (96-density long-pin
Singer RePads), re-arrayed into 384-colony arrays (leading to two
biological with two technical replicates of the library in one 384-
array), and grown overnight at 37 °C in a humid incubator. The
conjugation recipient strain (E. coliBW25113 pir-116) carrying the
p-RcaT-Sen2 plasmid (pJB37) or the p-RcaT-Eco9 plasmid
(pJB117) was grown overnight in LB spectinomycin in three
biological replicates, and 200μL of culture (OD 595 nm = 0.5) was
spread on LB DAP Singer plates using glass beads. Plates with
recipient lawns were incubated in a non-humid incubator at 37 °C
for 1 h to dry. Afterwards, the blocker library was pinned on top of
the recipient lawns in three biological replicates, using 384 short-
pin Singer RePads. Plates were incubated for 8 h in a humid
incubator at 37 °C for conjugation. Next, cells were pinned from the
c o n j u g a t i o np l a t e so n t oL Bp l a t e sw i t h o u tD A Pa n dw i t h
Spectinomycin and Tetracycline using 384 short-pin Singer RePads,
to select for transconjugants which carry both recipient (pJB37 or
pJB117) and donor (blocker libraries) plasmids. Transconjugants
were grown for 16 h at 37 °C before being pinned again on double
selection plates for another round of selection. Plates from the
second round of double selection were incubated for 8–9ha t3 7° C ,
and then each biological replicate was pinned using 384 short-pin
Singer RePads into double-selection LB experimental plates.
Experimental plates contained either no inducer, only arabinose
(to induce toxin expression), only IPTG (to induce blocker
expression), or both inducers.
Experimental plates were incubated for 10 h at 37 °C, and
imaged using a Canon EOS Rebel T3i camera (S&P robotics).
TIC data analysis
Bacterial colony opacity for each strain was quantiﬁed using the
image analysis tool Iris (Kritikos et al,2017) ,a n du s e da sap r o x y
for bacterial ﬁtness. To increase background contrast for colony
detection by Iris, plate images were converted to grayscale and
contrast enhanced by a value of 12 on Adobe Photoshop 2023
(v.24.7.0). Colonies with opacity equal to 0 were considered
pinning misses and were removed. As previously reported
(Baryshnikova et al, 2010), colonies on the outermost plate edge
had systematically higher opacity values, which were multiplica-
tively corrected to the median opacity of the rest of the plate. To
determine the effect of each blocker in each condition as compared
to non-blocking GFP controls and to compare between same-
condition plates, the colony opacity of each blocker-carrying strain
was divided per plate by the mean opacity of the GFP-carrying
controls ( n = 32), deriving normalised ﬁt n e s sv a l u e sf o re a c h
blocker (n = 12), which were then averaged across the two technical
replicates. Each blocker ’s effect was then quantiﬁed as the ratio
between ﬁtness values upon toxin and blocker induction (double-
induction plates with arabinose and IPTG) and upon toxin-only
induction (arabinose only). Signi ﬁcance was assessed through a
two-sided Welch ’s t-test comparing the effect of each blocker
(n =6 ) a n d G F P (n = 16). A cumulative effect size was derived for
each blocker as the mean of its effect divided by the effect of GFP,
distinguishing blockers from non-blockers, i.e. neutral (effect size =
1) or aggravating the toxin effect (effect size < 1). Leaky blockers
were deﬁned asﬁtness upon toxin-only expression higher than two
standard deviations from the mean of GFP controls in the same
condition. Toxic blockers were deﬁned asﬁtness upon blocker-only
expression lower than two standard deviations of GFP controls in
the same condition. Hits fulﬁlled a signiﬁcance cutoff (p-value <
0.01) and an effect size cutoff of 1.1 for RcaT-Sen2 (1.3 for RcaT-
Eco9). Data analysis was implemented with R v.4.3.1 (R Core Team,
2020) and RStudio v. 2023.06.1+ 524 (Posit Team,2023). Normal-
ized opacity measurements can be found in Appendix Fig. S6.
Small-scale expression and puriﬁcation
E. coli BL21(DE3) Codon Plus RIL cells (Stratagene) were freshly
transformed with expression plasmids (pETM11-SUMO3eGFP
(Scholz et al, 2013)) encoding His
6 and Sumo3-tagged, codon-
optimized, constructs for the top 11 RcaT-Sen2 inhibitor designs by
normalized blocker activity. 50 mL cultures were grown in TB-FB
medium supplemented with 2 mM MgSO
4, 0.05% glucose, 1.5%
lactose, 30μg/mL Kanamycin and 34μg/mL Chloramphenicol. The
E. coli cultures were grown at 37 °C until the OD600 0.6–0.8, after
which the temperature was reduced to 18 °C. After overnight
expression at 18 °C, the cultures were harvested by centrifugation
(10 min, 3200 ×g, 4 °C) and the pellets wereﬂash-frozen in liquid
nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until the start of the protein
puriﬁcation.
The cell pellets were resuspended in 4 mL lysis buffer (50 mM
Tris pH 7.5; 1 M NaCl; 20 mM imidazole; 5 mM; 1 mg/mL
lysozyme; 25 ng/μL SmNuclease; cOmplete™,E D T A - f r e eP r o t e a s e
Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich)). Cells were lysed by 4
consecutive freeze-thaw cycles, followed by centrifugation
(15 min, 17,000 ×g, 4 °C). After centrifugation, the supernatant
was incubated with 125 μL Ni-NTA beads (Qiagen) pre-
equilibrated with wash buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5; 300 mM NaCl;
10% glycerol; 20 mM imidazole) and the samples were rotated for
1 h at 4 °C. After this binding step, the Ni-NTA beads were
transferred into an empty Poly-Prep column (Bio-Rad), washed 3
times with 4 mL wash buffer and eluted with 300μL elution buffer
Molecular Systems Biology Michael A Jendrusch et al
1180 Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 © The Author(s)
( 5 0 m MT r i sp H7 . 5 ;3 0 0 m MN a C l ;1 0 %g l y c e r o l ;2 5 0 m M
imidazole). The total lysate, the soluble fraction after centrifugation
and the elution fraction of all samples were analysed via SDS-
PAGE.
To assess solubility in the absence of the Sumo3-tag, elution
fractions were subsequently incubated with 5 μgo f His
6-tagged
SenP2 protease for 2 h on ice. After the digest, samples were
centrifuged (15 min, 17,000 × g, 4 °C) and the supernatants
analysed via SDS-PAGE.
Expression and puriﬁcation for downstream analyses
Larger scale protein production experiments were performed for
constructs that could be successfully expressed and puriﬁed in a
soluble way in the small scale tests (Appendix Fig. S3A). The
expression plasmids were again freshly transformed into E. coli
BL21(DE3) Codon Plus RIL cells (Stratagene). Precultures were
grown overnight at 37 °C in LB medium supplemented with 30μg/
mL Kanamycin and 34 μg/mL Chloramphenicol. The next day,
20 mL preculture was added to 1 L of
15N M9 minimal medium
containing 0.5 g15NH4Cl (water 858 mL; Na2HPO4 6.78 g; KH2PO4
3 g; NaCl 0.5 g; 100x trace elements 10 mL; Thiamin (50 mg/mL)
0.6 mL; glucose (20%) 20 mL; MgSO4 (1 M) 2 mL;15NH4Cl 0.5 g;
CaCl2 (1 M) 100μL; total of 1 L) or 1 L of13C 15N M9 minimal
medium containing 2 g 13C-glucose and 0.5 g 15NH4Cl (water
858 mL; Na2HPO4 6.78 g; KH2PO4 3 g; 0.5 g; 100x trace elements
10 mL; Thiamin (50 mg/mL) 0.6 mL;13C-glucose 2 g; MgSO4 (1 M)
2m L ;15NH4Cl 0.5 g; CaCl2 (1 M) 100μL; total of 1 L) in 5 L culture
ﬂasks. The 20 mL preculture was centrifuged (15 min, 1200 ×g)a n d
resuspended in minimal medium before addition to the culture
ﬂasks. The expression cultures were grown at 37 °C until OD600
0.6–0.8 and then induced with 0.5 mM IPTG. After induction, the
temperature was reduced to 20 °C for overnight cultivation. The
cells were harvested by centrifugation (20 min, 5000 ×g), ﬂash-
frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at−20 °C until the start of the
puriﬁcation.
Cell pellets from 1 LE. coli cultures were resuspended in 40 mL
lysis buffer. The cells were lysed by 5 passages through a
microﬂuidizer device, followed by centrifugation (30 min,
35,000 rpm, 4 °C, Ti45 rotor) in an Optima L-100 XP Ultracen-
trifuge (Beckman Coulter). After centrifugation, the supernatant
was loaded at ca. 1 mL/min on a 1 mL Protino Ni-NTA column
(Macherey Nagel) pre-equilibrated with wash buffer using a
peristaltic pump at 4 °C. After this binding step, the Ni-NTA
c o l u m n sw e r ew a s h e dw i t h1 5 m Lw a s hb u f f e ra n da t t a c h e dt oa n
ÄKTA system for elution. The total lysate (TL), the soluble fraction
after centrifugation (supernatant SN) and the elution fraction (Elu)
of all samples were analysed via SDS-PAGE. As 50aa_2_14 and
50aa_2_10 showed some precipitation in the elution fractions, the
samples were centrifuged (15 min, 4500 rpm, 4 °C) and the cleared
supernatant was used for further puriﬁcation steps.
Elution fractions containing the designed proteins were pooled
and 333 μgo f His
6-tagged SenP2 protease was added to each
sample. The samples were transferred into a 3.5 kDa MWCO
Spectra/Por3 Dialysis Membrane and dialysed overnight at 4 °C
against 1 L dialysis buffer (same as wash buffer). The next day, all
samples were removed from the 3.5 kDa MWCO Spectra/Por3
Dialysis Membrane and loaded again onto a 1 mL Protino Ni-NTA
column (Macherey Nagel) at ca. 1 mL/min and 4 °C. The ﬂow
through, which should contain the untagged designed proteins was
collected. The His
6-tagged SenP2 protease, theHis6-Sumo3 fusion
tag and any uncleaved fusion proteins should remain bound to the
Ni-NTA beads. The ﬂow through fractions were concentrated to
0.5 mL in an Amicon 3 kDa MWCO centrifugalﬁlter unit (Merck
Millipore). No protein was present in the ﬂow through of the
Amicon concentrators.
The concentrated samples obtained after the reverse Ni-NTA
puriﬁcation step were loaded onto a Superdex 75 10/300 size
exclusion chromatography column (Cytiva) pre-equilibrated with
SEC buffer (50 mM Na-phosphate pH 7.0, 100 mM NaCl). 0.5 mL
elution fractions were collected and analysed via SDS-PAGE. The
cleanest fractions for all 6 proteins were pooled, aliquoted,ﬂash-
frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at−80 °C.
Circular dichroism spectroscopy
Circular dichroism (CD) spectra were recorded to analyse the
secondary structure of the proteins. CD spectrum of the sample
(protein at 1 mg/mL) was recorded using a Jasco J-815 CD
spectrophotometer using a 0.2 mm pathlength CD Quartz cuvette,
at 20 °C, between 260 nm to 190 nm, with 10 accumulations,
standard sensitivity, a bandwidth of 1 nm and a data-pitch of
0.1 nm. A buffer spectrum was ﬁrst recorded as baseline and
subtracted from the sample spectrum. The spectra were analysed
using the BeStSel server with single spectrum analysis ( https://
bestsel.elte.hu/index.php ) (Micsonai et al,2018), with the CDSSTR
(Johnson, 1999) method with the protein reference data 7
(Sreerama and Woody, 2000) using the DichroWeb server
(http://dichroweb.cryst.bbk.ac.uk/html/process.shtml )( M i l e se ta l ,
2022) and with the Multivariate SSE analysis of the Jasco Spectra
Manager software. A CD spectrum was calculated from the AF
structure prediction of the protein using the KCD software (https://
kcd.cinvestav.mx ) (Jacinto-Méndez et al, 2024)a n dt h e
PDBMD2CD software (https://pdbmd2cd.cryst.bbk.ac.uk )( M a v r i -
dis and Janes,2016).
Size exclusion chromatography coupled to multi-angle
light scattering
A size exclusion chromatography coupled to multi-angle light
scattering (SEC-MALS) experiment was performed to assess
aggregation and the oligomeric state of the proteins. 50 μLo f
sample (protein at 1 mg/mL) was injected onto a Superdex 200
Increase 5/150 GL gel-ﬁltration column (GE Healthcare) on an
A g i l e n t1 2 6 0I nﬁnity II HPLC system (Agilent) in 50 mM
NaPhosphate pH 7.0 and 100 mM NaCl buffer at room temperature
with aﬂow rate of 0.3 mL/min. The column was coupled to a MALS
system (MiniDAWN and Optilab, Wyatt Technology). Data were
analysed using the Astra 8.2.0 software (Wyatt Technology). The
generic protein dn/dc value of 0.1850 was applied.
Nuclear magnetic resonance structure determination
All nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra were recorded on
Bruker Avance III HD 700 MHz and 900 MHz NMR spectrometers,
equipped with cryogenically-cooled triple-resonance probes and a
Bruker Avance III 600 MHz spectrometer equipped with a room
temperature triple-resonance probe at a temperature of 298 K.
Michael A Jendrusch et al Molecular Systems Biology
© The Author(s) Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 1181
For protein resonance assignment, standard double and triple
resonance through-bond experiments were recorded (Sattler et al,
1999). 15Na n d13C-edited NOESY spectra (mixing time 120 ms)
were performed to obtain distance restraints. Apodization weighted
sampling was used for acquisition of triple resonance spectra
(Simon and Köstler,2019), and non-uniform sampling was applied
for 15N-edited NOESY spectra. NMR data were processed using
NMPipe (Delaglio et al, 1995) or in-house routines and analysed
with Cara ( http://cara.nmr.ch ) or NMRViewJ (Keller, 2005;
Johnson and Blevins, 1994). Secondary structure prediction from
secondary chemical shifts (C α and Cβ) was done according to
Wishart and Sykes (Wishart and Sykes, 1994) using random coil
chemical shifts determined by Kjaergaard et al, 2011 (Kjaergaard
et al, 2011).
For structure calculation using torsion angle dynamics with
CYANA 3.98.15 (Güntert, 2009) dihedral angle restraints were
derived from backbone chemical shifts using TALOS+ (Shen et al,
2009), and distance restraints were obtained from 15N- and
13C-edited NOESY spectra. NOEs were initially manually and later
automatically assigned using the noe_assign function of CYANA
3.98.15.
Validation of protein design using all-atom molecular
dynamics simulations
Designed binder complexes were further rigorously validated by
performing all-atom molecular dynamics (MD) simulations in
explicit solvent and analysing the corresponding properties of
structural ﬂexibility and internal/intramonomeric and interfacial
contacts. Furthermore, binding af ﬁnities were computed by
combining an established struct ure-based predictor (Xue et al,
2016) with the conformational ensemble generated from the
corresponding MD simulations.
The standard AMBER forceﬁeld (ff14sb) was used to describe
all protein parameters (Maier et al,2015). Each protein or protein
complex was solvated using atomistic TIP3P water (Jorgensen et al,
1983) with a minimum of 10 Å of padding to form a cubic periodic
box and then electrically neutralized with an ionic concentration of
0.15 M NaCl that used standard ionic parameters (Joung and
Cheatham, 2008).
A standardised minimisation, equilibration and simulation protocol
consisting of several stages was developed for all systems. A set of
restraints (RS) were applied to each system at speciﬁed stages of
equilibration. These consisted of restraining all heavy (non-hydrogen)
atoms of the proteins. Each system was subsequently minimised across
four stages with 1500 steps (500 steepest-descent+ 1000 conjugate-
gradient) of minimization applying restraints RS with different force
constants in each sequential stage: Stage 1: 10 kcal/mol Å
2,S t a g e2 :
5k c a l / m o lÅ2,S t a g e3 :1 k c a l / m o l Å2, Stage 4: unrestrained. MD
simulations were performed in alls u b s e q u e n ts t a g e s .T h eS H A K E
algorithm was employed on all atoms covalently bonded to a hydrogen
atom. A time-step of 2 fs was used. The long-range Coulomb interaction
was handled using a GPU implementation of the particle mesh Ewald
summation method (PME) (Essmann et al,1995). A nonbonded cutoff
distance of 10 Å
2 was used. In Stage 5, each system was heated from 10 K
to 300 K in 1 ns and with RS (k ¼ 10 kcal=mol Å
2
). The temperature
was subsequently maintained at 300K using a Langevin thermostat with
a damping constant of γ =5 . 0p s−1 and in Stage 6, the systems
equilibrated for 1 ns at constantvolume, thus in the NVT ensemble.
Subsequently the pressure was maintained at 1 atm using a Berendsen
barostat with a pressure relaxation time ofτp = 1.0 ps and the systems
simulated in the NPT ensemble for 100 ps for each of the subsequent
stages with RS: Stage 7:k =10 kcal/mol Å
2,S t a g e8 :k =5k c a l / m o l Å2,
Stage 9:k =1k c a l / m o lÅ2,S t a g e1 0 :k =0 . 5k c a l / m o lÅ2. Finally, in Stage
11, RS restraints were removed and the systems simulated in the NPT
ensemble for a further 5 ns. Following this, an ensemble of production
simulations of 50 × 4 ns replicas was performed for each system in the
NPT ensemble with the same conditions as Stage 11. Coordinate
snapshots from production simulations were generated every 10 ps,
resulting in an ensemble of trajectories consisting of 20,000 snapshots in
aggregate per system.
Structural stability and ﬂexibility were analysed by computing
the root-mean squared deviation (RMSD) of the backbone atoms of
the protein with respect to the in itial predicted structure (after
aligning the protein backbone) as well as the root-mean-square
ﬂuctuation (RMSF) with respect to the average structure in each
production replica. In the case of complexes, this was carried out
both on the overall complex and for individual monomers
separately. The number of sidechain-sidechain intramonomer
contacts were computed for each snapshot of the production
MD, based on a heavy atom distance threshold of 4 Å. Similarly,
interfacial contacts were computed for each interface in simulated
protein complexes based on the same criteria.
Binding afﬁnities of dimeric complexes were computed using
the PRODIGY tool (Xue et al,2016), an established structure-based
afﬁnity predictor that includes free energy contributions from
interface contacts as well as the non-interacting surface. The
dissociation constant (K
D) was computed for all 20,000 snapshots
of the production MD ensemble and then averaged. A default
threshold of 5.5 Å was used for the interface contact threshold
b e t w e e nh e a v y - a t o m so fa m i n oa c i d s .
Molecular dynamics input and output ﬁles are deposited on
Zenodo (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15208893 ). Input ﬁles are
stored in “MD_inputs”. Computed properties extracted from
analysis of molecular dynamics simulations can be found in
”MD_outputs”.
Data availability
The datasets and computer code produced in this study are available in
the following databases: NMR data for RcaT-Sen2 inhibitor designs:
BMRB (100aa_3_1: 34973; cpx-50-nr2-run_5_0: 52768) ( https://
bmrb.io/data_library/summary/index.php?bmrbId=34973, https://
bmrb.io/data_library/summary/index.php?bmrbId=52768). NMR
ensemble: PDB (100aa_3_1: 9HSA) (https://www.rcsb.org/structure/
9HSA). All other data and code in this study: Zenodo (https://doi.org/
10.5281/zenodo.15208893).
The source data of this paper are collected in the following
database record: biostudies:S-SCDT-10_1038-S44320-025-00119-z .
Expanded view data, supplementary information, appendices are
available for this paper athttps://doi.org/10.1038/s44320-025-00119-z.
Peer review information
A peer reviewﬁle is available athttps://doi.org/10.1038/s44320-025-00119-z
Molecular Systems Biology Michael A Jendrusch et al
1182 Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 © The Author(s)
References
Baryshnikova A, Costanzo M, Kim Y, Ding H, Koh JLY, Touﬁghi K, Youn J-Y, Ou
J, Luis B-JS, Bandyopadhyay S et al (2010) Quantitative analysis ofﬁtness
and genetic interactions in yeast on a genome scale. Nat Methods
7:1017–1024
Bennett NR, Coventry B, Goreshnik I, Huang B, Allen A, Vafeados D, Peng YP,
Dauparas J, Baek M, Stewart L et al (2022) Improving de novo protein binder
design with deep learning. Nat Commun 14:2625
Berman HM, Westbrook JD, Feng Z, Gilliland GL, Bhat TN, Weissig H, Shindyalov
IN, Bourne PE (2000) The protein data bank. Acta Crystallogr Sect D, Biol
Crystallogr 58:899–907
Bobonis J, Mitosch K, Mateus A, Karcher N, Kritikos GD, Selkrig J, Zietek M,
Monzon VA, Pfalz B, García-Santamarina S et al (2022) Bacterial retrons encode
phage-defending tripartite toxin–antitoxin systems. Nature 609:144–150
Bobonis J, Yang ALJ, Voogdt CGP, Typas A (2024) TAC-TIC, a high-throughput
genetics method to identify triggers or blockers of bacterial toxin-antitoxin
systems. Nat Protoc 19(8):2231–2249
Bryant P, Elofsson A (2022) EvoBind: in silico directed evolution of peptide
b i n d e r sw i t ha l p h a f o l d .P r e p r i n ta thttps://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.23.501214
Carabias A, Camara-Wilpert S, Mestre MR, Lopéz-Méndez B, Hendriks IA, Zhao
R, Pape T, Fuglsang A, Luk SH-C, Nielsen ML et al (2024) Retron-Eco1
assembles NAD+-hydrolyzing ﬁlaments that provide immunity against
bacteriophages. Mol Cell 84:2185–2202
Dauparas J, Anishchenko IV, Bennett NR, Bai H, Ragotte RJ, Milles LF, Wicky BIM,
Courbet A, Haas de RJ, Bethel N et al (2022) Robust deep learning based
protein sequence design using ProteinMPNN. Science 378:49–56
Delaglio F, Grzesiek S, Vuister GW, Zhu G, Pfeifer J, Bax A (1995) NMRPipe: a
multidimensional spectral processing system based on Unix pipes. J Biomol
NMR 6:277–293
Dougherty MJ, Arnold FH (2009) Directed evolution: new parts and optimized
function. Curr Opin Biotechnol 20:486–491
Engler RAM, Carola AND Kandzia (2008) A one pot, one step, precision cloning
method with high throughput capability. PLOS ONE 3:1–7
Essmann U, Perera LE, Berkowitz ML, Darden TA, Lee H-C, Pedersen LG (1995) A
smooth particle mesh Ewald method. J Chem Phys 103:8577–8593
Evans R, O’Neill M, Pritzel A, Antropova N, Senior A, Green T, Zídek A, Bates R,
Blackwell S, Yim J et al (2021) Protein complex prediction with alphafold-
multimer. Preprint athttps://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.04.463034
Frank C, Khoshouei A, Fuß L, Schiwietz D, Putz D, Weber L, Zhao Z, Hattori M,
Feng S, de Stigter Y, Ovchinnikov S, Dietz H (2024) Scalable protein design
using optimization in a relaxed sequence space. Science 386:439-445
Gao L, Altae-Tran H, Böhning F, Makarova KS, Segel M, Schmid-Burgk JL, Koob J,
Wolf YI, Koonin EV, Zhang F (2020) Diverse enzymatic activities mediate
antiviral immunity in prokaryotes. Science 369:1077–1084
Goverde CA, Wolf B, Khakzad H, Rosset S, Correia BE (2022) De novo protein
design by inversion of the alphafold structure prediction network. Protein Sci:
A Publ Protein Soc 32:e4653
Güntert P (2009) Automated structure determination from NMR spectra. Eur
Biophys J 38:129–143
Guo AB, Akpinaroglu D, Kelly MJS, Kortemme T (2024) Deep learning guided
design of dynamic proteins. Preprint athttps://doi.org/10.1101/
2024.07.17.603962
Hoogeboom E, Gritsenko AA, Bastings J, Poole B, van den Berg R, Salimans T
(2022) Autoregressive diffusion models. International Conference on Learning
Representations
Huang P-S, Boyken SE, Baker D (2016) The coming of age of de novo protein
design. Nature 537:320–327
Ingraham J, Baranov M, Costello Z, Frappier V, Ismail A, Tie S, Wang W, Xue V,
Obermeyer F, Beam AL et al (2022) Illuminating protein space with a
programmable generative model. Nature 623:1070–1078
Ingraham J, Garg VK, Barzilay R, Jaakkola T (2019) Generative models for graph-
based protein design. In DGS@ICLR
Jacinto-Méndez D, Granados-Ramírez CG, Carbajal-Tinoco MD (2024) KCD: a
prediction web server of knowledge-based circular dichroism. Protein Sci
33:e4967
Jeliazkov JR, Alamo DD, Karpiak JD (2023) ESMFold hallucinates native-like
protein sequences. Machine Learning in Structural Biology Workshop at
NeurIPS 2023
Johnson BA, Blevins R (1994) NMR view: a computer program for the
visualization and analysis of NMR data. J Biomol NMR 4:603–614
Johnson WC (1999) Analyzing protein circular dichroism spectra for accurate
secondary structures. Proteins: Struct, Funct, Bioinforma 35:307–312
Jorgensen WL, Chandrasekhar J, Madura JD, Impey R, Klein ML (1983)
Comparison of simple potential functions for simulating liquid water. J Chem
Phys 79:926–935
Joung I, Cheatham TE (2008) Determination of alkali and halide monovalent ion
parameters for use in explicitly solvated biomolecular simulations. J Phys
Chem B 112:9020–9041
Jumper JM, Evans R, Pritzel A, Green T, Figurnov M, Ronneberger O,
Tunyasuvunakool K, Bates R, Zídek A, Potapenko A et al (2021) Highly
accurate protein structure prediction with alphafold. Nature 596:583–589
Keller R (2005) Optimizing the process of nuclear magnetic resonance spectrum
analysis and computer aided resonance assignment
Kingma DP, Ba J (2014) Adam: a method for stochastic optimization. CoRR abs/
1412.6980
Kjaergaard M, Brander S, Poulsen FM (2011) Random coil chemical shift for
intrinsically disordered proteins: effects of temperature and pH. J Biomol NMR
49:139–149
Kleckner IR, Foster MP (2011) An introduction to NMR-based approaches for
measuring protein dynamics. Biochim Biophys Acta (BBA) - Proteins Proteom
1814:942–968
Kong B, Guo GL (2014) Soluble expression of disulﬁde bond containing proteins
FGF15 and FGF19 in the cytoplasm of Escherichia coli. PLoS ONE 9:e85890
Kritikos GD, Banzhaf M, Herrera-Dominguez L, Koumoutsi A, Wartel M, Zietek
M, Typas A (2017) A tool named Iris for versatile high-throughput
phenotyping in microorganisms. Nat Microbiol 2:17014–17014
Laboratory EMB, Pečar J, Lueck R, Wahlers M (2024) EMBL Heidelberg HPC
cluster.
Leaver-Fay A, Tyka MD, Lewis SM, Lange OF, Thompson JM, Jacak R, Kaufman K,
Renfrew PD, Smith CA, Shefﬂer W et al (2011) ROSETTA3: an object-oriented
software suite for the simulation and design of macromolecules. Methods
Enzymol 487:545–574
Lin Y, AlQuraishi M (2023) Generating novel, designable, and diverse protein
structures by equivariantly diffusing oriented residue clouds. In Proceedings of
the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML'23), Vol. 202.
JMLR.org, Article 864, 20978–21002
Lindorff-Larsen K, Piana S, Dror RO, Shaw DE (2011) How fast-folding proteins
fold. Science 334:517–520
Lisanza SL, Gershon JM, Tipps SW, Sims JN, Arnoldt L, Hendel SJ, Simma MK, Liu
G, Yase M, Wu H, Tharp CD (2024) Multistate and functional protein design
using RoseTTAFold sequence space diffusion. Nat Biotechnol 1–11. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41587-024-02395-w
Maier J, Martinez C, Kasavajhala K, Wickstrom L, Hauser K, Simmerling C (2015)
Ff14SB: improving the accuracy of protein side chain and backbone
parameters from ff99SB. J Chem Theory Comput 11(8):3696–3713
Michael A Jendrusch et al Molecular Systems Biology
© The Author(s) Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 1183
Martin A, Berner CA, Ovchinnikov S, Vorobieva AA (2024) Validation of de novo
designed water-soluble and transmembrane proteins by in silico folding and
melting. Protein Sci 33(7):e5033
Mavridis L, Janes RW (2016) PDB2CD: a web-based application for the
generation of circular dichroism spectra from protein atomic coordinates.
Bioinformatics 33:56–63
Metcalf WW, Jiang W-F, Wanner BL (1994) Use of the rep technique for allele
replacement to construct new Escherichia coli hosts for maintenance of R6K
gamma origin plasmids at different copy numbers. Gene 138(1-2):1–7
Micsonai A, Wien F, Bulyáki É, Kun J, Moussong É, Lee Y-H, Goto Y, Réfrégiers M,
Kardos J (2018) BeStSel: a web server for accurate protein secondary
structure prediction and fold recognition from the circular dichroism spectra.
Nucleic Acids Res 46:W315–W322
Miles AJ, Ramalli SG, Wallace BA (2022) DichroWeb, a website for calculating
protein secondary structure from circular dichroism spectroscopic data.
Protein Sci 31:37–46
Millman A, Bernheim A, Stokar-Avihail A, Fedorenko T, Voichek M, Leavitt A,
Oppenheimer-Shaanan Y, Sorek R (2020) Bacterial retrons function in anti-
phage defense. Cell 183:1551–1561
Mirdita M, Schütze K, Moriwaki Y, Heo L, Ovchinnikov S, Steinegger M (2022)
ColabFold: making protein folding accessible to all. Nat Methods 19:679–682
Norn C, Wicky BIM, Juergens D, Liu S, Kim D, Tischer D, Koepnick B,
Anishchenko I, Players F, Baker D et al (2021) Protein sequence design by
conformational landscape optimization. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
118:e2017228118
Pacesa M, Nickel L, Schmidt J, Pyatova E, Schellhaas C, Kissling L, Alcaraz-Serna
A, Cho Y, Ghamary KH, Vinué L et al (2024) BindCraft: one-shot design of
functional protein binders. Preprint athttps://doi.org/10.1101/
2024.09.30.615802
Posit Team (2023) RStudio: integrated development environment for R. Posit
Software, PBC, Boston, MA
Praetorius F, Leung PJY, Tessmer MH, Broerman A, Demakis C, Dishman AF,
Pillai A, Idris A, Juergens D, Dauparas J et al (2023) Design of stimulus-
responsive two-state hinge proteins. Science 381:754–760
R Core Team (2020) R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria
Rettie SA, Campbell KV, Bera AK, Kang A, Kozlov S, Cruz JDL, Adebomi V, Zhou G,
DiMaio F, Ovchinnikov S et al (2023) Cyclic peptide structure prediction and
design using alphafold. Preprint athttps://doi.org/10.1101/2023.02.25.529956
Sattler M, Schleucher J, Griesinger C (1999) Heteronuclear multidimensional
NMR experiments for the structure determination of proteins in solution
employing pulsedﬁeld gradients. Prog Nucl Magn Reson Spectrosc 34:93–158
Scholz J, Besir H, Strasser C, Suppmann S (2013) A new method to customize
protein expression vectors for fast, efﬁcient and background free parallel
cloning. BMC Biotechnol 13:1–11
Shen Y, Delaglio F, Cornilescu G, Bax A (2009) TALOS+: a hybrid method for
predicting protein backbone torsion angles from NMR chemical shifts. J
Biomol NMR 44:213–223
Simon B, Köstler H (2019) Improving the sensitivity of FT-NMR spectroscopy by
apodization weighted sampling. J Biomol NMR 73:155–165
Sinai S, Wang R, Whatley A, Slocum S, Locane E, Kelsic ED (2020) AdaLead: a
simple and robust adaptive greedy search algorithm for sequence design.
Preprint athttps://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02141
Sormanni P, Aprile FA, Vendruscolo M (2015) The camsol method of rational
design of protein mutants with enhanced solubility. J Mol Biol
427(2):478–490
Sreerama N, Woody RW (2000) Estimation of protein secondary structure from
circular dichroism spectra: comparison of CONTIN, SELCON, and CDSSTR
methods with an expanded reference set. Anal Biochem 287:252–260
Tischer DK, Lisanza S, Wang J, Dong R, Anishchenko IV, Milles LF, Ovchinnikov S,
Baker D (2020) Design of proteins presenting discontinuous functional sites
using deep learning. Preprint athttps://doi.org/10.1101/2020.11.29.402743
Verkuil R, Kabeli O, Du Y, Wicky BIM, Milles LF, Dauparas J, Baker D,
Ovchinnikov S, Sercu T, Rives A (2022) Language models generalize beyond
natural proteins. Preprint athttps://doi.org/10.1101/2022.12.21.521521
Wang J, Lisanza S, Juergens D, Tischer D, Watson JL, Castro KM, Ragotte R,
Saragovi A, Milles LFL, Baek M et al (2022) Scaffolding protein functional sites
using deep learning. Science 377:387–394
Wang Y, Guan Z, Wang C, Nie Y, Chen Y, Qian Z, Cui Y, Xu H, Wang Q, Zhao F
et al (2022) Cryo-EM structures of escherichia coli Ec86 retron complexes
reveal architecture and defence mechanism. Nat Microbiol 7:1480
–1489
Watson JL, Juergens D, Bennett NR, Trippe BL, Yim J, Eisenach HE, Ahern W,
Borst AJ, Ragotte RJ, Milles LF et al (2023) De novo design of protein
structure and function with rfdiffusion. Nature 620:1476–4687
Wicky BIM, Milles LF, Courbet A, Ragotte RJ, Dauparas J, Kinfu E, Tipps S, Kibler
RD, Baek M, DiMaio F et al (2022) Hallucinating symmetric protein
assemblies. Science 378:56–61
Wishart DS, Sykes BD (1994) The 13C chemical-shift index: a simple method for
the identiﬁcation of protein secondary structure using 13C chemical-shift data.
J Biomol NMR 4:171–180
Wu RM, Ding F, Wang R, Shen R, Zhang X, Luo S, Su C, Wu Z, Xie Q, Berger B
et al (2022) High-resolution de novo structure prediction from primary
sequence. Preprint athttps://doi.org/10.1101/2022.07.21.500999
Xue LC, Rodrigues JPGLM, Kastritis PL, Bonvin AMJJ, Vangone A (2016)
PRODIGY: a web server for predicting the binding afﬁnity of protein-protein
complexes. Bioinformatics 23:3676–3678
Yeh AH-W, Norn CH, Kipnis Y, Tischer DK, Pellock SJ, Evans D, Ma P, Lee GR,
Zhang JZ, Anishchenko IV et al (2023) De novo design of luciferases using
deep learning. Nature 614:774–780
Yim J, Trippe BL, Bortoli VD, Mathieu E, Doucet A, Barzilay R, Jaakkola T (2023)
SE(3) diffusion model with application to protein backbone generation. (2023)
In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML'23), Vol. 202. JMLR.org, Article 1672, 40001–40039
Zhang Y, Skolnick J (2004) Scoring function for automated assessment of protein
structure template quality. Proteins: Struct, Funct, Bioinforma 57:702–710
Zulkower V, Rosser SJ, Ponty Y (2020) DNA chisel, a versatile sequence
optimizer. Bioinformatics 36(16):4508–4509
Acknowledgements
JOK acknowledges support by the Bundesministerium für Bildung und
Forschung (de.NBI project: 031A537B) and the Volkswagen Foundation
(contract 95826). SKS acknowledges support by the Volkswagen Foundation
“Experiment! Funding Initiative” (grant no. 93874-1). AT acknowledges
European Molecular Biology Laboratory core funding. CGPV acknowledges
support by HORIZON EUROPE Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions COFUND
(grant no. 847543). We thank EMBL Heidelberg for generously providing
access to their HPC infrastructure (Laboratory et al,2024) and the EMBL
Protein Expression and Puriﬁcation Core Facility (PEPCF) for their support.
Author contributions
Michael A Jendrusch: Conceptualization; Software; Formal analysis;
Investigation; Visualization; Methodology; Writing— original draft; Writing—
review and editing.Alessio L J Yang: Conceptualization; Formal analysis;
Validation; Investigation; Methodology; Writing— review and editing.Elisabetta
Cacace: Formal analysis; Investigation; Writing— review and editing.Jacob
Bobonis: Conceptualization; Investigation; Methodology; Writing— review and
editing. Carlos G P Voogdt: Investigation; Writing— review and editing.Sarah
Kaspar: Formal analysis; Validation.Kristian Schweimer: Formal analysis;
Molecular Systems Biology Michael A Jendrusch et al
1184 Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 © The Author(s)
Investigation. Cecilia Perez-Borrajero: Formal analysis; Investigation; Writing—
review and editing.Karine Lapouge: Formal analysis; Investigation; Writing—
review and editing.Jacob Scheurich: Investigation. Kim Remans: Resources;
Supervision; Methodology; Writing— review and editing.Janosch Hennig:
Resources; Formal analysis; Supervision; Investigation; Methodology; Writing—
review and editing.Athanasios Typas: Conceptualization; Resources;
Supervision; Writing— review and editing.Jan O Korbel: Conceptualization;
Resources; Supervision; Funding acquisition; Writing— original draft; Writing—
review and editing.S Kashif Sadiq: Conceptualization; Resources; Formal
analysis; Supervision; Funding acquisition; Investigation; Visualization;
Methodology; Writing— original draft; Writing— review and editing.
Source data underlyingﬁgure panels in this paper may have individual
authorship assigned. Where available,ﬁgure panel/source data authorship is
listed in the following database record:biostudies:S-SCDT-10_1038-S44320-
025-00119-z.
Funding
Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Disclosure and competing interests statement
SKS is the Founder and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of DenovAI Biotech Ltd. in
which MJ, JOK and SKS haveﬁnancial interests. MJ, JOK, and SKS are co-
inventors on US Provisional Patent Application No. 63/329,522/PCT patent
application (published as WO 2023/198726 A1 on 19.10.2023). JOK and AT
are members of the Advisory Editorial Board of Molecular Systems Biology.
This has no bearing on the editorial consideration of this article for publication.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0
International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to
the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence,
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to
obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this
licence, visithttp://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. Creative Com-
mons Public Domain Dedication waiverhttp://creativecommons.org/public-
domain/zero/1.0/ applies to the data associated with this article, unless
otherwise stated in a credit line to the data, but does not extend to the graphical
or creative elements of illustrations, charts, orﬁgures. This waiver removes legal
barriers to the re-use and mining of research data. According to standard
scholarly practice, it is recommended to provide appropriate citation and
attribution whenever technically possible.
© The Author(s) 2025
Michael A Jendrusch et al Molecular Systems Biology
© The Author(s) Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 1185
Expanded View Figures
Figure EV1. ESMfold de novo design success.
(A, B) Scatter plots of redesigned sequence scRMSD/pLDDT using ESMfold for monomers (A) and oligomers (B). Designs are coloured by number of amino acids and
percentages of successful designs are reported. The turquoise region and dotted lines indicate the region of success in terms of scRMSD/pLDDT (scRMSD < 2.0 Å,
pLDDT > 70.0).
Molecular Systems Biology Michael A Jendrusch et al
1186 Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 © The Author(s)
Figure EV2. Conformational change design success.
(A) Scatter plots of scRMSD (top) and pLDDT (bottom) using AlphaFold, comparing the complex state and both monomers of a conformational change design. Designs
are coloured by their TM-score threshold (0.1,N = 28; 0.3,N = 32; or 0.5,N = 75) and the region of successful designs in terms of scRMSD or pLDDT is marked in blue.
For each TM-score threshold, the percentage of successful designs with complex scRMSD < 2.0 Å, pLDDT > 70 and monomer scRMSD < 3.0 Å are reported. (B)
Distribution of TM-scores between the complex and monomeric state predicted using AlphaFold for each TM-score threshold. (top) as a box-plot reporting the percentage
of designs with TM-score below threshold. (bottom) as a scatter plot comparing scRMSD and TM-score. Designs are coloured by TM-score threshold and correspondingly
coloured dotted lines mark the position of each threshold in the scatter plot (0.1,N = 28; 0.3,N = 32; 0.5,N = 75). The centre line of each box in the box plot corresponds
to the median, box edges to the upper and lower quartiles, and whiskers to the lowest and highest data points excluding outliers (within 1.5 times the interquartile range).
Michael A Jendrusch et al Molecular Systems Biology
© The Author(s) Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 1187
Figure EV3. Binder design success rate.
(A, B) Scatter plots of redesigned sequence scRMSD, pLDDT and interface pAE for binder designs to all target proteins considered in this work. Designs are coloured by
number of amino acids (50 AA:N = 715, 100 AA:N = 203) and percentages of successful designs are reported. A shows lax success criteria, B shows strict success
criteria. (C) Box plot of predicted dissociation constants for a set of selected binder designs overN = 20,000 molecular dynamics snapshots. Designs are grouped by
target protein and the structures of each target are displayed above. The centre line of each box corresponds to the median, box edges to the upper and lower quartiles,
and whiskers to the lowest and highest data points excluding outliers (within 1.5 times the interquartile range).
Molecular Systems Biology Michael A Jendrusch et al
1188 Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 © The Author(s)
Figure EV4. Multistate binder design.
(A) Scatter plot of complex scRMSD for two targets of a bispeciﬁc binder design. Designs are coloured by target and number of amino acids (RcaT-Sen2/Eco1 50 AA:
N = 42, 100 AA:N = 7; SARS/MERS Spike RBD 50 AA:N = 58; delta/omicron Spike RBD 50 AA:N = 13). Dotted lines represent a relaxed threshold for bispeciﬁc binder
design success of 3.0 Å. Percentage of successful designs with pLDDT > 70 and scRMSD < 3.0 Å are reported for each pair of targets and designed binder size.( B)
Statistics of proteins designed to change conformation upon RcaT-Sen2 binding. (left) Scatter plot of complex scRMSD of the bound state (x-axis) compared to the binder
TM-score between the bound and unbound state. Designs are coloured by the maximum TM-score threshold used in theirﬁtness function (TM < 0.1:N = 14, TM < 0.3:
N = 19, TM < 0.5:N = 46). Coloured dotted lines represent these respective TM-score thresholds. The black dotted line represents the threshold for design success of
scRMSD < 2.0 Å. Percentage of successful designs per TM-score threshold is reported. (right) Box plot of TM-scores for structures predicted using AF for each TM-score
threshold used in the designﬁtness function. Percentage of designs below the threshold is reported. The centre line of each box corresponds to the median, box edges to
the upper and lower quartiles, and whiskers to the lowest and highest data points excluding outliers (within 1.5 times the interquartile range). (C) Box plot of predicted
dissociation constants for a set of selected multi-state binder designs (N = 20,000 molecular dynamics snapshots per box). Designs are grouped by target protein and the
structures of each target are displayed above. Boxes, centre line and whiskers as in (B).
Michael A Jendrusch et al Molecular Systems Biology
© The Author(s) Molecular Systems BiologyVolume 21 | Issue 9 | September 2025 | 1166– 1189 1189