Citation: Teklemariam, A.D.;
Al-Hindi, R.R.; Qadri, I.; Alharbi,
M.G.; Ramadan, W.S.; Ayubu, J.;
Al-Hejin, A.M.; Hakim, R.F.; Hakim,
F.F.; Hakim, R.F.; et al. The Battle
between Bacteria and Bacteriophages:
A Conundrum to Their Immune
System. Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
antibiotics12020381
Academic Editor: Adelaide Almeida
Received: 19 January 2023
Revised: 7 February 2023
Accepted: 9 February 2023
Published: 13 February 2023
Correction Statement: This article
has been republished with a minor
change. The change does not affect
the scientific content of the article and
further details are available within the
backmatter of the website version of
this article.
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
antibiotics 
Review
The Battle between Bacteria and Bacteriophages: A Conundrum
to Their Immune System
Addisu D. Teklemariam 1
 , Rashad R. Al-Hindi 1
 , Ishtiaq Qadri 1, *, Mona G. Alharbi 1, Wafaa S. Ramadan 2,3 ,
Jumaa Ayubu 1, Ahmed M. Al-Hejin 1,4 , Raghad F. Hakim 5, Fanar F. Hakim 6, Rahad F. Hakim 7,
Loojen I. Alseraihi 7, T urki Alamri8
 and Steve Harakeh 9, *
1 Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia
2 Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine (FM), King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia
3 Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University, Cairo 11566, Egypt
4 Microbiology Level 2 Laboratory, King Fahd Medical Research Center, King Abdulaziz University,
P .O. Box 80216, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia
5 Ministry of Health, Jeddah 11176, Saudi Arabia
6 Department of Internal Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia
7 Ibn Sina National College for Medical Studies, Jeddah 21418, Saudi Arabia
8 Family and Community Medicine Department, Faculty of Medicine in Rabigh, King Abdulaziz University,
Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia
9 King Fahd Medical Research Center, Yousef Abdullatif Jameel Chair of Prophetic Medicine Application,
Faculty of Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia
* Correspondence: ishtiaqmq@yahoo.com (I.Q.); sharakeh@gmail.com (S.H.)
Abstract: Bacteria and their predators, bacteriophages, or phages are continuously engaged in an
arms race for their survival using various defense strategies. Several studies indicated that the
bacterial immune arsenal towards phage is quite diverse and uses different components of the host
machinery. Most studied antiphage systems are associated with phages, whose genomic matter is
double-stranded-DNA. These defense mechanisms are mainly related to either the host or phage-
derived proteins and other associated structures and biomolecules. Some of these strategies include
DNA restriction-modification (R-M), spontaneous mutations, blocking of phage receptors, production
of competitive inhibitors and extracellular matrix which prevent the entry of phage DNA into the
host cytoplasm, assembly interference, abortive infection, toxin–antitoxin systems, bacterial retrons,
and secondary metabolite-based replication interference. On the contrary, phages develop anti-phage
resistance defense mechanisms in consortium with each of these bacterial phage resistance strategies
with small fitness cost. These mechanisms allow phages to undergo their replication safely inside
their bacterial host’s cytoplasm and be able to produce viable, competent, and immunologically
endured progeny virions for the next generation. In this review, we highlight the major bacterial
defense systems developed against their predators and some of the phage counterstrategies and
suggest potential research directions.
Keywords: bacteriophage; phage resistance; phage counterstrategies; prophage; phage therapy
1. Introduction
Antimicrobial resistance is a major global public health concern and approximately
10 million people will die yearly worldwide by 2050 because of antimicrobial resistance [1].
Consequently, novel therapeutic strategies have been sought and must be developed and
used as an alternative to antibiotics or in conjunction with conventional therapy. One
of these approaches involves the use of bacteriophages (phages). Phages are the most
abundant predators of bacteria in nature. According to viral ecologists, phage infections
happen about 10 23 times per second worldwide, indicating a very dynamic and large
population [2]. A significant portion of the genes (over 80%) encoded by phages have
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381. https://doi.org/10.3390/antibiotics12020381 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/antibiotics
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 2 of 17
neither been linked to known proteins nor have their functions been identified. This makes
them the greatest source of genetic novelty in the biological world [3].
Bacterial infections that are difficult to treat can be either treated with phages alone
or in conjunction with antibiotics [ 4]. Currently, phage therapy is being reevaluated as
a potential alternative to classical therapeutic agents in the Western countries. However,
there are still multiple challenges to overcome. These challenges include phage resistance
risks, immunity to phages, problems associated with appropriate phage selection, and new
regulatory requirements [5].
Bacteria and phages are seemingly involved in a continuous battle. It is part of con-
tinuous cycles of coexistence and evolution, resulting in phage-resistant hosts protecting
bacterial lineages, while counter-resistant phages threaten such strains. Phages, by devel-
oping resistance, play a crucial role in controlling bacterial populations in most, if not in all,
the milieus. Bacteria can evade the phage attack via several mechanisms and some of these
strategies include the following: DNA restriction-modification (R-M), spontaneous muta-
tions, blocking of phage receptors, production of competitive inhibitors, and extracellular
matrix and acquired immunity via the clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic
repeats and associated proteins (CRISPR-Cas) mechanism [6–8]. On the contrary, phages
developed several counterstrategies and circumvent the phage resistance warfare. These
host-phage interaction is a complex and multifaceted process, which influences the diver-
sity of genetic makeup of both bacteria and their predators, and it is one of the driving
forces creating genetically fit populations from both sides [9].
In this review, we present an overview of the major anti-phage defense strategies of
bacteria and the counterstrategies used by phages to evade these systems and suggest
potential research directions.
2. Mechanisms of Phage Resistances
The mechanism of phage resistance could take place at various stages of phage replicative
cycle. During the phage replication cycle, a phage introduces its DNA via translocation into
the host’s cytoplasm. This will lead to either the lysogenic cycle (prophage formation) or the
lytic cycle. In the lytic cycle, phages pass via several steps and early and late gene expression,
which leads to maturation and aggregation of newly produced virion, which are ultimately
released via lysis. The phage resistance strategies can interfere with one of these steps as
shows in Figure 1 [8], and each resistance mechanism is described in detail below.
2.1. Preventing Phage Adsorption
Phage adsorption to the bacterial cell surface is performed through specific receptors as
the first step of phage infection cycle. Several bacterial cell surface proteins, lipopolysaccha-
rides, and other surface polysaccharide and carbohydrate moieties can serve as receptors
for phages [ 10]. Bacteria have generated several barriers to prevent phage attachment
to their cell surface, such as hidden receptors with extracellular matrix [ 11]. Bacterial
extracellular matrix (a loose network of polymers), such as slime layers (e.g., Campylobacter
fetus slime layer) or capsules (e.g., Escherichia coli K1 capsule, and Klebsiella pneumoniae
capsule) can cover the bacterial surface and makes the phage receptors inaccessible for
phage binding so that protecting bacteria from phage attack [12]. Some bacterial strains
can synthesize competitive inhibitors and mutate (modify) their receptor or by generat-
ing receptors, which are new for the virus [ 13] (Figure 2). The phage receptor diversity
on the surface of the host cell are affected by phage co-evolutionary adaptations to stun
these barriers [10]. This includes phase variation and diversity-generating retro elements
(DGRs) [10]. Phase variation is a reversible, as well as heritable process, regulating the
expression of bacterial gene, thereby genes can shift between a non-functional state and
a functional existence ensuing to phenotypic variations among the bacterial community
even among strains which have similar genotype. Gencay et al. studied the mechanism
of resistance developed by Campylobacter jejuni (strain NCTC11168) against phage F336.
The authors proven that the successful adsorption of the phage F336 to the bacterial sur-
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 3 of 17
face depends on the hypervariable O-methyl phosphoramidate (MeOPN) modification of
capsular polysaccharides (CPS). However, phage resistance has been acquired by loss of
MeOPN receptor on the surface of the organism because of cj1421 gene phase variation,
which encodesd the MeOPN-GalfNAc transferase [14].
Antibiotics 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 18 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the mechanisms of phage resistance in relation to the life cycle of 
phages. (1) Adsorption (phage can use one or multiple receptor binding protein (RBPs) to adhere 
on the host surface. Bacterial strains can interfere this phase by different mechanisms, such as mask-
ing of the receptor(s), changing the structural organization the receptor(s), etc.); ( 2) Translocation 
(direct injection of phage DNA into host cytoplas m). Some bacterial strains can interfere with the 
injection of phage nucleic acid by the host encoded proteins; ( 3) Phage DNA preparation in the 
cytoplasm. Either modified or unmodified phage DNA can be degraded with the host encoded pro-
teins following its translocation into the host cytoplasm; (4) Replication (biosynthesis). Some bacte-
rial strains produce antiviral prot eins that can interfere with th e phage biosynthesis pathway by 
interacting with one or more structural or nonstructural proteins of the infected phage, or they may 
use phage-encoded proteins to protect themselves from phage attack(s); (5) Assembly and packag-
ing (some bacterial strains may express proteins, which can interfere the process of assembly or 
packaging of newly produced virions). 
2.1. Preventing Phage Adsorption 
Phage adsorption to the bacterial cell surface is performed through specific receptors 
as the first step of phage infection cycle. Several bacterial cell surface proteins, lipopoly-
saccharides, and other surface polysaccharide and carbohydrate moieties can serve as re-
ceptors for phages [10]. Bacteria have generated several barriers to prevent phage attach-
ment to their cell surface, such as hidden receptors with extracellular matrix [11]. Bacterial 
extracellular matrix (a loose network of polymers), such as slime layers (e.g., Campylobac-
ter fetus slime layer) or capsules (e.g., Escherichia coli K1 capsule, and Klebsiella pneumoniae 
capsule) can cover the bacterial surface an d makes the phage receptors inaccessible for 
phage binding so that protecting bacteria from phage attack [12]. Some bacterial strains 
can synthesize competitive inhibitors and mutate (modify) their receptor or by generating 
receptors, which are new for the virus [13] (Figure 2). The phage receptor diversity on the 
surface of the host cell are affected by phag e co-evolutionary adaptations to stun these 
barriers [10]. This includes phase variation and diversity-generating retro elements 
(DGRs) [10].
 Phase variation is a reversible, as well as heritable process, regulating the 
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the mechanisms of phage resistance in relation to the life cycle of
phages. (1) Adsorption (phage can use one or multiple receptor binding protein (RBPs) to adhere on
the host surface. Bacterial strains can interfere this phase by different mechanisms, such as masking
of the receptor(s), changing the structural organization the receptor(s), etc.); (2) Translocation (direct
injection of phage DNA into host cytoplasm). Some bacterial strains can interfere with the injection of
phage nucleic acid by the host encoded proteins; (3) Phage DNA preparation in the cytoplasm. Either
modified or unmodified phage DNA can be degraded with the host encoded proteins following its
translocation into the host cytoplasm; (4) Replication (biosynthesis). Some bacterial strains produce
antiviral proteins that can interfere with the phage biosynthesis pathway by interacting with one
or more structural or nonstructural proteins of the infected phage, or they may use phage-encoded
proteins to protect themselves from phage attack(s); ( 5) Assembly and packaging (some bacterial
strains may express proteins, which can interfere the process of assembly or packaging of newly
produced virions).
DGRs are genetic elements mediating the receptor–ligand interactions by varying
proteins and DNA sequences they encode. The change in phage receptors can be introduced
by random mutations and Error-prone DGRs in the genes of bacterial cells encoding cell
surface receptors making them incompatible to the phage’s ligand [15].
There are some instances by which phage receptors can be hidden under a physical
barrier, such as biofilm, capsule, or another extracellular polymer and confer protective
role towards phage attack. In a study, K1 capsules from E. coli were shown to interfere with
the adsorption of phage T7 to the LPS receptor of this bacterium [12].
2.2. Preventing Phage DNA Entry
One of the phage-derived phage defense strategy is superinfection exclusion (Sie).
In the case of Sie defense systems phage encoded anti-phage proteins can be utilized by
bacterial cells to prevent the translocation of DNA of lytic phage into the cytoplasm of host
cells, thereby acquiring protection against virulent phages [16] (Figure 3). These proteins
are thought to be associated with membrane components or membrane anchored. The Sie
encoding genes are frequently found in prophages (phage genome, which is integrated into
the circular bacterial chromosome), signifying that, in many cases, Sie pathways are vital
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 4 of 17
for inter-phage interactions than host–phage interactions. Very limited Sie systems have
been fully studied in spite of the fact that various Sie systems have been identified [17,18].
Antibiotics 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 18 
 
expression of bacterial gene, thereby genes can shift between a non-functional state and a 
functional existence ensuing to phenotypic  variations among the bacterial community 
even among strains which have similar genotype. Gencay et al. studied the mechanism of 
resistance developed by Campylobacter jejuni (strain NCTC11168) against phage F336. The 
authors proven that the successful adsorption of the phage F336 to the bacterial surface 
depends on the hypervariable O-methyl phosphoramidate (MeOPN) modification of cap-
sular polysaccharides (CPS). However, phage resistance has been acquired by loss of 
MeOPN receptor on the surface of the organism  because of cj1421 gene phase variation, 
which encodesd the MeOPN-GalfNAc transferase [14]. 
 
Figure 2. Schematic illustration of the phage resistan ces mechanism at the point of phage adsorp-
tion. (1) Masking the phage receptor with exopolysaccharides; ( 2) Modification of the bacterial cell 
surface receptors. 
DGRs are genetic elements mediating the receptor–ligand interactions by varying 
proteins and DNA sequences they encode. The change in phage receptors can be intro-
duced by random mutations and Error-prone DGRs in the genes of bacterial cells encod-
ing cell surface receptors making them incompatible to the phage’s ligand [15]. 
There are some instances by which phage receptors can be hidden under a physical 
barrier, such as biofil m, capsule, or another extracellular polymer and confer protective 
role towards phage attack. In a study, K1 capsules from E. coli were shown to interfere 
with the adsorption of phage T7 to the LPS receptor of this bacterium [12]. 
2.2. Preventing Phage DNA Entry 
One of the phage-derived phage defense strategy is superinfection exclusion (Sie). In 
the case of Sie defense systems phage encoded anti-phage proteins can be utilized by bac-
terial cells to prevent the translocation of DNA of lytic phage into the cytoplasm of host 
cells, thereby acquiring protection against virulent phages [16] (Figure 3). These proteins 
are thought to be associated with membrane components or membrane anchored. The Sie 
encoding genes are frequently found in prop hages (phage genome, which is integrated 
into the circular bacterial chromosome), signifying that, in many cases, Sie pathways are 
Figure 2. Schematic illustration of the phage resistances mechanism at the point of phage adsorp-
tion. (1) Masking the phage receptor with exopolysaccharides; (2) Modification of the bacterial cell
surface receptors.
Antibiotics 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 18 
 
vital for inter-phage interactions than host–p hage interactions. Very limited Sie systems 
have been fully studied in spite of the fact that various Sie systems have been identified 
[17,18]. 
 
Figure 3. Schematic illustration of the superinfection exclusion systems. (1) Phage proteins prevent 
phage DNA translocation—Imm (T4 phage) , SieA (P22 phage), Sim (P1 phage). ( 2) Prevent phage 
peptidoglycan layer degradation by inhibiting T4 lysozyme activity (Sp of T4 phage). (3) Phage pro-
tein bind to the receptor (e.g., LIp prevents the entry of T5 phage). 
Virulent phages, such as Coliphage T4, have two Sie systems mediated by Sp  and 
imm. These systems prevent the entry of phage DNA into the cytoplasm of bacterial cell, 
thereby affecting successive infection by other T-even-like phages (Figure 3). The Sp  and 
Imm systems act independently, and their mechanism of action is different from one to 
the other. Imm protects the direct injection of phage DNA into the cytoplasm of bacterial 
cells by altering the structural integrity of the translocation site. Imm is suggested to have 
two transmembrane domains and is expected to be localized to the cytoplasmic mem-
brane, but it does not generate sufficient phage immunity alone. Rather, it must be joined 
with another membrane protein to be fully fu nctional and attain strong and efficient ex-
clusion [17]. In contrast, the Sp protein, encoded by gp5, downregulate the activity of the 
T4 lysozyme. The activity of the T4 lysozyme encoded by gp5 has inhibited the membrane 
protein Sp, thereby likely preventing the peptidoglycan degradation and the consequent 
translocation of phage DNA [17,19]. 
2.3. Nucleic Acid Interference 
Restriction-modification (R-M) systems are universal and tremendously varied in the 
bacterial primitive immune system. The R–M system has two main components: a methyl 
transferase (MTase) and a restriction endonuclease (REase). The restriction endonuclease 
pathway detects short DNA segments, measuring between four to eight base pairs long, 
and they are chopped into piec es. The mis-recognition and cleavage of the host DNA is 
Figure 3. Schematic illustration of the superinfection exclusion systems. (1) Phage proteins prevent
phage DNA translocation—Imm (T4 phage), SieA (P22 phage), Sim (P1 phage). (2) Prevent phage
peptidoglycan layer degradation by inhibiting T4 lysozyme activity (Sp of T4 phage). ( 3) Phage
protein bind to the receptor (e.g., LIp prevents the entry of T5 phage).
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 5 of 17
Virulent phages, such as Coliphage T4, have two Sie systems mediated by Sp and
imm. These systems prevent the entry of phage DNA into the cytoplasm of bacterial cell,
thereby affecting successive infection by other T-even-like phages (Figure 3). The Sp and
Imm systems act independently, and their mechanism of action is different from one to the
other. Imm protects the direct injection of phage DNA into the cytoplasm of bacterial cells
by altering the structural integrity of the translocation site. Imm is suggested to have two
transmembrane domains and is expected to be localized to the cytoplasmic membrane, but
it does not generate sufficient phage immunity alone. Rather, it must be joined with another
membrane protein to be fully functional and attain strong and efficient exclusion [17]. In
contrast, the Sp protein, encoded by gp5, downregulate the activity of the T4 lysozyme.
The activity of the T4 lysozyme encoded by gp5 has inhibited the membrane protein Sp,
thereby likely preventing the peptidoglycan degradation and the consequent translocation
of phage DNA [17,19].
2.3. Nucleic Acid Interference
Restriction-modification (R-M) systems are universal and tremendously varied in
the bacterial primitive immune system. The R–M system has two main components:
a methyl transferase (MTase) and a restriction endonuclease (REase). The restriction
endonuclease pathway detects short DNA segments, measuring between four to eight base
pairs long, and they are chopped into pieces. The mis-recognition and cleavage of the
host DNA is protected by the methyl transferase, which is hidden from being recognized
by the restriction enzyme [ 20]. The phage DNA is commonly not methylated and will
consequently be degraded upon injection (Figure 4). Naturally competent bacteria such
as Neisseria gonorrhoeae and others such as Helicobacter pylori, Streptococcus pneumonia and
Haemophilus influenzae have abundant R–M systems [21].
Antibiotics 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 18 
 
protected by the methyl transferase, which is hidden from being recognized by the re-
striction enzyme [20]. The phage DNA is commonly not methylated and will consequently 
be degraded upon injection (Figure 4). Naturally competent bacteria such as Neisseria gon-
orrhoeae and others such as Helicobacter pylori, Streptococcus pneumonia and Haemophilus in-
fluenzae have abundant R–M systems [21]. 
 
Figure 4. Schematic illustration of bacterial R–M systems. R–M systems efficiently degrade phage 
DNA once introduced into the cytosol of the host cell. Fragmented translocated DNA is recognized 
as non-self (lacking chi sequences) and is subjected for further degradation by RecBCD enzyme. 
There are four R–M systems, so far identi fied, based on their subunit composition 
and mechanism of action [22]. Type I and III R-M systems cut and methylate translocated 
DNA far from the recognition sites. Type II is the most common R–M system, which cut 
DNA within or near the recognition site. Unlike the other R–M system, type IV systems 
contain a restriction endonuclease and may or may not have a methylase activity and usu-
ally cut the modified DNA [23]. The antiphage potential of a R–M system is directly re-
lated to the number of recognition sites found in a phage genome [24,25]. 
The genome of some virulent phages may be  modified by harboring a rare base hy-
droxymethylcytosine (HMC) in place of the ba se cytosine. This modification enables T4 
phage DNA to be resistant to the classical R–M-based degradation. In co-evolutionary 
w a r f a r e ,  s o m e  b a c t e r i a  h a v e  d e v e l o p e d  m odification-dependent systems (MDSs) that 
used to attack the modified DNA of phage [26]. 
2.4. Assembly Interference 
Phage-inducible chromosomal islands (PICIs) are one of phage resistance mechanism 
developed by bacteria, which involve the integration of small ( ∼15 kb) gene sequences 
and are excised with the help of a specific “helper phage” [27]. The genes encoding for 
integration factors and excision are locali zed in the PICI genomes. These genes are 
Figure 4. Schematic illustration of bacterial R–M systems. R–M systems efficiently degrade phage
DNA once introduced into the cytosol of the host cell. Fragmented translocated DNA is recognized
as non-self (lacking chi sequences) and is subjected for further degradation by RecBCD enzyme.
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 6 of 17
There are four R–M systems, so far identified, based on their subunit composition and
mechanism of action [22]. Type I and III R-M systems cut and methylate translocated DNA
far from the recognition sites. Type II is the most common R–M system, which cut DNA
within or near the recognition site. Unlike the other R–M system, type IV systems contain a
restriction endonuclease and may or may not have a methylase activity and usually cut
the modified DNA [23]. The antiphage potential of a R–M system is directly related to the
number of recognition sites found in a phage genome [24,25].
The genome of some virulent phages may be modified by harboring a rare base
hydroxymethylcytosine (HMC) in place of the base cytosine. This modification enables
T4 phage DNA to be resistant to the classical R–M-based degradation. In co-evolutionary
warfare, some bacteria have developed modification-dependent systems (MDSs) that used
to attack the modified DNA of phage [26].
2.4. Assembly Interference
Phage-inducible chromosomal islands (PICIs) are one of phage resistance mechanism
developed by bacteria, which involve the integration of small ( ∼15 kb) gene sequences
and are excised with the help of a specific “helper phage” [ 27]. The genes encoding for
integration factors and excision are localized in the PICI genomes. These genes are switched
off by repressors in the absence of helper phages. PICIs are well studied in Staphylococcus
aureus, where they are specifically located in the pathogenicity islands name as “SaPIs”.
In Gram-positive bacteria, PICI expression has been downregulated by a transcription
repressor. PICI is excised from the host chromosome by the anti-repressor that has been
produced by helper phages. Proteins translated from PICI genome suppress the expression
of late helper phage genes and also modify the size of capsid protein to be suitable to
accommodate the PICI genome, which ultimately end up with proper packaging of PICI
genomes and prevent the formation of helper phage virions [27] (Figure 5).
Antibiotics 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 18 
 
switched off by repressors in the absence of helper phages. PICIs are well studied in Staph-
ylococcus aureus, where they are specifically located in the pathogenicity islands name as 
“SaPIs”. In Gram-positive bacteria, PICI expression has been downregulated by a tran-
scription repressor. PICI is excised from the host chromosome by the anti-repressor that 
has been produced by helper phages. Proteins translated from PICI genome suppress the 
expression of late helper phage genes and also  modify the size of capsid protein to be 
suitable to accommodate the PICI genome, which ultimately end up with proper packag-
ing of PICI genomes and prevent the formation of helper phage virions [27] (Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5. Schematic diagram showing the mechanisms of PICI-based assembly interference. ( 1) 
Translocation of helper phage genome may activate host protein, which interfere the activation of 
helper phage early genes that are involving in the early replication cycle; (2) Excised PICI from the 
PICI harboring genome; ( 3) Interference with the activation  of helper phage late genes; ( 4) Helper 
phage packaging interference (Ppi) proteins; ( 5) Small capsid avoids the packaging of larger-size 
helper phage genome. 
2.5. CRISPR-Cas Systems 
CRISPR-Cas is one of the advanced bacter ial phage resistance strategies, which has 
been detected in nearly 50% and 90% of sequenced bacteria and archaea, respectively [28–
30]. CRISPR systems are acquired immune syst ems, where long term protection is guar-
anteed for the second round of infection. In this system, immunological memory is repre-
sented by short (30–40 base pairs) “spacers”. Spacers, the hereditary foundations for im-
munological memory, are generated from phage DNA, and they are flanked by similarly 
short semi-palindromic repeats. Basically, the cas, which we call CRISPR-associated genes, 
commonly neighboring the CRISPR locus, encode essential proteins needed for gaining 
new spacers upon infection and for the target-specific removal of the invader. During re-
moval of the invader nucleic acid, RNA-guided Cas nucleases use the crRNAs to identify 
and cut them via complementary base pairing. The CRISPR systems has been categorized 
into two classes, six types, and several subtypes, mainly based on the composition of cas 
genes [31], with a wide range of action. 
  
Figure 5. Schematic diagram showing the mechanisms of PICI-based assembly interference.
(1) Translocation of helper phage genome may activate host protein, which interfere the activa-
tion of helper phage early genes that are involving in the early replication cycle; (2) Excised PICI from
the PICI harboring genome; (3) Interference with the activation of helper phage late genes; (4) Helper
phage packaging interference (Ppi) proteins; ( 5) Small capsid avoids the packaging of larger-size
helper phage genome.
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 7 of 17
2.5. CRISPR-Cas Systems
CRISPR-Cas is one of the advanced bacterial phage resistance strategies, which has
been detected in nearly 50% and 90% of sequenced bacteria and archaea,respectively [28–30].
CRISPR systems are acquired immune systems, where long term protection is guaranteed
for the second round of infection. In this system, immunological memory is represented by
short (30–40 base pairs) “spacers”. Spacers, the hereditary foundations for immunological
memory, are generated from phage DNA, and they are flanked by similarly short semi-
palindromic repeats. Basically, the cas, which we call CRISPR-associated genes, commonly
neighboring the CRISPR locus, encode essential proteins needed for gaining new spacers
upon infection and for the target-specific removal of the invader. During removal of the
invader nucleic acid, RNA-guided Cas nucleases use the crRNAs to identify and cut them
via complementary base pairing. The CRISPR systems has been categorized into two
classes, six types, and several subtypes, mainly based on the composition of cas genes [31],
with a wide range of action.
2.6. Abortive Infection
Abortive infection (Abi) is a strategy of bacterial cells halt the release of newly pro-
duced progeny virions at the expense of the life of infected cell, thereby preventing the
uninfected cell from being infected. It is considered a self-sacrificing event, or apoptosis
that averts the subsequent infection of the neighboring bacterial community [ 32]. Each
Abi system should contain at least two functional modules: one of these should sense the
infection of phage and the other one related to cell death accompanied by the shutdown of
metabolism following phage sensing. The Abi system senses intermediate replication of
phage genome [33], early, and/or late structural phage proteins [34,35], or phage proteins
that are expressed in the cytosol of the cell during replication [36,37]. The Abi system can
also sense extensive phage DNA transcription [38,39] or phage-mediated shutoff of host
gene expression [40]. Many Abi systems, such as PrrC and Lit, induce cell death because of
the inactivation of the host translation system. The Abi gene, abiZ, which protects L. lactis
against phage phi31infection, also induces cell death via cellular membrane damage of
infected cells [37]. Premature cell lysis leads to the lysis of the infected cells and results in
the release of defective unassembled virions with no potential of infecting other healthy
cells [37]. Another Abi system based on E. coli data is PifA, which causes abortive infec-
tion of phage T7 midway through its replication cycle [ 34]. An Abi gene was reported
to provide protection for Staphylococcus species against Siphoviridae phages through the
phosphorylation of cellular proteins [36]. In general, research findings indicated that most
of the Abi system have been identified in Lactococcus lactis and E. coli, whereby nearly
23 Abi system have been characterized in L. lactis [41] (Figure 6).
In recent times, kinase-associated Abi system was identified in Staphylococcus epider-
midis, protecting them against Siphoviridae phages [36]. In this system, following infection,
the eukaryotic-like serine/threonine kinase Stk2 was found to phosphorylate several targets
of the host machinery, including replication, transcription, translation, and related cellular
pathway. This extensive phosphorylation likely interrupts the whole metabolic system to
result in abortive infection. Phages counter-attack this system by mutating the pack gene,
which affects the activation of Stk2 and its auto phosphorylation [36].
2.7. Toxin-Antitoxin Systems
Phages may trigger the bacterial cells to produce toxins, which my attack the phage
infection cycle. There are six major bacterial toxin–antitoxin (TA) types, classified based
on the toxin neutralization mechanisms, the biomolecular and functional characteristics of
the TA and, the TA count (some bacteria containing lots of TA gene pairs, such as E. coli
K-12, which has more than 35 TA pairs) [42]. This wide genetic diversity indicated that
the TA system is responsible for many functions: apart from phage resistance, they have
been involved in plasmid maintenance, stress responses, and persisting cell production.
The replication pathway of phages can be directly affected by some of the TA system. For
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 8 of 17
example, the MazF/MazE TA system of E. coli can inhibit the infection process of T4 phage
by inducing MazF’s ribonuclease activity, which ultimately leads to complete cessation
of the infection cycle [43]. Table 1 summarizes some of the different anti-phage defense
mechanisms across various species of bacteria.
Antibiotics 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 18 
 
2.6. Abortive Infection 
Abortive infection (Abi) is a strategy of ba cterial cells halt the release of newly pro-
duced progeny virions at the expense of the li fe of infected cell, thereby preventing the 
uninfected cell from being infected. It is cons idered a self-sacrificing event, or apoptosis 
that averts the subsequent infection of th e neighboring bacterial community [32]. Each 
Abi system should contain at least two functional modules: one of these should sense the 
infection of phage and the other one related to cell death accompanied by the shutdown 
of metabolism following phage sensing. The Abi system senses intermediate replication 
of phage genome [33], early, and/or late st ructural phage proteins [34,35], or phage pro-
teins that are expressed in the cytosol of the cell during replication [36,37]. The Abi system 
can also sense extensive phage DNA transcri ption [38,39] or phage-mediated shutoff of 
host gene expression [40]. Many Abi systems, such as PrrC and Lit, induce cell death be-
cause of the inactivation of the host translation system. The Abi gene, abiZ, which protects 
L. lactis against phage phi31infection, also induces cell death via cellular membrane dam-
age of infected cells [37]. Premature cell lysis leads to the lysis of the infected cells and 
results in the release of defective unassembled virions with no potential of infecting other 
healthy cells [37]. Another Abi system based on E. coli data is PifA, which causes abortive 
infection of phage T7 midway through its replication cycle [34]. An Abi gene was reported 
to provide protection for Staphylococcus species against Siphoviridae phages through the 
phosphorylation of cellular proteins [36]. In general, research findings indicated that most 
of the Abi system have been identified in Lactococcus lactis and E. coli, whereby nearly 23 
Abi system have been characterized in L. lactis [41](Figure 6). 
 
Figure 6. Abi pathway of L. lactis. Three proteins AbiU, AbiG and AbiB interfere with RNA tran-
scription. AbiC limit major capsid protein production. AbiQ, AbiI, and AbiE interfere with the pack-
aging of phage DNA. 
Figure 6. Abi pathway of L. lactis . Three proteins AbiU, AbiG and AbiB interfere with RNA
transcription. AbiC limit major capsid protein production. AbiQ, AbiI, and AbiE interfere with the
packaging of phage DNA.
Table 1. Some examples of anti-phage defense strategies across different bacterial species.
Specific Systems Bacteria
Phage Resistance Mechanism
(Anti-Phage Defense
Strategies)
References
ToxN, RNase activity, destroying both host
and phage transcripts Pectobacterium atrosepticum TA systems [44]
MazF/MazE TA system E. coli TA systems [43]
Phage-inducible chromosomal
islands (PICIs) Staphylococcus aureus Assembly Interference [45]
Ppi protein prevent phage
packaging process Staphylococcus spp. Assembly interference [46]
abiK system L. lactis Abi [47]
AbiZ (100-fold reduction of the burst size
of phage Φ31) L. lactis Abi [37]
Stk2 Abi System (kinase-mediated
Abi mechanism) Staphylococcus epidermidis Abi [36]
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 9 of 17
Table 1. Cont.
Specific Systems Bacteria
Phage Resistance Mechanism
(Anti-Phage Defense
Strategies)
References
Inhibiting the protein translation system
using the peptide Lit and the anticodon
nuclease (PrrC)
E. coli Abi [48]
Stp protein of phage T4 affects the
interaction of PrrC and EcoprrI, freeing
triggered PrrC protein and leading
to abortion
E. coli Abi [33]
“inverted” RM systems Streptomyces coelicolor A2(3) R–M systems [49]
Type IV pili Pseudomonas aeruginosa Preventing phage adsorption [50]
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) E. coli K1 Preventing phage adsorption [12]
Mediated by imm and sp E. coli Sie systems [17]
Sie2009 L. lactis and
lactococcal prophages Sie systems [51,52]
Using the signal peptide lipoprotein
prophage TP-J34 (LTP)
Prophage of Streptococcus
thermophilus Sie systems [53]
Using MDS enzymes (DpnI for
Streptococcus pneumoniae, McrBC, McrA,
and Mrr for E. coli)
Streptococcus pneumoniae,
E. coli
Modification-dependent
systems (MDSs), which detect
the modified phage DNA
[26,54]
RNA-guided DNA silencing and
DNA-guided DNA silencing
It is available in some
bacterial spp. Argonautes (pAgos) [55]
2.8. Bacterial Retrons
Retrons are bacterial genomic materials composed of a non-coding RNA (ncRNA) and
reverse transcriptase (RT). The ncRNA served as a template for RT, producing a chimeric
DNA/RNA molecule in which the DNA and RNA are covalently connected [56]. Retrons
have been named in accordance with a convention, encompassing the first genus letters
followed by species names, as well as their reverse-transcribed DNA lengths (for example,
E. coli retron, Ec48, has 48 nt long reverse-transcribed DNAs [57]). It has been three decades
since retrons were discovered, but little is known about their function. However, the anti-
phage activity of retrons has been currently reported. Millman and coworkers reported the
role of retrons as an anti-phage defense strategy. This defense system is consisted of three
principal units: the ncRNA, RT, and an effector protein. According to the result obtained
from this study, the phage proteins inhibit E. coli RecBCD, causing the retron (Ec48) to
activate and kill the cell via Abi [58]. The authors suggested that retrons serve as second
defense line if the first defense line has collapsed (Figure 7).
2.9. Bacterial Secondary Metabolites (Chemical Agents)
Antiphage defense systems discussed so far have largely been mediated by RNA or
proteins complexes acting on individual cells. However, bacterial secondary metabolites,
such as gibberellins, toxins, alkaloids, and biopolymers, can interfere with the replication
cycle of phages via different mechanisms and defending them from phage attack [ 59].
Maxwell and coworkers introduced a chemical anti-phage defense mechanism that pre-
dominantly occurred in soil fungus, Streptomyces spp. They reported that Streptomyces
spp. synthesized two vital bioactive metabolites (doxorubicin and daunorubicin) that bind
(intercalate) into the DNA of phage and prevent the replication cycle. Interestingly, the
bacterial growth pattern was not affected by these molecules. It has been proposed that
daunorubicin exerted its action at an early stage in the phage replication cycle, after the
translocation of the DNA, but ahead of replication. Doxorubicin forms free radicals (e.g.,
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 10 of 17
OH•), which can damage DNA and cause DNA oxidation (Figure 8). The authors also
reported that these metabolites can disperse into bacteria cells and safeguard them from
infection [60]. Idarubicin and pirubicin are other DNA intercalating agents, which are
produced by Streptomyces spp. These metabolites are thought to affect the circularization
process of the phage linear DNA or to affect proteins that are involved in the transcription
and translation process [59,61].
Antibiotics 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 18 
 
Sie2009 L. lactis and lactococcal prophages Sie systems [51,52] 
Using the signal peptide lipoprotein pro-
phage TP-J34 (LTP) 
Prophage of Streptococcus ther-
mophilus  Sie systems [53] 
Using MDS enzymes (DpnI for Streptococ-
cus pneumoniae, McrBC, McrA, and Mrr for 
E. coli) 
Streptococcus pneumoniae, 
E. coli  
Modification-de-
pendent systems 
(MDSs), which de-
tect the modified 
phage DNA 
[26,54] 
RNA-guided DNA silencing and DNA-
guided DNA silencing 
It is available in some bacterial 
spp. 
Argonautes (pA-
gos) [55] 
2.8. Bacterial Retrons 
Retrons are bacterial genomic materials composed of a non-coding RNA (ncRNA) 
and reverse transcriptase (RT). The ncRNA served as a template for RT, producing a chi-
meric DNA/RNA molecule in which the DNA and RNA are covalently connected [56]. 
Retrons have been named in accordance with a convention, encompassing the first genus 
letters followed by species names, as well as their reverse-transcribed DNA lengths (for 
example, E. coli retron, Ec48, has 48 nt long reverse-transcribed DNAs [57]). It has been 
three decades since retrons were discovered, but little is known about their function. 
However, the anti-phage activity of retron s has been currently reported. Millman and 
coworkers reported the role of retrons as an  anti-phage defense strategy. This defense 
system is consisted of three principal units: the ncRNA, RT, and an effector protein. Ac-
cording to the result obtained from this study, the phage proteins inhibit E. coli RecBCD, 
causing the retron (Ec48) to activate and kill the cell via Abi [58]. The authors suggested 
that retrons serve as second defense line if the first defense line has collapsed (Figure 7). 
 
Figure 7. Schematic illustration of bacterial retron-based anti-phage defense mechanism. 
  
Figure 7. Schematic illustration of bacterial retron-based anti-phage defense mechanism.
Antibiotics 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 18 
 
2.9. Bacterial Secondary Metabolites (Chemical Agents) 
Antiphage defense systems discussed so far have largely been mediated by RNA or 
proteins complexes acting on individual cells. However, bacterial secondary metabolites, 
such as gibberellins, toxins, alkaloids, and biopolymers, can interfere with the replication 
cycle of phages via different mechanisms an d defending them from phage attack [59]. 
Maxwell and coworkers introduced a chemical  anti-phage defense mechanism that pre-
dominantly occurred in soil fungus, Streptomyces spp. They reported that Streptomyces spp. 
synthesized two vital bioactive metabolites (doxorubicin and daunorubicin) that bind (in-
tercalate) into the DNA of phage and prevent the replication cycle. Interestingly, the bac-
terial growth pattern was not affected by th ese molecules. It has been proposed that 
daunorubicin exerted its action at an early st age in the phage replication cycle, after the 
translocation of the DNA, but ahead of replication. Doxorubicin forms free radicals (e.g., 
OH•), which can damage DNA and cause DNA oxidation (Figure 8). The authors also 
reported that these metabolites can disperse into bacteria cells and safeguard them from 
infection [60]. Idarubicin and pirubicin are other DNA intercalating agents, which are pro-
duced by Streptomyces spp. These metabolites are thought to affect the circularization pro-
cess of the phage linear DNA or to affect proteins that are involved in the transcription 
and translation process [59,61]. 
 
Figure 8. Schematic diagram elucidating the mechanism of action of bacterial secondary metabolites 
in relation to the phage infection cycle. Daunorubicin mainly affect the phage DNA circularization 
and exposing them for restriction enzyme digest ion. Doxorubicin attacks the phage DNA with its 
free radical (OH.), and the subsequent oxidation will result in full degradation. 
3. Phage Counteracting Mechanisms 
Almost all living organisms, including archaea, fungi, and bacteria, are frequently 
infected with viruses and have developed miscellaneous means of resistance. On the other 
Figure 8. Schematic diagram elucidating the mechanism of action of bacterial secondary metabolites
in relation to the phage infection cycle. Daunorubicin mainly affect the phage DNA circularization
and exposing them for restriction enzyme digestion. Doxorubicin attacks the phage DNA with its
free radical (OH.), and the subsequent oxidation will result in full degradation.
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 11 of 17
3. Phage Counteracting Mechanisms
Almost all living organisms, including archaea, fungi, and bacteria, are frequently
infected with viruses and have developed miscellaneous means of resistance. On the other
side, viruses develop counter-defense strategies. Viruses counterattack the host defense
strategies in different ways. Some of the strategies are discussed below.
3.1. Access to Host Receptors
Phages counteract the bacterial resistance associated with their receptors in many
different mechanisms. Adaptation of phages to a new bacterial receptor or unhiding of
bacterial cell surface receptors using phage derived enzymes are the two major coun-
terstrategies employed by phages [ 62,63] (Figure 9). The RBPs of tailed phages, which
taxonomically belong to the family Siphoviridae, can be modified to generate a new receptor
towards the target hosts. Recent findings indicated that the phage λ evolves to target a new
receptor, OmpF, which previously used the LamB receptor on the surface of theE. coli B.
The expression of the equivalent receptor, LamB, is suppressed via mutation [62]
Antibiotics 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 18 
 
side, viruses develop counter-defense strategi es. Viruses counterattack the host defense 
strategies in different ways. Some of the strategies are discussed below. 
3.1. Access to Host Receptors 
Phages counteract the bacterial resistance associated with their receptors in many 
different mechanisms. Adaptation of phages to a new bacterial receptor or unhiding of 
bacterial cell surface receptors using phag e derived enzymes are the two major counter-
strategies employed by phages [62,63] (Figure 9). The RBPs of tailed phages, which taxo-
nomically belong to the family Siphoviridae, can be modified to ge nerate a new receptor 
towards the target hosts. Recent findings indicated that the phage λ evolves to target a 
new receptor, OmpF, which previously used the LamB receptor on the surface of the E. 
coli B. The expression of the equivalent receptor, LamB, is suppressed via mutation [62] 
 
Figure 9. Schematic illustration of the mechanism of ph age accesses the receptor of phage on the 
surface of host cell. (1) Adapting to a new RBP; (2) Adapting to a modified RBP; (3) Access the host 
cell receptor by enzymatic degradation of the exopolysaccharides. 
3.2. Anti-Restriction—Modification Systems 
Bacterial cell typically used a restrict ion endonuclease (REase) enzyme, which 
cleaves the phage DNA at specific recognition site(s). In response to this defense feature, 
phages developed a broad range of passive and active anti-restriction strategies [22,64] 
(Figure 10). 
Figure 9. Schematic illustration of the mechanism of phage accesses the receptor of phage on the
surface of host cell. (1) Adapting to a new RBP; (2) Adapting to a modified RBP; (3) Access the host
cell receptor by enzymatic degradation of the exopolysaccharides.
3.2. Anti-Restriction—Modification Systems
Bacterial cell typically used a restriction endonuclease (REase) enzyme, which cleaves
the phage DNA at specific recognition site(s). In response to this defense feature, phages
developed a broad range of passive and active anti-restriction strategies [22,64] (Figure 10).
3.2.1. Active Evasion Mechanisms
The Myoviridae coliphage P1 encodes two inti-restriction proteins, DarA and DarB, that
are co-translocated into host cells, along with their genome, thereby hiding the type I R-M
recognition sites and protecting phage DNA degradation [65]. In addition, Ocr protein of
coliphage T7 mimics the structure of phosphate backbone of the cellular DNA and directly
interacts with EcoKI (both the REase and MTase domain of this type I R–M enzyme), thus
affecting the action of this system [66,67].
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 12 of 17
Antibiotics 2023, 12, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 18 
 
 
Figure 10. Schematic representation of phage anti-restriction–modification systems. (1) Host MTase 
can modify the genome of phages, which enable th e agent to undergo safe replication in the cyto-
plasm of the host cell. On the other hand, MTase can be encoded by the genome of phage and ex-
pressed its own MTase (PMTase) during infection; ( 2) Phages (e.g., phage P1) can simultaneously 
inject proteins, such as DarA and DarB with it s DNA to bind to the DNA of phage and hidden the 
restriction sites. The target phage DNA can be mimicked by a phage protein (e.g., Ocr of phage T7) 
binded to both REase and MTase, and it seizes the restriction enzyme; (3) The activity of the MTase 
can be activated by phage derived proteins, such as Ral of phage λ and thereby quicken the phage 
DNA protection. The phage T4 peptides, such as Stp, can also impede restriction by perturbation of 
the MTase–REase system. 
3.2.1. Active Evasion Mechanisms 
The Myoviridae coliphage P1 encodes two inti-restriction proteins, DarA and DarB, 
that are co-translocated into host cells, along with their genome, thereby hiding the type I 
R-M recognition sites and protecting phage DNA degradation [65]. In addition, Ocr pro-
tein of coliphage T7 mimics the structure of phosphate backbone of the cellular DNA and 
directly interacts with EcoKI (both the REase and MTase domain of this type I R–M en-
zyme), thus affecting the action of this system [66,67]. 
3.2.2. Passive Mechanisms of Phage Evasion 
In the case of passive mechanisms of ph age evasion, MTase modifies the double-
stranded DNA of phages rapidly within a host comprising a R–M system before it is rec-
ognized by the host REase. Thus, the invading phage DNA will be protected from degra-
dation by R–M systems. Hence, the modified genome of phage can replicate safely in the 
R–M-consisting host cell and can also infect and replicate in other cells which express 
identical R–M system. Nevertheless, as the R–M system is specific to specific host, the 
same DNA of a phage can be detected as foreign in a cell consisting of a different R–M 
system, and it will, therefore, be degraded by a different REase. In yet another twist, some 
REases of bacterial cell even can detect and degrade modified DNA [68]. 
  
Figure 10. Schematic representation of phage anti-restriction–modification systems. (1) Host MTase
can modify the genome of phages, which enable the agent to undergo safe replication in the cytoplasm
of the host cell. On the other hand, MTase can be encoded by the genome of phage and expressed its
own MTase (PMTase) during infection; (2) Phages (e.g., phage P1) can simultaneously inject proteins,
such as DarA and DarB with its DNA to bind to the DNA of phage and hidden the restriction sites. The
target phage DNA can be mimicked by a phage protein (e.g., Ocr of phage T7) binded to both REase
and MTase, and it seizes the restriction enzyme; (3) The activity of the MTase can be activated by phage
derived proteins, such as Ral of phageλ and thereby quicken the phage DNA protection. The phage T4
peptides, such as Stp, can also impede restriction by perturbation of the MTase–REase system.
3.2.2. Passive Mechanisms of Phage Evasion
In the case of passive mechanisms of phage evasion, MTase modifies the double-
stranded DNA of phages rapidly within a host comprising a R–M system before it is
recognized by the host REase. Thus, the invading phage DNA will be protected from
degradation by R–M systems. Hence, the modified genome of phage can replicate safely in
the R–M-consisting host cell and can also infect and replicate in other cells which express
identical R–M system. Nevertheless, as the R–M system is specific to specific host, the same
DNA of a phage can be detected as foreign in a cell consisting of a different R–M system,
and it will, therefore, be degraded by a different REase. In yet another twist, some REases
of bacterial cell even can detect and degrade modified DNA [68].
3.3. Escaping Abortive-Infection Mechanisms
Certain phages have developed anti-Abi mechanisms to undergo protected replication
in the targeted host cell [69]. Lactococcus phages are the best example for this counterstrategy.
Mutations of one or more specific genes of the Lactococcus spp. can enable the phages to
escape the Abi systems [ 70]. Phages from Lactococcus spp., for instance, can bypass the
AbiQ mechanism by mutating genes involved in nucleotide metabolism. A phage can
encode a molecule (such as Dmd in coliphage T4) that can replace a bacterial antitoxin,
thus inhibiting the activity of the bacterial toxin and protecting the cell from death [71]. It
has been discovered that the Pectobacterium atrosepticum phage, phiTE, produces pseudo-
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 13 of 17
anti-toxin RNA or takes over the antitoxin, ToxI, during its infection to deactivate the ToxN
toxin [72].
3.4. Evading CRISPR–Cas Systems
3.4.1. Evasion by Mutation
An individual nucleotide substitution can enable phages to evade the CRISPR system
in the protospacer site or in the conserved region adjacent to the protospacer motif [73]. In
contrast to phages with multiple mismatches in distal PAM protospacer sites, those with
substitutions near the protospacer-adjacent motif will evade CRISPR targeting [74].
3.4.2. Evasion by Anti-CRISPR Genes
Current research findings indicated that phages encode anti-CRISPR genes, which are
active towards the CRISPR of bacterial defense systems, as it is recognized in Pseudomonas
aeruginosa temperate phages [75]. Some phages encode several anti-CRISPR proteins (Acrs)
that interfere with the function of different variants of the CRISPR–Cas system [76].
Some examples of the phage’s counterstrategies towards different phage resistance
mechanisms that we discussed so far are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2. Some examples of phage counterstrategies.
Specific System Anti-Phage Resistance Strategies Example of Phages References
Absence of endonuclease recognition
sites (Lack of Sau 3A regions in
its dsDNA)
Anti-R-M system Staphylococcus phage K [77]
Phage DNA modification comprised
the rare base hydroxymethylcytosine
(HMC) in place of the cytosine
Anti-R-M system Phage T4 [26]
Ocr protein prevent restriction activity Anti-R-M system Coliphage T7 [67]
Using anti-restriction protein Anti-R-M system Phage P1 [65]
Using protein RIIA and RIIB Anti-Abi mechanism Phage T4 [33]
The toxin effect of LsoA and RnlA
neutralized by Dmd during replication
of phage
Anti-Abi system Coliphage T4 [71]
Polysaccharide-degradation using
hydrolases and lyases Accessing the receptors Depolymerase producing
phages [78]
Anti-CRISPR proteins Interfere with CRISPR–Cas system P . aeruginosaprophages [75]
Protospacer mutation Interfere with CRISPR–Cas system Streptococcus thermophilus
phages [73]
Mutations in the RBP-encoding
gene mutation New receptors adaptation Coliphages T7 and ϕX174 [79]
Tail protein modification New receptors adaptation Pseudomonas fluorescens phage
ϕ2, L. lactis phage LL-H [80,81]
4. Conclusions and Future Directions
In this review, we have reviewed a variety of phage resistance mechanisms. These
antiviral defense systems involved several biomolecules, proteins, enzymes, cellular struc-
tures, and inter-cellular interactions that protect bacterial cells from lysis and death. The
bacterial antiphage defense strategies, which are described in this review, reflect the tremen-
dous diversity of phages, and thus some other resistance mechanisms could be discovered.
The study of phage resistance should be scaled up beyond the discovery of the baseline
mechanism towards the detailed understanding on the molecular root behind these antiviral
systems. In this context, advancement in phage biology will certainly be required to
fully understand the mechanism of phage resistance. Moreover, most studied antiphage
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 14 of 17
systems were associated with the phages whose genomic matter is double-stranded-DNA.
Resistance mechanisms linked to single-stranded DNA and RNA, or double-stranded
RNA genomes, as well as other genetically unique phages, are waiting to be investigated.
In addition, lysogenic phage mediated resistance mechanisms are less understood, and
therefore this gap needs to be filled.
The above-mentioned phage resistance strategies are often investigated in a laboratory-
controlled setting, in a single replica, and using a single host–phage model. Nevertheless,
bacterial pathogens usually comprised multi-lateral antiphage systems. The coexistence of
these systems in one host cell has seldom been studied, and the outcome of such interactions
on phage evolution and their community is often overlooked. Likewise, the effectiveness
of phage resistance strategies towards some families of phages (non Siphoviridae) are not
continually evaluated.
As bacteria and phages have ancient co-evolutionary history, phages can profoundly
generate a counter-resistance, via several mechanisms and with small fitness cost. One
phage may also possess multiple phage resistance systems that may generate strong de-
fenses over individual systems, allowing specific clonal inhabitants to stay in phage-
containing ecosystems. The phage counteracting strategies enable the phages to undergo
their replication safely and to produce viable progeny virions for the next generation.
However, there are many unexplored mechanisms, cascades of reactions, molecular inter-
actions, and involvement of newly produced biomolecules that need additional in-depth
investigation for better understanding of phage science. Hence, the limitation of this review
is that we have presented limited information regarding the mechanisms of action of some
phage resistance and counterstrategies that have not yet been fully explored.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization and contribution to writing, S.H., J.A., A.D.T., T.A., M.G.A.,
R.R.A.-H., I.Q., A.M.A.-H., R.F.H. (Raghad F. Hakim), F.F.H., R.F.H. (Rahad F. Hakim), W.S.R. and
L.I.A. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research work was funded by the Institutional Fund projects under grant no. (IFPDP
-47-22). Therefore, the authors gratefully acknowledge technical and financial support from the
Ministry of Education and Deanship of Scientific Research (DSR), King Abdulaziz University (KAU),
Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
Acknowledgments: This research work was funded by the Institutional Fund projects under grant no.
(IFPDP -47-22). Therefore, the authors gratefully acknowledge technical and financial support from
the Ministry of Education and Deanship of Scientific Research (DSR), King Abdulaziz University
(KAU), Jeddah, Saudi Arabia.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. De Kraker, M.E.; Stewardson, A.J.; Harbarth, S. Will 10 million people die a year due to antimicrobial resistance by 2050?PLoS
Med. 2016, 13, e1002184. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Suttle, C.A. Marine viruses—Major players in the global ecosystem. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2007, 5, 801–812. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Hatfull, G.F.; Hendrix, R.W. Bacteriophages and their genomes. Curr. Opin. Virol. 2011, 1, 298–303. [CrossRef]
4. Górski, A.; Mi˛ edzybrodzki, R.; W˛ egrzyn, G.; Jo ´ nczyk-Matysiak, E.; Borysowski, J.; Weber-D ˛ abrowska, B. Phage therapy: Current
status and perspectives. Med. Res. Rev. 2020, 40, 459–463. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Pires, D.P .; Costa, A.R.; Pinto, G.; Meneses, L.; Azeredo, J. Current challenges and future opportunities of phage therapy.FEMS
Microbiol. Rev. 2020, 44, 684–700. [CrossRef]
6. Seed, K.D. Battling phages: How bacteria defend against viral attack. PLoS Pathog. 2015, 11, e1004847. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Bondy-Denomy, J.; Qian, J.; Westra, E.R.; Buckling, A.; Guttman, D.S.; Davidson, A.R.; Maxwell, K.L. Prophages mediate defense
against phage infection through diverse mechanisms. ISME J. 2016, 10, 2854–2866. [CrossRef]
8. Labrie, S.J.; Samson, J.E.; Moineau, S. Bacteriophage resistance mechanisms. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2010, 8, 317–327. [CrossRef]
9. Bono, L.M.; Gensel, C.L.; Pfennig, D.W.; Burch, C.L. Competition and the origins of novelty: Experimental evolution of niche-
width expansion in a virus. Biol. Lett. 2013, 9, 20120616. [CrossRef]
10. Simmons, E.L.; Drescher, K.; Nadell, C.D.; Bucci, V . Phage mobility is a core determinant of phage–bacteria coexistence in biofilms.
ISME J. 2018, 12, 531–543. [CrossRef]
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 15 of 17
11. Egido, J.E.; Costa, A.R.; Aparicio-Maldonado, C.; Haas, P .; Brouns, S.J. Mechanisms and clinical importance of bacteriophage
resistance. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 2022, 46, fuab048. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Scholl, D.; Adhya, S.; Merril, C. Escherichia coli K1’s capsule is a barrier to bacteriophage T7. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2005, 71,
4872–4874. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Reyes-Robles, T.; Dillard, R.S.; Cairns, L.S.; Silva-Valenzuela, C.A.; Housman, M.; Ali, A.; Wright, E.R.; Camilli, A.Vibrio cholerae
outer membrane vesicles inhibit bacteriophage infection. J. Bacteriol. 2018, 200, e00792-17. [CrossRef]
14. Gencay, Y.E.; Sørensen, M.C.; Wenzel, C.Q.; Szymanski, C.M.; Brøndsted, L. Phase variable expression of a single phage receptor
in Campylobacter jejuni NCTC12662 influences sensitivity toward several diverse CPS-dependent phages. Front. Microbiol. 2018,
9, 82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Guo, H.; Arambula, D.; Ghosh, P .; Miller, J.F. Diversity-generating retroelements in phage and bacterial genomes.Mob. DNA III
2015, 2, 1237–1252. [CrossRef]
16. Shi, K.; Oakland, J.T.; Kurniawan, F.; Moeller, N.H.; Banerjee, S.; Aihara, H. Structural basis of superinfection exclusion by
bacteriophage T4 Spackle. Commun. Biol. 2020, 3, 691. [CrossRef]
17. Lu, M.J.; Stierhof, Y.D.; Henning, U. Location and unusual membrane topology of the immunity protein of theEscherichia coli
phage T4. J. Virol. 1993, 67, 4905–4913. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Lu, M.; Henning, U. Superinfection exclusion by T-even-type coliphages. Trends Microbiol. 1994, 2, 137–139. [CrossRef]
19. Moak, M.; Molineux, I.J. Role of the Gp16 lytic transglycosylase motif in bacteriophage T7 virions at the initiation of infection.
Mol. Microbiol. 2000, 37, 345–355. [CrossRef]
20. Vasu, K.; Nagaraja, V . Diverse functions of restriction-modification systems in addition to cellular defense.Microbiol. Mol. Biol.
Rev. 2013, 77, 53–72. [CrossRef]
21. Stein, D.C.; Gunn, J.S.; Radlinska, M.; Piekarowicz, A. Restriction and modification systems of Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Gene 1995,
157, 19–22. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Tock, M.R.; Dryden, D.T. The biology of restriction and anti-restriction. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2005, 8, 466–472. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
23. Lepikhov, K.; Tchernov, A.; Zheleznaja, L.; Matvienko, N.; Walter, J.; Trautner, T.A. Characterization of the type IV restriction
modification system Bsp LU11III from Bacillus sp. LU11. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001, 29, 4691–4698. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Wilson, G.G.; Murray, N.E. Restriction and modification systems. Annu. Rev. Genet. 1991, 25, 585–627. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. McGrath, S.; Seegers, J.F.; Fitzgerald, G.F.; van Sinderen, D. Molecular characterization of a phage-encoded resistance system in
Lactococcus lactis. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1999, 65, 1891–1899. [CrossRef]
26. Bickle, T.A.; Krüger, D.H. Biology of DNA restriction. Microbiol. Rev. 1993, 57, 434–450. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Rostøl, J.T.; Marraffini, L. (Ph) ighting phages: How bacteria resist their parasites. Cell Host Microbe 2019, 25, 184–194. [CrossRef]
28. Makarova, K.S.; Wolf, Y.I.; Alkhnbashi, O.S.; Costa, F.; Shah, S.A.; Saunders, S.J.; Barrangou, R.; Brouns, S.J.; Charpentier, E.; Haft,
D.H. An updated evolutionary classification of CRISPR–Cas systems. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2015, 13, 722–736. [CrossRef]
29. Barrangou, R.; Fremaux, C.; Deveau, H.; Richards, M.; Boyaval, P .; Moineau, S.; Romero, D.A.; Horvath, P . CRISPR provides
acquired resistance against viruses in prokaryotes. Science 2007, 315, 1709–1712. [CrossRef]
30. Marraffini, L.A.; Sontheimer, E.J. CRISPR interference limits horizontal gene transfer in Staphylococci by targeting DNA. Science
2008, 322, 1843–1845. [CrossRef]
31. Koonin, E.V .; Makarova, K.S.; Zhang, F. Diversity, classification, and evolution of CRISPR-Cas systems.Curr. Opin. Microbiol.
2017, 37, 67–78. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Lopatina, A.; Tal, N.; Sorek, R. Abortive infection: Bacterial suicide as an antiviral immune strategy. Annu. Rev. Virol. 2020,
7, 371–384. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Snyder, L. Phage-exclusion enzymes: A bonanza of biochemical and cell biology reagents? Mol. Microbiol. 1995, 15, 415–420.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Schmitt, C.K.; Molineux, I.J. Expression of gene 1.2 and gene 10 of bacteriophage T7 is lethal to F plasmid-containing Escherichia
coli. J. Bacteriol. 1991, 173, 1536–1543. [CrossRef]
35. Bingham, R.; Ekunwe, S.I.; Falk, S.; Snyder, L.; Kleanthous, C. The major head protein of bacteriophage T4 binds specifically to
elongation factor Tu. J. Biol. Chem. 2000, 275, 23219–23226. [CrossRef]
36. Depardieu, F.; Didier, J.; Bernheim, A.; Sherlock, A.; Molina, H.; Duclos, B.; Bikard, D. A eukaryotic-like serine/threonine kinase
protects staphylococci against phages. Cell Host Microbe 2016, 20, 471–481. [CrossRef]
37. Durmaz, E.; Klaenhammer, T.R. Abortive phage resistance mechanism AbiZ speeds the lysis clock to cause premature lysis of
phage-infected Lactococcus lactis. J. Bacteriol. 2007, 189, 1417–1425. [CrossRef]
38. Kazlauskiene, M.; Kostiuk, G.; Venclovas, ˇC.; Tamulaitis, G.; Siksnys, V . A cyclic oligonucleotide signaling pathway in type III
CRISPR-Cas systems. Science 2017, 357, 605–609. [CrossRef]
39. Niewoehner, O.; Garcia-Doval, C.; Rostøl, J.T.; Berk, C.; Schwede, F.; Bigler, L.; Hall, J.; Marraffini, L.A.; Jinek, M. Type III
CRISPR–Cas systems produce cyclic oligoadenylate second messengers. Nature 2017, 548, 543–548. [CrossRef]
40. Koga, M.; Otsuka, Y.; Lemire, S.; Yonesaki, T. Escherichia coli rnlA and rnlB compose a novel toxin–antitoxin system.Genetics
2011, 187, 123–130. [CrossRef]
41. Dai, G.; Su, P .; Allison, G.E.; Geller, B.L.; Zhu, P .; Kim, W.S.; Dunn, N.W. Molecular characterization of a new abortive infection
system (AbiU) from Lactococcus lactis LL51-1. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2001, 67, 5225–5232. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 16 of 17
42. Harms, A.; Brodersen, D.E.; Mitarai, N.; Gerdes, K. Toxins, targets, and triggers: An overview of toxin-antitoxin biology. Mol. Cell
2018, 70, 768–784. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Alawneh, A.M.; Qi, D.; Yonesaki, T.; Otsuka, Y. An ADP-ribosyltransferase A lt of bacteriophage T 4 negatively regulates the
Escherichia coli MazF toxin of a toxin–antitoxin module. Mol. Microbiol. 2016, 99, 188–198. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Blower, T.R.; Pei, X.Y.; Short, F.L.; Fineran, P .C.; Humphreys, D.P .; Luisi, B.F.; Salmond, G.P . A processed noncoding RNA regulates
an altruistic bacterial antiviral system. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol. 2011, 18, 185–190. [CrossRef]
45. Tormo-Más, M.Á.; Mir, I.; Shrestha, A.; Tallent, S.M.; Campoy, S.; Lasa, Í.; Barbé, J.; Novick, R.P .; Christie, G.E.; Penadés, J.R.
Moonlighting bacteriophage proteins derepress staphylococcal pathogenicity islands. Nature 2010, 465, 779–782. [CrossRef]
46. Ram, G.; Chen, J.; Kumar, K.; Ross, H.F.; Ubeda, C.; Damle, P .K.; Lane, K.D.; Penad és, J.R.; Christie, G.E.; Novick, R.P .
Staphylococcal pathogenicity island interference with helper phage reproduction is a paradigm of molecular parasitism. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2012, 109, 16300–16305. [CrossRef]
47. Wang, C.; Villion, M.; Semper, C.; Coros, C.; Moineau, S.; Zimmerly, S. A reverse transcriptase-related protein mediates phage
resistance and polymerizes untemplated DNA in vitro. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011, 39, 7620–7629. [CrossRef]
48. Kaufmann, G. Anticodon nucleases. Trends Biochem. Sci. 2000, 25, 70–74. [CrossRef]
49. Chinenova, T.A.; Mkrtumian, N.M.; Lomovskaia, N.D. Genetic characteristics of a new phage resistance trait in Streptomyces
coelicolor A3 (2). Genetika 1982, 18, 1945–1952.
50. Harvey, H.; Bondy-Denomy, J.; Marquis, H.; Sztanko, K.M.; Davidson, A.R.; Burrows, L.L.Pseudomonas aeruginosa defends against
phages through type IV pilus glycosylation. Nat. Microbiol. 2018, 3, 47–52. [CrossRef]
51. McGrath, S.; Fitzgerald, G.F.; Sinderen, D.V . Identification and characterization of phage-resistance genes in temperate lactococcal
bacteriophages. Mol. Microbiol. 2002, 43, 509–520. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Mahony, J.; McGrath, S.; Fitzgerald, G.F.; van Sinderen, D. Identification and characterization of lactococcal-prophage-carried
superinfection exclusion genes. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2008, 74, 6206–6215. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
53. Sun, X.; Göhler, A.; Heller, K.J.; Neve, H. The ltp gene of temperate Streptococcus thermophilus phage TP-J34 confers superinfec-
tion exclusion to Streptococcus thermophilus and Lactococcus lactis. Virology 2006, 350, 146–157. [CrossRef]
54. Vovis, G.F.; Lacks, S. Complementary action of restriction enzymes endo R· DpnI and endo R· DpnII on bacteriophage f1 DNA. J.
Mol. Biol. 1977, 115, 525–538. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Hegge, J.W.; Swarts, D.C.; van der Oost, J. Prokaryotic Argonaute proteins: Novel genome-editing tools? Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2018,
16, 5–11. [CrossRef]
56. Simon, A.J.; Ellington, A.D.; Finkelstein, I.J. Retrons and their applications in genome engineering. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019,
47, 11007–11019. [CrossRef]
57. Lampson, B.; Inouye, M.; Inouye, S. The msDNAs of bacteria. Prog. Nucleic Acid Res. Mol. Biol. 2001, 67, 65–91.
58. Millman, A.; Bernheim, A.; Stokar-Avihail, A.; Fedorenko, T.; Voichek, M.; Leavitt, A.; Oppenheimer-Shaanan, Y.; Sorek, R.
Bacterial retrons function in anti-phage defense. Cell 2020, 183, 1551–1561.e12. [CrossRef]
59. Kronheim, S.; Daniel-Ivad, M.; Duan, Z.; Hwang, S.; Wong, A.I.; Mantel, I.; Nodwell, J.R.; Maxwell, K.L. A chemical defence
against phage infection. Nature 2018, 564, 283–286. [CrossRef]
60. York, A. Chemical warfare against phages. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2019, 17, 64. [CrossRef]
61. Davies, J. Specialized microbial metabolites: Functions and origins. J. Antibiot. 2013, 66, 361–364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Chatterjee, S.; Rothenberg, E. Interaction of bacteriophage λ with its E. coli receptor, LamB. Viruses 2012, 4, 3162–3178. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
63. Laanto, E.; Mäkelä, K.; Hoikkala, V .; Ravantti, J.J.; Sundberg, L. Adapting a phage to combat phage resistance.Antibiotics 2020,
9, 291. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Roberts, R.J.; Belfort, M.; Bestor, T.; Bhagwat, A.S.; Bickle, T.A.; Bitinaite, J.; Blumenthal, R.M.; Degtyarev, S.K.; Dryden, D.T.;
Dybvig, K. A nomenclature for restriction enzymes, DNA methyltransferases, homing endonucleases and their genes. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2003, 31, 1805–1812. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Iida, S.; Streiff, M.B.; Bickle, T.A.; Arber, W. Two DNA antirestriction systems of bacteriophage P1, darA, and darB: Characteriza-
tion of darA−phages. Virology 1987, 157, 156–166. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Atanasiu, C.; Su, T.; Sturrock, S.S.; Dryden, D. Interaction of the ocr gene 0.3 protein of bacteriophage T7 with Eco KI restric-
tion/modification enzyme. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002, 30, 3936–3944. [CrossRef]
67. Walkinshaw, M.D.; Taylor, P .; Sturrock, S.S.; Atanasiu, C.; Berge, T.; Henderson, R.M.; Edwardson, J.M.; Dryden, D. Structure of
Ocr from bacteriophage T7, a protein that mimics B-form DNA. Mol. Cell 2002, 9, 187–194. [CrossRef]
68. Lacks, S.; Greenberg, B. A deoxyribonuclease of Diplococcus pneumoniae specific for methylated DNA. J. Biol. Chem. 1975,
250, 4060–4066. [CrossRef]
69. Sberro, H.; Leavitt, A.; Kiro, R.; Koh, E.; Peleg, Y.; Qimron, U.; Sorek, R. Discovery of functional toxin/antitoxin systems in
bacteria by shotgun cloning. Mol. Cell 2013, 50, 136–148. [CrossRef]
70. Samson, J.E.; Bélanger, M.; Moineau, S. Effect of the abortive infection mechanism and type III toxin/antitoxin system AbiQ on
the lytic cycle of Lactococcus lactis phages. J. Bacteriol. 2013, 195, 3947–3956. [CrossRef]
71. Otsuka, Y.; Yonesaki, T. Dmd of bacteriophage T4 functions as an antitoxin againstEscherichia coli LsoA and RnlA toxins. Mol.
Microbiol. 2012, 83, 669–681. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Antibiotics 2023, 12, 381 17 of 17
72. Short, F.L.; Akusobi, C.; Broadhurst, W.R.; Salmond, G.P . The bacterial Type III toxin-antitoxin system, ToxIN, is a dynamic
protein-RNA complex with stability-dependent antiviral abortive infection activity. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8, 1013. [CrossRef]
73. Deveau, H.; Barrangou, R.; Garneau, J.E.; Labonté, J.; Fremaux, C.; Boyaval, P .; Romero, D.A.; Horvath, P .; Moineau, S. Phage
response to CRISPR-encoded resistance in Streptococcus thermophilus. J. Bacteriol. 2008, 190, 1390–1400. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74. Sapranauskas, R.; Gasiunas, G.; Fremaux, C.; Barrangou, R.; Horvath, P .; Siksnys, V . TheStreptococcus thermophilus CRISPR/Cas
system provides immunity in Escherichia coli. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011, 39, 9275–9282. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75. Bondy-Denomy, J.; Pawluk, A.; Maxwell, K.L.; Davidson, A.R. Bacteriophage genes that inactivate the CRISPR/Cas bacterial
immune system. Nature 2013, 493, 429–432. [CrossRef]
76. Pawluk, A.; Davidson, A.R.; Maxwell, K.L. Anti-CRISPR: Discovery, mechanism and function. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2018, 16, 12–17.
[CrossRef]
77. Krüger, D.H.; Barcak, G.J.; Reuter, M.; Smith, H.O. Eco RII can be activated to cleave refractory DNA recognition sites.Nucleic
Acids Res. 1988, 16, 3997–4008. [CrossRef]
78. Stummeyer, K.; Schwarzer, D.; Claus, H.; Vogel, U.; Gerardy-Schahn, R.; Mühlenhoff, M. Evolution of bacteriophages infecting
encapsulated bacteria: Lessons from Escherichia coli K1-specific phages. Mol. Microbiol. 2006, 60, 1123–1135. [CrossRef]
79. Meyer, J.R.; Dobias, D.T.; Weitz, J.S.; Barrick, J.E.; Quick, R.T.; Lenski, R.E. Repeatability and contingency in the evolution of a key
innovation in phage lambda. Science 2012, 335, 428–432. [CrossRef]
80. Ravin, V .; Räisänen, L.; Alatossava, T. A conserved C-terminal region in Gp71 of the small isometric-head phage LL-H and
ORF474 of the prolate-head phage JCL1032 is implicated in specificity of adsorption of phage to its host, Lactobacillus delbrueckii. J.
Bacteriol. 2002, 184, 2455–2459. [CrossRef]
81. Scanlan, P .D.; Hall, A.R.; Lopez-Pascua, L.D.; Buckling, A. Genetic basis of infectivity evolution in a bacteriophage.Mol. Ecol.
2011, 20, 981–989. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.