Citation: Suárez, J.; de Ceglia, M.;
Rodríguez-Pozo, M.; Vargas, A.;
Santos, I.; Melgar-Locatelli, S.;
Castro-Zavala, A.; Castilla-Ortega, E.;
Rodríguez de Fonseca, F.; Decara, J.;
et al. Inhibition of Adult
Neurogenesis in Male Mice after
Repeated Exposure to Paracetamol
Overdose. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25,
1964. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms25041964
Academic Editor: Amal Kaddoumi
Received: 22 December 2023
Revised: 24 January 2024
Accepted: 2 February 2024
Published: 6 February 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
 International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences
Article
Inhibition of Adult Neurogenesis in Male Mice after Repeated
Exposure to Paracetamol Overdose
Juan Suárez 1,2,†
 , Marialuisa de Ceglia 2,†
 , Miguel Rodríguez-Pozo 1,2
 , Antonio Vargas 2, Ignacio Santos 1,
Sonia Melgar-Locatelli 2,3 , Adriana Castro-Zavala 2,3
 , Estela Castilla-Ortega 2,3
 ,
Fernando Rodríguez de Fonseca 2,4
 , Juan Decara 2, *
 and Patricia Rivera 2, *
1 Departamento de Anatomía Humana, Medicina Legal e Historia de la Ciencia, Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad de Málaga, 29071 Málaga, Spain; juan.suarez@uma.es (J.S.); rpmiguel@uma.es (M.R.-P .);
isantos@uma.es (I.S.)
2 Grupo de Neuropsicofarmacología, Instituto IBIMA-Plataforma BIONAND, Unidad de Gestión Clínica de
Salud Mental, Hospital Regional Universitario de Málaga, Av. de Carlos Haya, 29010 Málaga, Spain;
marialuisa.deceglia@ibima.eu (M.d.C.); antonio.vargas@ibima.eu (A.V .); 0619587398@uma.es (S.M.-L.);
adriana.castro@uma.es (A.C.-Z.); estela.castilla@ibima.eu (E.C.-O.); fernando.rodriguez@ibima.eu (F.R.d.F.)
3 Departamento de Psicobiología y Metodología de las Ciencias del Comportamiento, Facultad de Psicología,
Universidad de Málaga, 29010 Málaga, Spain
4 Unidad Clínica de Neurología, Hospital Regional Universitario de Málaga, Instituto IBMA-Plataforma
BIONAND, 29010 Málaga, Spain
* Correspondence: juandecara@uma.es (J.D.); patricia.rivera@ibima.eu (P .R.); Tel.: +34-952614012 (J.D. & P .R.)
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract: Paracetamol, or acetaminophen (N-acetyl-para-aminophenol, APAP), is an analgesic and
antipyretic drug that is commonly used worldwide, implicated in numerous intoxications due to
overdose, and causes serious liver damage. APAP can cross the blood–brain barrier and affects brain
function in numerous ways, including pain signals, temperature regulation, neuroimmune response,
and emotional behavior; however, its effect on adult neurogenesis has not been thoroughly investi-
gated. We analyze, in a mouse model of hepatotoxicity, the effect of APAP overdose (750 mg/kg/day)
for 3 and 4 consecutive days and after the cessation of APAP administration for 6 and 15 days on
cell proliferation and survival in two relevant neurogenic zones: the subgranular zone of the dentate
gyrus and the hypothalamus. The involvement of liver damage (plasma transaminases), neuronal
activity (c-Fos), and astroglia (glial fibrillar acidic protein, GFAP) were also evaluated. Our results
indicated that repeated APAP overdoses are associated with the inhibition of adult neurogenesis
in the context of elevated liver transaminase levels, neuronal hyperactivity, and astrogliosis. These
effects were partially reversed after the cessation of APAP administration for 6 and 15 days. In
conclusion, these results suggest that APAP overdose impairs adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus
and hypothalamus, a fact that may contribute to the effects of APAP on brain function.
Keywords: adult neurogenesis; acetaminophen; paracetamol; endocannabinoid; subgranular zone;
hypothalamus; toxicology
1. Introduction
Paracetamol, or acetaminophen (N-acetyl-para-aminophenol, APAP), is one of the
most used drugs worldwide, famous for its analgesic and antipyretic actions. Available
in a wide variety of pharmaceutical forms, APAP is principally administered for the
treatment of cold, fever, and acute or chronic pain, especially in patients in whom non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are contraindicated [1]. Nonetheless, recent
evidence estimates that APAP causes 6% of poisonings worldwide [ 2] because of acute
and/or chronic overdose. Acute overdose is a common form of suicide because of APAP’s
low cost and accessibility; chronic overdose is usually unintentional and happens as a
result of therapeutic misuse and prolonged excessive dosing [ 3]. The most dangerous
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms25041964 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 2 of 19
outcome of APAP poisoning is severe liver injury caused by the metabolic conversion to N-
acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI), which results in glutathione (GSH) depletion and
covalent binding to proteins, subsequently leading to protein nitration and mitochondrial
permeability transition and ultimately inducing oxidative stress, cell death, and loss of liver
function [4]. APAP overdose also causes alterations in brain functions that have long been
considered side effects of liver damage [5]. Thus, hepatic encephalopathy (HE), in turn,
indicates a worsening of the liver’s functionality. The pathophysiology of HE is variable,
including ammonia accumulation, oxidative stress, glutamine signaling, and inflammatory
factors, highlighting the excess of NH4+ in the blood derived from hepatocellular damage,
which spreads to the central nervous system (CNS), joining the glutamine synthesis route
with a cytotoxic nature [3,6–8].
However, paracetamol not only affects the brain through its relationship with liver
damage but also has a direct effect on the brain.
APAP is a moderately lipid-soluble weak organic acid that is transported in its non-
ionized form in the blood, so its hydrophobic nature allows it to readily penetrate cellular
membranes [9]. Since the effects of this drug must be exhibited by acting on the CNS,
several studies have focused on verifying whether APAP is capable of diffusing through
the blood–brain barrier (BBB). It has been shown that paracetamol can easily pass through
it and be found in the cerebrospinal fluid of healthy individuals [10]. Furthermore, it has
been shown that the drug is distributed homogeneously throughout the different areas
of the brain and spinal cord and does not have a greater affinity or action in any specific
region [11]. While its hepatic metabolism and how its overdose leads to hepatotoxicity are
well established, its mechanism of action in the brain is still under debate [12].
APAP mainly acts in the CNS, reducing the active form of cyclooxygenase (COX) 1 and
2 and dampening prostaglandin release and the activation of the inflammatory response [3].
Unlike other NSAIDs, APAP does not inhibit COX activity in the periphery, which reduces
its side effects. Recent evidence shows that APAP efficacy may depend on its transformation
into N-arachidonoylphenolamine (AM404), an active metabolite that activates transient
receptor potential vanilloid-1 (TRPV1) and inhibits endocannabinoid anandamide (AEA)
reuptake from the synaptic cleft [13]. However, recent evidence demonstrates that brain
alterations occurring after APAP overdose may depend on on-site APAP metabolism into
toxic metabolites, GSH depletion, the generation of oxidative stress, and a dose-dependent
increase in cell mortality [3].
Neurogenesis is a life-long process by which neural progenitors or stem cells proliferate
and differentiate into new neurons. The subventricular zone (SVZ) and subgranular zone
(SGZ) are the best-characterized neurogenic niches in the adult rodent brain; however,
adult neurogenesis in rodents is not restricted to these areas, which can be demonstrated in
other brain regions such as the hypothalamus, substantial nigra, and amygdala [14].
A large body of evidence suggests the role of APAP overdose in neurodevelopmental
impairment [15–17]. Nevertheless, few studies relate adult neurogenesis to paracetamol
overdose toxicity. In this sense, it is known that APAP metabolite AM404 is a suppressor
of hippocampal cell proliferation [18] and can affect hippocampal neurogenesis through
TRPV-1-dependent mechanisms [19].
This study aims to evaluate the effect of repeated overdoses of APAP on the prolif-
eration of neural stem cells and the survival of mature neurons at different time points
(6 h, 6 days, and 15 days) to evaluate its impact on adult neurogenesis in the SGZ of the
hippocampus and the hypothalamus, brain regions related to cognitive processes (learn-
ing and memory) and metabolic functions, respectively [ 14]. Also, we evaluated APAP
overdose effects on c-Fos expression in the areas of interest, knowing that its activation is
required for synaptic plasticity and learning [20]. Moreover, considering previous evidence
obtained in our laboratory that suggests that paracetamol-induced liver injury provokes
alterations in inflammatory pathways [21,22], we studied the expression of glial fibrillar
acidic protein (GFAP), which is a recognized marker of neuroinflammation, as well as
an astrocyte precursor in adult neurogenic niches [ 23]. Overall, our results suggested
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 3 of 19
that repeated overdoses of APAP are associated with the inhibition of adult neurogenesis
in the context of high liver transaminase levels, neuronal hyperactivity, and astrogliosis.
These effects were most evident in the hypothalamus and were partially reversed after the
cessation of APAP administration for 6 and 15 days.
2. Results
2.1. Effect of AP AP Overdose on Cell Proliferation in the Subgranular Zone of the Dentate Gyrus
and Hypothalamus
To investigate the impact of repeated APAP administration (750 mg/kg) on cell prolif-
eration in the relevant neurogenic zones of the adult brain, we evaluated the number of
newborn cells in the SGZ of the dentate gyrus (DG) and hypothalamus after the adminis-
tration of 5′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU) (50 mg/kg) for three consecutive days before
sacrifice. The number of BrdU-immunoreactive (BrdU-ir) cells was differentially detected
depending on the experimental group (the APAP injections and time of sacrifice after the
last APAP administration) and the neurogenic zone analyzed.
One-way ANOVA showed the effect of repeated APAP administration in both neu-
rogenic areas analyzed, the SGZ (p < 0.05) and hypothalamus (p < 0.001) (Figure 1). The
number of BrdU-ir cells was lower in the hypothalamus, but not in the SGZ, after repeated
APAP administration for three consecutive days (APAPx3) compared with the control
group (** p < 0.01; Figure 1B,I).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 21 
 
 
obtained in our laboratory that suggests that paracetamol-induced liver injury provokes 
alterations in inﬂammatory pathways [21,22], we studied the expression of glial ﬁbrillar 
acidic protein (GFAP), which is a recognized marker of neuroinﬂammation, as well as an 
astrocyte precursor in adult neurogenic niches [23]. Overall, our results suggested that 
repeated overdoses of APAP are associated with  the inhibition of adult neurogenesis in 
the context of high liver transaminase levels, neuronal hyperactivity, and astrogliosis. 
These eﬀects were most evident in the hypothalamus and were partially reversed after the 
cessation of APAP administration for 6 and 15 days. 
2. Results 
2.1. Eﬀect of APAP Overdose on Cell Proliferation in the Subgranular Zone of the Dentate Gyrus 
and Hypothalamus 
To investigate the impact of repeated APAP administration (750 mg/kg) on cell pro-
liferation in the relevant neurogenic zones of the adult brain, we evaluated the number of 
newborn cells in the SGZ of the dentate gyrus (DG) and hypothalamus after the admin-
istration of 5′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU) (50 mg/kg) for three consecutive days before 
sacriﬁce. The number of BrdU-immunoreactive (BrdU-ir) cells was diﬀerentially detected 
depending on the experimental group (the APAP injections and time of sacriﬁce after the 
last APAP administration) and the neurogenic zone analyzed. 
One-way ANOVA showed the eﬀect of repeated APAP administration in both neu-
rogenic areas analyzed, the SGZ ( p < 0.05) and hypothalamus ( p < 0.001) (Figure 1). The 
number of BrdU-ir cells was lower in the hypothalamus, but not in the SGZ, after repeated 
APAP administration for three consecutive days (APAPx3) compared with the control 
group (** p < 0.01; Figure 1B,I). 
 
Figure 1. Eﬀect of repeated administration of acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg/day on 
cell proliferation analyzed by 5 ′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine immunohistoche mistry (BrdU-ir) in the 
subgranular zone (SGZ) of the dentate gyrus ( A) and the hypothalamus ( B) of male mice. The 
Figure 1. Effect of repeated administration of acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg/day
on cell proliferation analyzed by 5′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine immunohistochemistry (BrdU-ir) in the
subgranular zone (SGZ) of the dentate gyrus ( A) and the hypothalamus ( B) of male mice. The
histogram represents the means ± standard error of the mean (SEM) per section of BrdU-ir nuclei
(N = 6 samples per group). Representative micrographs show magnification views of the typical
clustering of newborn cells at the inner border of the SGZ (C–G) and hypothalamus (H–L). 3v, third
ventricle; gcl, granular cell layer; ml, molecular layer; pcl, polymorphic cell layer. One-way ANOVA:
(**) p < 0.01, and (***) p < 0.001 vs. control group. ($$) p < 0.01 vs. APAPx4–6 h group. (&) p < 0.05 vs.
APAPx4–6days group.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 4 of 19
Likewise, the number of BrdU-ir cells was lower in the SGZ and hypothalamus
when animals received APAP for four consecutive days and were sacrificed 6 h after the
last administration (APAPx4–6 h) compared with the control group (*** p < 0.05/0.001;
Figure 1A,B,E,J).
Interestingly, a significant increase in the number of BrdU-ir cells was detected in
the hypothalamus of mice that received APAP for 4 consecutive days and were sacrificed
15 days after the last administration (APAPx4–15 days) compared with the APAPx4–6 h
group ($$ p < 0.01; Figure 1B,L).
2.2. Effect of AP AP Overdose on Cell Survival in the Hippocampus and Hypothalamus
To investigate the impact of repeated APAP administration on cell survival in adult
mouse brains, we evaluated the number of surviving cells after 5′-iodo-2′-deoxyuridine
(IdU) administration (42.75 mg/kg) for three consecutive days starting on the second day
of APAP administration. The IdU-ir cells in the hippocampus and hypothalamus of mice
sacrificed 6 and 15 days after administering APAPx4 were analyzed (Figure 2).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 21 
 
 
histogram represents the means ± standard error of  the mean (SEM) per section of BrdU-ir nuclei 
(N = 6 samples per group). Repres entative micrographs show magni ﬁcation views of the typical 
clustering of newborn cells at the inner border of the SGZ (C–G) and hypothalamus (H–L). 3v, third 
ventricle; gcl, granular cell layer; ml, molecular layer; pcl, polymorphic cell layer. One-way ANOVA: 
(**) p < 0.01, and (***) p < 0.001 vs. control group. ($$) p < 0.01 vs. APAPx4–6 h group. (&) p < 0.05 vs. 
APAPx4–6days group. 
Likewise, the number of BrdU-ir cells was lower in the SGZ and hypothalamus when 
animals received APAP for four consecutive days and were sacri ﬁced 6 h after the last 
administration (APAPx4–6 h) compared with the control group (*** p < 0.05/0.001; Figure 
1A,B,E,J). 
Interestingly, a signiﬁcant increase in the number of BrdU-ir cells was detected in the 
hypothalamus of mice that received APAP for 4 consecutive days and were sacri ﬁced 15 
days after the last administration (APAPx4–15 days) compared with the APAPx4–6 h 
group (
$$ p < 0.01; Figure 1B,L). 
2.2. Eﬀect of APAP Overdose on Cell Survival in the Hippocampus and Hypothalamus 
To investigate the impact of repeated APAP administration on cell survival in adult 
mouse brains, we evaluated the number of surviving cells after 5 ′-iodo-2′-deoxyuridine 
(IdU) administration (42.75 mg/kg) for three consecutive days starting on the second day 
of APAP administration. The IdU-ir cells in the hippocampus and hypothalamus of mice 
sacriﬁced 6 and 15 days after administering APAPx4 were analyzed (Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2. Effect of repeated administration of acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg/day
on cell survival analyzed by 5′-iodo-2′-deoxyuridine immunohistochemistry (IdU-ir) in the dentate
gyrus (DG) of the hippocampus (A) and the hypothalamus (B) in male mice. The histogram represents
the means ± standard error of the mean (SEM) per section of IdU-ir nuclei (N = 6 samples per group).
Representative micrographs show magnification views of the typical clustering of survival cells at the
inner border of the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the DG (C–E) and the hypothalamus (F–H). 3v, third
ventricle; gcl, granular cell layer; ml, molecular layer; pcl, polymorphic cell layer. One-way ANOVA:
(**) p < 0.01 vs. control group.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 5 of 19
One-way ANOVA showed the effect of APAP administration on cell survival in the
hypothalamus (p < 0.01) but not in the dentate gyrus (DG) (Figure 2). The DG of mice
repeatedly treated with APAP did not show any difference in the number of IdU-ir cells
compared with that of the control mice (Figure 2A,C–E). However, we observed a significant
decrease in the number of IdU-ir cells specifically in the hypothalamus of APAPx4-treated
mice sacrificed 6 days after the last APAP administration compared with the control group
(** p < 0.01; Figure 2B,G).
2.3. Effect of AP AP Overdose on Neuronal Activity in the Hippocampus and Hypothalamus
To investigate the impact of repeated APAP administration on neuronal activity, we
evaluated the number of c-Fos immunoreactivity (c-Fos-ir) cells in the hippocampus and
hypothalamus (Figure 3). One-way ANOVA indicated the effect of APAP overdose on the
number of c-Fos-ir cells in both areas analyzed, the DG (p < 0.05) and the hypothalamus
(p < 0.001) (Figure 3).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 5 of 21 
 
 
Figure 2. Eﬀect of repeated administration of acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg/day on 
cell survival analyzed by 5′-iodo-2′-deoxyuridine immunohistochemistry (IdU-ir) in the dentate gy-
rus (DG) of the hippocampus (A) and the hypothalamus (B) in male mice. The histogram represents 
the means ± standard error of the mean (SEM) per section of IdU-ir nuclei (N = 6 samples per group). 
Representative micrographs show magniﬁcation views of the typical clustering of survival cells at 
the inner border of the subgranular zone (SGZ) of the DG ( C–E) and the hypothalamus ( F–H). 3v, 
third ventricle; gcl, granular cell layer; ml, mole cular layer; pcl, polymorphic cell layer. One-way 
ANOVA: (**) p < 0.01 vs. control group. 
One-way ANOVA showed the eﬀect of APAP administration on cell survival in the 
hypothalamus (p < 0.01) but not in the dentate gyrus (DG) (Figure 2). The DG of mice 
repeatedly treated with APAP did not show any di ﬀerence in the number of IdU-ir cells 
compared with that of the control mice (Figure 2A,C–E). However, we observed a signiﬁ-
cant decrease in the number of IdU-ir cells speci ﬁcally in the hypothalamus of APAPx4-
treated mice sacriﬁced 6 days after the last APAP administration compared with the con-
trol group (** p < 0.01; Figure 2B,G). 
2.3. Eﬀect of APAP Overdose on Neuronal Activity in the Hippocampus and Hypothalamus 
To investigate the impact of repeated APAP administration on neuronal activity, we 
evaluated the number of c-Fos immunoreactivity (c-Fos-ir) cells in the hippocampus and 
hypothalamus (Figure 3). One-way ANOVA indicated the eﬀect of APAP overdose on the 
number of c-Fos-ir cells in both areas analyzed, the DG ( p < 0.05) and the hypothalamus 
(p < 0.001) (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Eﬀect of repeated administration of acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg/day on 
neuronal activity analyzed by c-Fos immunohistochemistry in the dentate gyrus (DG) of the hippo-
campus (A) and the hypothalamus (B) of male mice. The histogram represents the means ± standard 
Figure 3. Effect of repeated administration of acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg/day
on neuronal activity analyzed by c-Fos immunohistochemistry in the dentate gyrus (DG) of
the hippocampus ( A) and the hypothalamus ( B) of male mice. The histogram represents the
means ± standard error of the mean (SEM) per section of c-Fos immunoreactivity (c-Fos-ir) cells
(N = 6 samples per group). Representative micrographs show magnification views of c-Fos-ir cells
in the hippocampus (C–G) and the hypothalamus (H–L). 3v, third ventricle; gcl, granular cell layer;
ml, molecular layer; pcl, polymorphic cell layer. One-way ANOVA: (*) p < 0.05 and (***) p < 0.001 vs.
control group. (###) p < 0.001 vs. APAPx3 group. ($$) p < 0.01 vs. APAPx4–6 h group. (&) p < 0.05 vs.
APAPx4–6 days group.
Post hoc analysis showed an increase in the number of c-Fos-ir cells in the DG of
APAPx4-treated mice sacrificed 6 days after the last administration compared with the
control and the APAPx4–15 days groups (*/& p < 0.05; Figure 3A,F,G).
Regarding the hypothalamus, we observed a higher number of c-Fos-ir cells in the
APAPx3, APAPx4–6 h, APAPx4–6 days, and APAPx4–15 days groups than in the control
group (*** p < 0.001; Figure 3B,I–K). Interestingly, APAPx4-treated mice sacrificed 15 days af-
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 6 of 19
ter the last administration showed a lower c-Fos-ir cell number than that of the other groups
treated with repeated APAP administration (APAPx3, APAPx4–6 h, andAPAPx4–6 days)
(&/$$/### p < 0.05/0.01/0.001; Figure 3B,L).
2.4. Effect of AP AP Overdose on Astroglia in the Hippocampus and Hypothalamus
To investigate the effects of repeated APAP administration on astrogliosis, we eval-
uated the intensity of GFAP immunoreactivity (GFAP-ir) and the number of astrocytes
expressing GFAP in the DG and hypothalamus.
One-way ANOVA indicated the effects of APAP on GFAP-ir cells and GFAP-ir intensity
in the DG (p < 0.001) (Figure 4A,B).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 21 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Eﬀect of repeated administration of acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg/day on 
astrogliosis analyzed by glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunohistochemistry in the dentate 
gyrus (DG) of the hippocampus ( A,B) and the hypothalamus ( C,D) of male mice. The histogram 
represents the means ± standard error of the me an (SEM) per section of GFAP immunoreactivity 
(GFAP-ir) cells and GFAP-ir intensity (n = 6 samples per group). Representative micrographs show 
magniﬁcation views of GFAP-ir cells and GFAP-ir intensity in the DG ( E–I) and hypothalamus (J–
N). One-way ANOVA: (*) p < 0.05, (**) p < 0.01, and (***) p < 0.001 vs. control group. (#) p < 0.05 and 
(###) p < 0.001 vs. APAPx3 group. ( $$) p < 0.01 vs. APAPx4–6 h group. ( &&&) p < 0.001 vs. APAPx4–6 
days group. 
2.5. Correlation Analysis between Liver Transaminases and Cell Proliferation and Survival fol-
lowing APAP Overdose 
Since elevated liver transaminases are associated with APAP hepatotoxicity [22], we 
statistically analyzed the correlation between the plasma levels of the liver transaminases 
Figure 4. Effect of repeated administration of acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg/day on
astrogliosis analyzed by glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunohistochemistry in the dentate
gyrus (DG) of the hippocampus ( A,B) and the hypothalamus (C,D) of male mice. The histogram
represents the means ± standard error of the mean (SEM) per section of GFAP immunoreactivity
(GFAP-ir) cells and GFAP-ir intensity (n = 6 samples per group). Representative micrographs show
magnification views of GFAP-ir cells and GFAP-ir intensity in the DG ( E–I) and hypothalamus
(J–N). One-way ANOVA: (*)p < 0.05, (**) p < 0.01, and (***) p < 0.001 vs. control group. (#) p < 0.05
and (###) p < 0.001 vs. APAPx3 group. ( $$) p < 0.01 vs. APAPx4–6 h group. ( &&&) p < 0.001 vs.
APAPx4–6 days group.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 7 of 19
A greater number of GFAP-ir cells were observed in the DG of APAP-treated mice
(APAPx3, APAPx4–6 h, APAPx4–6 days, APAPx4–15 days) compared with the control
group (*** p < 0.001; Figure 4A,F–I). However, the APAPx4–15 days mice showed a lower
number of GFAP-ir cells than the other groups treated with APAP ($$/&&&/### p < 0.01/0.001;
Figure 4A,I). GFAP-ir intensity was higher in the DG of the APAPx3 and APAPx4–6 days
groups than that of the control group (**/*** p < 0.01/0.001; Figure 4B,F,H). Animals that
received four consecutive administrations of APAP and that were sacrificed 15 days later
showed lower GFAP-ir intensity than those of the APAPx3 and APAPx4–6 days groups
(#/&&& p < 0.05/0.001; Figure 4B,I).
Regarding the hypothalamus, one-way ANOVA indicated the effect of repeated APAP
administration on GFAP-ir intensity (p < 0.001) but not on the number of GFAP-ir cells
(Figure 4C,D).
Post hoc analysis showed increased GFAP-ir intensity in the hypothalamus of APAPx3,
APAPx4–6 h, and APAPx4–6 days mice compared with the control group (*/*** p < 0.05/0.001;
Figure 4D,K–M). Moreover, the APAPx4–15 days group showed lower GFAP-ir intensity
than the APAPx3 and APAPx4–6 days groups (###/&&& p < 0.001; Figure 4D,N).
2.5. Correlation Analysis between Liver Transaminases and Cell Proliferation and Survival
following AP AP Overdose
Since elevated liver transaminases are associated with APAP hepatotoxicity [22], we
statistically analyzed the correlation between the plasma levels of the liver transaminases
gamma-glutamyltransferase (γGT), aspartate aminotransferase (GOT), alanine aminotrans-
ferase (GPT), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP); the number of BrdU-ir cells (cell prolifer-
ation); and the number of IdU-ir cells (cell survival) after repeated APAP administration
(Figure 5).
The results indicated that the plasma levels of γGT, GOT, and GPT, but not ALP ,
negatively correlated with the number of SGZ BrdU-ir cells (γGT: R = −0.424, F1,28 = 6.154,
p < 0.05; GOT: R = −0.512, F1,28 = 9.957, p < 0.01; GPT: R = −0.344, F1,28 = 3.782, p = 0.061).
These results suggest that the decrease in SGZ cell proliferation was significantly related to
the increase in liver transaminases after repeated APAP administration, an effect that was
exacerbated in the APAPx4–6 h group and partially restored in the APAPx4–6 days and
APAPx4–15 days groups (Figure 5A,C,E,G). However, cell survival assessed by the number
of IdU-ir cells in the hippocampus did not correlate with liver transaminases when the
control, APAPx4–6 days, and APAPx4–15 days groups were analyzed (Figure 5B,D,F,H).
The results also indicated that the plasma levels of γGT, GOT, and GPT, but not ALP ,
negatively correlated with the number of hypothalamic BrdU-ir cells ( γGT: R = −0.613,
F1,28 = 16.90, p < 0.001; GOT: R = −0.688, F 1,28 = 25.27, p < 0.0001; GPT: R = −0.463,
F1,28 = 7.666, p < 0.01). These results suggest that the decrease in hypothalamic cell prolifer-
ation was significantly related to the increase in liver transaminases induced by repeated
APAP administration, an effect that was exacerbated in the APAPx4–6 h group and partially
restored in the APAPx4–6 days and APAPx4–15 days groups (Figure 6A,C,E,G). In addition,
cell survival was assessed based on the number of IdU-ir cells in the hypothalamus and was
correlated with the liver transaminases γGT, GOT, and ALP (γGT: R = −0.752, F1,16 = 20.88,
p < 0.001; GOT: R = −0.444, F1,16 = 3.491, p = 0.064; ALP: R = −0.651, F1,16 = 11.79, p < 0.01),
but not GPT, when the control, APAPx4–6 days, and APAPx4–15 days groups were an-
alyzed (Figure 6B,D,F,H). These results suggest that the decrease in hypothalamic cell
survival was significantly related to the increase in liver transaminases induced by repeated
APAP administration, an effect that was exacerbated in the APAPx4–6 days group and
partially restored in the APAPx4–15 days group.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 8 of 19
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 21 
 
 
gamma-glutamyltransferase ( γGT), aspartate aminotransferase (GOT), alanine ami-
notransferase (GPT), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP); the number of BrdU-ir cells (cell 
proliferation); and the number of IdU-ir cells (cell survival) after repeated APAP admin-
istration (Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5. Correlation analysis between plasma levels of liver transaminases gamma-glutamyltrans-
ferase (γGT; A,B), aspartate aminotransferase (GOT; C,D), alanine aminotransferase (GPT; E,F), and 
alkaline phosphatase (ALP; G,H) and cell proliferation in the subgranular zone (SGZ), assessed by 
the number of 5 ′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine immunoreactivity (BrdU-ir) cells, and cell survival in the 
Figure 5. Correlation analysis between plasma levels of liver transaminases gamma-
glutamyltransferase (γGT; A,B), aspartate aminotransferase (GOT; C,D), alanine aminotransferase
(GPT; E,F), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP; G,H) and cell proliferation in the subgranular zone (SGZ),
assessed by the number of 5 ′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine immunoreactivity (BrdU-ir) cells, and cell
survival in the hippocampus, assessed by the number 5′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine immunoreactivity
(IdU-ir) cells, in mice that received vehicle (control group) or acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of
750 mg/kg for 3 and 4 consecutive days and that were sacrificed 6 h (APAPx3 and APAPx4–6 h groups),
6 days (APAPx4–6 days group), and 15 days (APAPx4–15 days group) after the last administration.
The scatter (XY) plots represent the means± standard error of the mean (SEM) (N = 6 per experimental
group). Plotted (solid) lines between mean points represent the correlative changes between the two
variables represented. Dashed lines represent error of the plotted lines. Rho values (goodness-of-fit)
were calculated. A p-value less than 0.05 indicates the statistical significance of the correlation.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 9 of 19
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 21 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Correlation analysis between plasma levels of the liver transaminases gamma-glutamyl-
transferase ( γGT; A,B), aspartate aminotransferase (GOT; C,D), alanine aminotransferase (GPT; 
E,F), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP; G,H) and cell proliferation, as sessed by the number of 5 ′-
bromo-2′-deoxyuridine immunoreactivity (BrdU-ir) cells, and cell survival, assessed by the number 
of 5 ′-iodo-2′-deoxyuridine immunoreactivity (IdU-ir) cell s, in the hypothalamus of mice that re-
ceived saline (control group) or acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg for 3 and 4 consecu-
tive days and that were sacri ﬁced 6 h (APAPx3 and APAPx4–6 h groups), 6 days (APAPx4–6 days 
group), and 15 days (APAPx4–15 days group)  after the last administration. The sca tter (XY) plots 
represent the means ± standard error of the me an (SEM) (N = 6 per experimental group). Plo tted 
Figure 6. Correlation analysis between plasma levels of the liver transaminases gamma-
glutamyltransferase (γGT; A,B), aspartate aminotransferase (GOT; C,D), alanine aminotransferase
(GPT; E,F), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP; G,H) and cell proliferation, assessed by the number of
5′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine immunoreactivity (BrdU-ir) cells, and cell survival, assessed by the number
of 5′-iodo-2′-deoxyuridine immunoreactivity (IdU-ir) cells, in the hypothalamus of mice that received
saline (control group) or acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg for 3 and 4 consecutive
days and that were sacrificed 6 h (APAPx3 and APAPx4–6 h groups), 6 days (APAPx4–6 days group),
and 15 days (APAPx4–15 days group) after the last administration. The scatter (XY) plots represent
the means ± standard error of the mean (SEM) (N = 6 per experimental group). Plotted (solid)
lines between mean points represent the correlative changes between the two variables represented.
Dashed lines represent error of the plotted lines. Rho values (goodness-of-fit) were calculated. A
p-value less than 0.05 indicates the statistical significance of the correlation.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 10 of 19
2.6. Correlation Analysis between Neuronal Activity and Astroglia and Cell Proliferation and
Survival following AP AP Overdose
We also analyzed the correlation between cell proliferation and survival and neuronal
activity and astroglia after repeated APAP administration (Figure 7).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 21 
 
 
(solid) lines between mean points represent the correlative changes between the two variables rep-
resented. Dashed lines represent error of the plo tted lines. Rho values (goodness-of-ﬁt) were calcu-
lated. A p-value less than 0.05 indicates the statistical signiﬁcance of the correlation. 
2.6. Correlation Analysis between Neuronal Activity and Astroglia and Cell Proliferation and 
Survival Following APAP Overdose 
We also analyzed the correlation between cell proliferation and survival and neu-
ronal activity and astroglia after repeated APAP administration (Figure 7). 
 
Figure 7. Correlation analysis between cell proliferation, assessed by the number of 5 ′-bromo-2′-
deoxyuridine immunoreactivity (BrdU-ir) cells; cell survival, assessed by the number 5 ′-iodo-2′-
deoxyuridine immunoreactivity (IdU-ir) cells; neuronal activity, assessed by the number of c-Fos
immunoreactivity (c-Fos-ir) cells; and astroglia, assessed by the number of glial fibrillary acidic
protein immunoreactivity (GFAP-ir) cells, in the hippocampus (A–D) and hypothalamus ( E–H) of
mice that received saline (control group) or acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg for 3
and 4 consecutive days and that were sacrificed 6 h (APAPx3 and APAPx4–6 h groups), 6 days
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 11 of 19
(APAPx4–6 days group), and 15 days (APAPx4–15 days group) after the last administration. The
scatter (XY) plots represent the means ± standard error of the mean (SEM) (N = 6 per experimental
group). Plotted (solid) lines between mean points represent the correlative changes between the two
variables represented. Dashed lines represent error of the plotted lines. Rho values (goodness-of-fit)
were calculated. A p-value less than 0.05 indicates the statistical significance of the correlation.
The results indicated that the number of SGZ BrdU-ir cells and the number of hip-
pocampal IdU-ir cells did not correlate with the number of DG c-FOS-ir cells and the
number of DG GFAP-ir cells (Figure 7A–D). However, in the hypothalamus, the results
also indicated significant correlations between the number of BrdU-ir cells and the num-
ber of c-Fos-ir cells (R = −0.712, F1,28 = 28.91, p < 0.0001) and GFAP-ir cells (R = −0.680,
F1,28 = 24.08, p < 0.0001) (Figure 7E,G). These results suggest that the decrease in hypotha-
lamic cell proliferation was significantly related to an increase in neuronal activity and
astrogliosis induced by repeated APAP administration, an effect that was exacerbated in
the APAPx4–6 h group and partially restored in the APAPx4–6 days and APAPx4–15 days
groups. In addition, significant correlations were also found between the number of IdU-ir
cells and the number of c-Fos-ir cells (R = −0.746, F1,16 = 20.27, p < 0.001) and GFAP-ir
cells (R = −0.739, F1,28 = 19.30, p < 0.001) in the hypothalamus (Figure 7F,H). These results
suggest that the decrease in hypothalamic cell survival was significantly related to an
increase in neuronal activity and astrogliosis induced by repeated APAP administration,
an effect that was exacerbated in the APAPx4–6 days group and partially restored in the
APAPx4–15 days group.
2.7. Correlation Analysis between Cell Proliferation and Survival following AP AP Overdose
We finally analyzed whether changes in cell proliferation in the neurogenic zones are
related to changes in cell survival in the hippocampus and hypothalamus after repeated
APAP administration. The results indicated that the number of SGZ BrdU-ir cells did
not correlate with the number of hippocampal IdU-ir cells (Figure 8A). However, in the
hypothalamus, a significant correlation between the number of BrdU-ir cells and the
number of IdU-ir cells was found (R = −0.503, F1,16 = 5.430, p < 0.05) when the control,
APAPx4–6 days, and APAPx4–15 days groups were analyzed (Figure 8B).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 21 
 
 
Figure 7. Correlation analysis between cell prolif eration, assessed by the number of 5 ′-bromo-2′-
deoxyuridine immunoreactivity (BrdU-ir) cells; cell survival, assessed by the number 5′-iodo-2′-de-
oxyuridine immunoreactivity (IdU-ir) cells; neuronal activity, assessed by the number of c-Fos im-
munoreactivity (c-Fos-ir) cells; and astroglia, assessed by the number of glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein 
immunoreactivity (GFAP-ir) cells, in the hippocampus (A–D) and hypothalamus (E–H) of mice that 
received saline (control group) or acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg for 3 and 4 consec-
utive days and that were sacriﬁced 6 h (APAPx3 and APAPx4–6 h groups), 6 days (APAPx4–6 days 
group), and 15 days (APAPx4–15 days group)  after the last administration. The sca tter (XY) plots 
represent the means ± standard error of the me an (SEM) (N = 6 per experimental group). Plo tted 
(solid) lines between mean points represent the correlative changes between the two variables rep-
resented. Dashed lines represent error of the plo tted lines. Rho values (goodness-of-ﬁt) were calcu-
lated. A p-value less than 0.05 indicates the statistical signiﬁcance of the correlation. 
The results indicated that the number of SGZ BrdU-ir cells and the number of hippo-
campal IdU-ir cells did not correlate with the number of DG c-FOS-ir cells and the number 
of DG GFAP-ir cells (Figure 7A–D). However, in the hypothalamus, the results also indi-
cated signiﬁcant correlations between the number of  BrdU-ir cells and the number of c-
Fos-ir cells (R = −0.712, F
1,28 = 28.91, p < 0.0001) and GFAP-ir cells (R = −0.680, F1,28 = 24.08, 
p < 0.0001) (Figure 7E,G). These results suggest that the decrease in hypothalamic cell pro-
liferation was signiﬁcantly related to an increase in neuronal activity and astrogliosis in-
duced by repeated APAP administration, an eﬀect that was exacerbated in the APAPx4–6 
h group and partially restored in the APAPx4–6 days and APAPx4–15 days groups. In 
addition, signiﬁcant correlations were also found between the number of IdU-ir cells and 
the number of c-Fos-ir cells (R = −0.746, F1,16 = 20.27, p < 0.001) and GFAP-ir cells (R = −0.739, 
F1,28 = 19.30, p < 0.001) in the hypothalamus (Figure 7F,H). These results suggest that the 
decrease in hypothalamic cell survival was signiﬁcantly related to an increase in neuronal 
activity and astrogliosis induced by repeated APAP administration, an eﬀect that was ex-
acerbated in the APAPx4–6 days group and partially restored in the APAPx4–15 days 
group. 
2.7. Correlation Analysis between Cell Proliferation and Survival following APAP Overdose 
We ﬁnally analyzed whether changes in cell proliferation in the neurogenic zones are 
related to changes in cell survival in the hippocampus and hypothalamus after repeated 
APAP administration. The results indicated that the number of SGZ BrdU-ir cells did not 
correlate with the number of hippocampal IdU-ir cells (Figure 8A). However, in the hypo-
thalamus, a signiﬁcant correlation between the number of BrdU-ir cells and the number 
of IdU-ir cells was found (R = −0.503, F1,16 = 5.430, p < 0.05) when the control, APAPx4–6 
days, and APAPx4–15 days groups were analyzed (Figure 8B). 
 
Figure 8. Correlation analysis between cell prolif eration, assessed by the number of 5 ′-bromo-2′-
deoxyuridine immunoreactivity (BrdU-ir) cells, and cell survival, assessed by the number 5′-bromo-
2′-deoxyuridine immunoreactivity (IdU-ir) cells, in the hippocampus ( A) and hypothalamus (B) of 
mice that received saline (control group) or acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg for 4 
Figure 8. Correlation analysis between cell proliferation, assessed by the number of 5 ′-bromo-2′-
deoxyuridine immunoreactivity (BrdU-ir) cells, and cell survival, assessed by the number 5′-bromo-
2′-deoxyuridine immunoreactivity (IdU-ir) cells, in the hippocampus ( A) and hypothalamus ( B)
of mice that received saline (control group) or acetaminophen (APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg for
4 consecutive days and that were sacrificed 6 days (APAPx4–6 days group) and 15 days (APAPx4–
15 days group) after the last administration. The scatter (XY) plots represent the means ± standard
error of the mean (SEM) (N = 6 per experimental group). Plotted (solid) lines between mean points
represent the correlative changes between the two variables represented. Dashed lines represent error
of the plotted lines. Rho values (goodness-of-fit) were calculated. A p-value less than 0.05 indicates
the statistical significance of the correlation.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 12 of 19
2.8. Effect of AP AP Overdose Reduced GSH/GSSG Ratio in the Hypothalamus and Plasma of
Control and AP APx3-Treated Mice
Hypothalamus and plasma samples from the control group and the APAPx3 group
were analyzed to study the reduced glutathione (GSH)/oxidized glutathione (GSSG) ratio.
The mice treated with APAP showed a reduced GSH/GSSG ratio compared with the
controls in the hypothalamus (p < 0.05), while in plasma, no differences were found (see
Figure S2 in Supplementary Materials).
3. Discussion
Despite the numerous ways in which APAP can affect brain functionality, its effect on
adult neurogenesis, a neuroadaptive process strongly susceptible to numerous intrinsic
and environmental factors, has not been fully investigated. The main findings of this
study are that APAP administered in overdose (750 mg/kg) for consecutive days decreases
cell proliferation in the neurogenic areas, the SGZ and the hypothalamus, while also
affecting cell survival in the latter area. The reductions in cell proliferation and survival
are statistically associated with increases in liver transaminase levels in plasma, as well as
astrogliosis (GFAP) and neuronal activity measured based on c-Fos. Interestingly, most of
the changes found after the repeated administration of APAP recovered 15 days after the
last overdose.
APAP not only has the ability to cross the BBB but it has also been described that
the integrity of the BBB is altered by high doses of APAP by disrupting tight junction
barrier proteins at the brain microvascular endothelium [24]. In accordance with this, we
observed that the expression of occludin, a transmembrane protein of tight junctions that
regulates the integrity and permeability of the BBB, leads to a drastic decrease in all groups
treated with APAP compared with the control (see Figure S1 in Supplementary Materials);
furthermore, we did not see a recovery after stopping the treatment in this sense.
Our main hypothesis is that the APAP overdose effect on adult neurogenesis could
be due to the direct toxic effect caused by the accumulation of N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone
imine (NAPQI) in the brain. Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) is present in brain areas
such as the cortex, olfactory bulbs, hippocampus, cerebellum, and brainstem, so brain
cells can directly metabolize APAP , producing the toxic reagent NAPQI [3]. To date, there
are no studies linking NAPQI toxicity to adult neurogenesis, although there is evidence
associating the early consumption of APAP with mid-/long-term neurodevelopment and
behavioral defects [ 25–28]. Here, we show, for the first time, that there is a negative
correlation between adult neurogenesis and the plasma levels of liver damage markers.
Thus, we found negative correlations between SGZ cell proliferation and the transaminases
γGT and GOT. Likewise, there is a negative correlation between cell proliferation in the
hypothalamus and γGT, GOT, and GPT. Furthermore, in the hypothalamus, cell survival
also negatively correlates withγGT and ALP . A second finding also indicates that decreased
cell proliferation and survival in the hippocampus and hypothalamus induced by APAP
overdose are also associated with increased neuronal activity and astrogliosis. Indeed, we
found a negative correlation between cell proliferation and survival and the number of
cells immunoreactive for c-Fos and GFAP in the hypothalamus. A study by Posadas et al.
(2010) [29] showed that rats treated with APAP overdoses had an increased number of
apoptotic positive neurons in culture, confirming a direct toxic effect of APAP on brain
function that may include neuronal activity and maintenance.
APAP is a safe drug administered in therapeutic doses. However, APAP overdose is
the most common cause of acute liver failure (ALF) in many developed countries. NAPQI
depletes hepatic GSH, producing mitochondrial dysfunction that ends with the death of
hepatocytes. The redox imbalance that occurs within these cells can lead to the excessive
production of free radicals capable of crossing the BBB and entering the brain, where
they act as neurotoxins. Furthermore, one of the most important consequences of this
hepatocellular damage is the cessation of the urea cycle, such that NH4+ levels in the blood
increase radically. This ion is in equilibrium with its non-charged form (NH3) in aqueous
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 13 of 19
media such as the bloodstream, so it can cross the BBB and diffuse throughout the CNS.
When this molecule reaches the interior of the astrocytes, NH4+ is used for the synthesis of
glutamine [7,30], where high concentrations of this compound lead to cytotoxic effects [8],
as we observed in our study with astrogliosis marked by the high expression of GFAP . This
fact is one of the many factors that can lead to hepatic encephalopathy (HE) [30,31].
APAP crosses the BBB and is distributed throughout the CNS, where it has analgesic
and anti-inflammatory effects [11]. As in the liver, the CYP2E1 enzyme is also expressed
in the brain [32] and is found mainly in old areas of the allocortex, such as the hippocam-
pus [33], so this toxic intermediate is produced by brain cells themselves. On the other
hand, it has been found that one of the regions of this organ in which GSH levels are most
depleted after an overdose of APAP is the hypothalamus [34]. We were able to verify this
fact by finding a decrease in the GSH/GSSG ratio found in the hypothalamus of mice
exposed to repeated doses of APAP , which also agrees with the existence of an imbalance
in GSH homeostasis in neurodegenerative diseases [35]. Therefore, the decrease in cell pro-
liferation and survival that we observed in the hippocampus and hypothalamus, induced
by an excess of this drug, is associated with neuronal activity and astrogliosis, and that is
why we found a negative correlation between markers of cell proliferation and survival
and the number of cells positive for c-Fos and GFAP .
In the brain, APAP inhibits the COX pathway, playing an anti-inflammatory/antipyretic
role. However, this process does not occur in the periphery, where the analgesic action
of APAP is not related to the inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis [12]. Recently, a COX-
independent mechanism of action through cannabinoid/vanilloid signaling was described
that explains the analgesic properties of APAP . Upon crossing the BBB, APAP is deacety-
lated to become p-aminophenol, which, thanks to the fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH)
enzyme, is conjugated with arachidonic acid to form AM404 [36,37].
AM404 is a ligand of cannabinoid receptor 1 (CB1) and an inhibitor of AEA uptake into
cells, thereby increasing cannabinoid tone [3,36,38]. Recent studies have implicated the en-
docannabinoid system in neurogenic processes. Thus, endocannabinoid signaling controls
neuronal proliferation and survival as a neuroprotective response to brain insults [39–42].
Several studies have shown that the activation of CB1 receptors facilitates cell proliferation
and survival in the hippocampus and hypothalamus; these studies have also shown the
direct role of the CB1 receptor in neurogenesis since the number of BrdU-labeled cells can
be significantly reduced in the hippocampal SGZ and SVZ of CB1 knockoutmice [39,42–44].
Thus, we expect that AM404, an AEA reuptake inhibitor that enhances the effects of AEA
in vivo through the cannabinoid CB1 receptor, should increase cell proliferation and sur-
vival after the administration of APAP . However, this hypothesis is not consistent with
our results, which demonstrate that the excessive and continued consumption of APAP
reduces adult neurogenesis (cell proliferation and survival) in the SGZ and hypothalamus.
Several factors must be considered to explain our results. First, the inhibitory effect of APAP
overdose on adult neurogenesis may be a consequence of CB1 desensitization in the context
of elevated AEA tone. Second, there is a possibility of APAP interactions with indepen-
dent CB1 pathways, including vanilloid, serotonergic, and nitric oxide systems [37,45,46].
Indeed, both anandamide and AM404 are agonists of the capsaicin receptor TRPV1, a
vanilloid receptor that mediates decreased cell proliferation [43,47].
Given all these premises, we conclude that there is a direct toxic effect of excess parac-
etamol on the brain, decreasing adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus and hypothalamus
and increasing neuroinflammation. These effects do not seem to be mediated by metabo-
lites generated in the transformation of APAP as it crosses the BBB and, therefore, would
not involve the action of the cannabinoid and vanilloid signaling systems. To confirm
the hypothesis based on our results, future studies using antioxidants that prevent the
accumulation of NAPQI are necessary.
The alterations in cell proliferation and survival caused by drugs in different neuro-
genic niches can be transient and, therefore, can be restored after the cessation of their
administration, as occurs, for example, in studies of cocaine addiction. This does not
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 14 of 19
mean that there are no long-term neuroadaptations induced by the drug (genes related to
neuroplasticity, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), cellular morphology, etc.) or
changes at a cognitive level [48]. In future studies, it would be interesting to analyze these
possible long-term neuroadaptations induced by paracetamol overdose, performing, for
example, behavioral tests during treatment with APAP and after its cessation.
From a clinical point of view, drug-induced hepatotoxicity is an important disease,
as APAP is the most frequent cause in relation to ingested doses [49]. Generally, APAP is
consumed alone or in combination with other medication, frequently in self-medication
without medical advice, thus causing the majority of cases of APAP poisoning.
The liver toxicity of APAP has been widely studied, but the toxic effect of this drug on
the brain has been less investigated. More studies are needed to clarify the direct damage of
APAP in the brain (by crossing the BBB) and the indirect damage associated with worsening
liver function. Also, deeper knowledge of the pathways that mediate APAP toxicity in the
brain is necessary.
Our results provide information in this regard, helping to comprehensively under-
stand APAP’s mechanism of toxic action in the brain, which may be fundamental in the
development of new therapeutic approaches.
4. Materials and Methods
4.1. Ethics Statement
The experimental procedures with animals were carried out following the recommen-
dations of European Communities Directive 2010/63/EU and Spanish legislation (Real
Decreto 53/2013, BOE 34/11370-11421, 2013) regulating the care and use of laboratory
animals. The protocol was approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of the University of
Málaga (Ref. no. 24-2015-A). All efforts were made to minimize animal suffering and to
reduce the number of animals used. Animal studies comply with the ARRIVE guidelines.
4.2. Animal Model
Male Crl:CD1 (ICR) mice (approximately 25–30 g, 3–4 months old) were purchased
from Charles Rivers Laboratories (Barcelona, Spain). They were housed in cages maintained
in standard conditions (Centro de Experimentación y Conducta Animal, Universidad de
Málaga) at 20 ± 2 ◦C room temperature, 40 ± 5% relative humidity, and a 12h light⁄dark
cycle with a dawn/dusk effect. Water and standard rodent chow (Prolab, Saint Louis, MO,
USA; RMH 2500, 2.9 kcal/g) were available ad libitum.
The animals were handled daily for 10 min and habituated to an oral gavage procedure
for 1 week before experimentation in order to minimize stress effects.
4.3. Acetaminophen Treatment
Acetaminophen (APAP , cat. no. A7085, Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA) was
dissolved in a vehicle containing 0.5% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) in sterile 0.9% NaCl
solution just before each experiment. The APAP was orally gavage-administrated in a final
concentration of 750 mg/kg body weight.
Mice received repeated administration of APAP and were sacrificed 6 h or several
days after the last administration to study the recovery. Mice were randomly divided
into five groups (N = 6): (1) repeated vehicle administration for 4 days (control group);
(2) repeated APAP administration (750 mg/kg/day) for 3 days and sacrificed 6 h after
the last administration (APAPx3); (3) repeated APAP administration (750 mg/kg/day)
for 4 days and sacrificed 6 h after the last administration (APAPx4–6 h); (4) repeated
APAP administration (750 mg/kg/day) for 4 days and sacrificed 6 days after the last
administration (APAPx4–6 days); and (5) repeated APAP administration (750 mg/kg/day)
for 4 days and sacrificed 15 days after the last administration (APAPx4–15 days). Figure 9
shows the administration scheme and the experimental groups used in this study.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 15 of 19
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 21 
 
 
repeated APAP administration (750 mg/kg/day) for 3 days and sacriﬁced 6 h after the last 
administration (APAPx3); (3) repeated APAP administration (750 mg/kg/day) for 4 days 
and sacriﬁced 6 h after the last administration (APAPx4–6 h); (4) repeated APAP admin-
istration (750 mg/kg/day) for 4 days and sacri ﬁced 6 days after the last administration 
(APAPx4–6 days); and (5) repeated APAP administration (750 mg/kg/day) for 4 days and 
sacriﬁced 15 days after the last administration (APAPx4–15 days). Figure 9 shows the ad-
ministration scheme and the experimental groups used in this study. 
 
Figure 9. Schematic timeline and experimental groups of repeated administration of acetaminophen 
(APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg/day for 3 (green line) or 4 (purple line) consecutive days and cessation 
of APAP administration for 6 (red line) or 15 (black line) consecutive days. Black arrow: APAP ad-
ministration; gray arrow: sacri ﬁce; yellow circle: 5 ′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine immunoreactivity 
(BrdU) administration (50 mg/kg/day); green circle: 5′-iodo-2′-deoxyuridine immunoreactivity IdU 
administration (42.75 mg/kg/day). 
4.4. IdU and BrdU Administration 
To analyze cell proliferation and survival, 5 ′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU, cat. no. 
B5002, Sigma-Aldrich, Sant Louis, USA) and 5′-iodo-2′-deoxyuridine (IdU, cat. no. I7125, 
Sigma-Aldrich) were administered intraperitoneally (i.p.) in a sterile 0.9% NaCl solution 
at a dose of 50 mg/kg/day and 42.75 mg/kg/day, respectively. 
BrdU was administered to all experimental groups. BrdU was injected i.p. twice per 
day at 10 h intervals for 3 consecutive days before sacriﬁce. Thus, BrdU was used as a cell 
proliferation marker. IdU was injected i.p. twice per day at 10 h intervals for 3 consecutive 
days on days 2–4 of the experiment. Using this regimen of administration, IdU was ad-
ministered to the control, APAPx4–6 days, and APAPx4–15 days groups only. Thus, IdU 
was used as a cell survival marker (Figure 9). 
  
Figure 9. Schematic timeline and experimental groups of repeated administration of acetaminophen
(APAP) at a dose of 750 mg/kg/day for 3 (green line) or 4 (purple line) consecutive days and cessation
of APAP administration for 6 (red line) or 15 (black line) consecutive days. Black arrow: APAP
administration; gray arrow: sacrifice; yellow circle: 5 ′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine immunoreactivity
(BrdU) administration (50 mg/kg/day); green circle: 5′-iodo-2′-deoxyuridine immunoreactivity IdU
administration (42.75 mg/kg/day).
4.4. IdU and BrdU Administration
To analyze cell proliferation and survival, 5′-bromo-2′-deoxyuridine (BrdU, cat. no.
B5002, Sigma-Aldrich, Sant Louis, USA) and 5′-iodo-2′-deoxyuridine (IdU, cat. no. I7125,
Sigma-Aldrich) were administered intraperitoneally (i.p.) in a sterile 0.9% NaCl solution at
a dose of 50 mg/kg/day and 42.75 mg/kg/day, respectively.
BrdU was administered to all experimental groups. BrdU was injected i.p. twice
per day at 10 h intervals for 3 consecutive days before sacrifice. Thus, BrdU was used
as a cell proliferation marker. IdU was injected i.p. twice per day at 10 h intervals for
3 consecutive days on days 2–4 of the experiment. Using this regimen of administration,
IdU was administered to the control, APAPx4–6 days, and APAPx4–15 days groups only.
Thus, IdU was used as a cell survival marker (Figure 9).
4.5. Sample Collection
Animals were fasted for 12 h before sacrifice. Previous to sacrifice, all animals were
anesthetized (sodium pentobarbital, 50 mg/kg body weight, i.p.) in a room separate from
the other experimental animals. The blood samples were transcardially collected into tubes
containing heparin and centrifuged (1600× g for 10 min, 4 ◦C), and the plasma was stored
at −80 ◦C for biochemical analysis. Another batch of animals was transcardially perfused
with 4% formaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB). Brains were dissected out and kept
in the same fixative solution overnight at 4 ◦C.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 16 of 19
The brains were then cut into 30µm thick coronal sections by using a sliding microtome
(Leica, Wetzlar, Germany; VT1000S) and divided into 6 parallel series. Sections were stored
at 4 ◦C in PB with 0.002% (w/v) sodium azide until they were used for immunostaining.
4.6. Biochemical Analysis
ALP and the hepatic enzymes ALT or GPT, AST or GOT, andγGT were analyzed using
commercial kits according to the manufacturer’s instructions in a Hitachi 737 Automatic
Analyzer (Hitachi Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). In all cases, a calibration curve and internal controls
were included in each assay.
4.7. Immunohistochemistry and Immunofluorescence
Free-floating coronal sections from −2.16 to −4.20 Bregma levels (hippocampus and
hypothalamus) were selected from one of the six parallel series obtained from each brain
from the five experimental groups [50].
Floating brain sections were incubated overnight at 4 ◦C with rat anti-BrdU (1:2000;
Accurate Chemical & Scientific, Nueva York, NY, USA; OBT0030 F), mouse anti-IdU (1:500;
Sigma-Aldrich, Sant Louis, MI, USA), rabbit anti-c-Fos antibody (1:10,000 Calbiochem, San
Diego, CA, USA; PC38), mouse anti-glial fibrillaric acidic protein (GFAP) (1:500, Sigma,
Sant Louis, MI, USA; cat. no. G3893), and mouse anti-occludin (1:200; Invitrogen, Waltham,
MA, USA; OC-3F10) antibody [42].
The following day, the sections were incubated in their respective secondary antibodies
for 90 min: biotinylated donkey anti-rat IgG (1:500, Novex by Life Technologies, Carlsbad,
CA, USA, cat. No. A18743), biotinylated goat anti-mouse IgG (1:500, Sigma, Sant Louis, MI,
USA; cat. No. B7264), or biotinylated donkey anti-rabbit IgG (1:500, Amersham, Little Chal-
font, UK; cat. no. RPN 1004). The sections were then incubated in ExtrAvidin peroxidase
(Sigma) diluted 1:2000 in darkness at room temperature for 1 h. Finally, immunolabeling
was revealed with 0.05% diaminobenzidine (DAB; Sigma), 0.05% nickel ammonium sulfate,
and 0.03% H2O2 in PBS.
For immunofluorescence, sections were incubated for 2 h at room temperature with sec-
ondary antibody goat anti-mouse IgG labeled with Alexa 488 (1:200; Invitrogen, Waltham,
MA, USA; A-11029).
4.8. Cell Counting
BrdU, IdU, c-Fos, and GFAP-ir nuclei and cells that came into focus were manually
counted from Bregma −2.16 to −4.20 mm at hippocampal and hypothalamic levels (Pax-
inos & Watson, 2007) using a standard optical microscope with a 40 × objective (Nikon
Instruments Europe B.V ., Amstelveen, The Netherlands) coupled to the NIS-Elements
Imaging Software 3.00 (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan).
Focusing on the hippocampus, BrdU-ir nuclei were counted in the SGZ of the DG,
while IdU-ir nuclei and c-Fos and GFAP-ir cells were counted in the whole hippocam-
pus (DG, CA3, and CA1 areas). Focusing on the hypothalamus, counting was per-
formed in the paraventricular (PVH), ventromedial (VMH), and arcuate (ARC) nuclei
and median eminence.
Immunostained cells located in the uppermost side that came into focus while moving
down through the thickness of the section were counted. Overall, quantification was
expressed as the average number of cells per area (mm2) in each experimental group.
4.9. Quantification of Immunoreactivity
Densitometric analysis of the GFAP immunoreactivity was conducted on the three hip-
pocampal areas (DG, CA3, and CA1) and hypothalamus from Bregma−2.16 to−4.20 mm [50].
High-resolution digital microphotographs of representative areas were taken with a 10× ob-
jective under the same conditions of light and brightness/contrast with an Olympus BX41
microscope equipped with an Olympus DP70 digital camera (Tokyo, Japan). Quantification
was determined using the analysis software ImageJ 1.38X (NIH, USA).
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 17 of 19
4.10. Determination of Reduced and Oxidized Glutathione
Quantification of the reduced (GSH), free GSH, and oxidized GSH (GSSG) in the
hypothalamus and liver were measured using a commercial kit according to the manufac-
turer’s instructions (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA, USA; Cat# EIAGSHC).
4.11. Statistical Analysis
The GraphPad Prism 9 software was used. All data are expressed as means ± stan-
dard error of the mean (SEM) (N = 6 per experimental group). Animal model data were
analyzed by one-way ANOVA. Subsequent multiple comparisons between groups were
carried out using Tukey adjustments. To analyze whether repeated APAP administration
induced changes in the association between parameters, Pearson’s correlation analysis
was performed, and Rho values (goodness-of-fit) were calculated. A p-value less than
0.05 indicates statistical significance.
Supplementary Materials: The supporting information can be downloaded at https://www.mdpi.com/
article/10.3390/ijms25041964/s1.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.S., J.D. and P .R.; methodology, M.d.C., M.R.-P ., A.V .
and P .R.; formal analysis, J.S., I.S., S.M.-L., A.C.-Z., E.C.-O., F.R.d.F., J.D. and P .R.; investigation, J.S.,
M.d.C., F.R.d.F., J.D. and P .R.; resources, J.S., F.R.d.F. and P .R.; writing—original draft preparation, J.S.,
M.d.C., J.D. and P .R.; writing—review and editing, J.S., M.d.C., M.R.-P ., I.S., S.M.-L., A.C.-Z., E.C.-O.,
F.R.d.F., J.D. and P .R.; funding acquisition, J.S., F.R.d.F. and P .R. All authors have read and agreed to
the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This study was supported by Consejer ía de Salud, Junta de Andaluc ía, ERDF-EU (P .R.:
PI-0337-2012) and Consejería de Universidad, Investigación e Innovación, grant number PI21/00291.
Patricia Rivera and Juan Decara were supported for the “Miguel Servet” (CP19/00068 and CP21/00021
respectively) research contract from the National System of Health, ERDF-EU-ISCIII, cofunded by
the European Social Fund, “Investing in your future”, Gobierno de España.
Institutional Review Board Statement: The protocol was approved by the Animal Ethics Committee
of the University of Málaga and Junta de Andalucía (09/06/2021/095).
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding authors upon reasonable request.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Jozwiak-Bebenista, M.; Nowak, J.Z. Paracetamol: Mechanism of Action, Applications and Safety Concern. Acta Pol. Pharm. Drug
Res. 2014, 71, 11–23.
2. Chidiac, A.S.; Buckley, N.A.; Noghrehchi, F.; Cairns, R. Paracetamol (Acetaminophen) Overdose and Hepatotoxicity: Mechanism,
Treatment, Prevention Measures, and Estimates of Burden of Disease. Expert Opin. Drug Metab. Toxicol. 2023, 19, 297–317.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Ghanem, C.I.; Pérez, M.J.; Manautou, J.E.; Mottino, A.D. Acetaminophen from Liver to Brain: New Insights into Drug Pharmaco-
logical Action and Toxicity.Pharmacol. Res. 2016, 109, 119–131. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Agarwal, R.; Hennings, L.; Rafferty, T.M.; Letzig, L.G.; McCullough, S.; James, L.P .; MacMillan-Crow, L.A.; Hinson, J.A.
Acetaminophen-Induced Hepatotoxicity and Protein Nitration in Neuronal Nitric-Oxide Synthase Knockout Mice. J. Pharmacol.
Exp. Ther. 2012, 340, 134–142. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Bajaj, J.S.; Wade, J.B.; Sanyal, A.J. Spectrum of Neurocognitive Impairment in Cirrhosis: Implications for the Assessment of
Hepatic Encephalopathy. Hepatology 2009, 50, 2014–2021. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Aldridge, D.R.; Tranah, E.J.; Shawcross, D.L. Pathogenesis of Hepatic Encephalopathy: Role of Ammonia and Systemic Inflamma-
tion. J. Clin. Exp. Hepatol. 2015, 5, S7–S20. [CrossRef]
7. Felipo, V .; Butterworth, R.F. Neurobiology of Ammonia. Prog. Neurobiol. 2002, 67, 259–279. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Sofroniew, M.V .; Vinters, H.V . Astrocytes: Biology and Pathology. Acta Neuropathol. 2010, 119, 7–35. [CrossRef]
9. Clissold, S.P . Paracetamol and Phenacetin. Drugs 1986, 32, 46–59. [CrossRef]
10. Kumpulainen, E.; Kokki, H.; Halonen, T.; Heikkinen, M.; Savolainen, J.; Laisalmi, M. Paracetamol (Acetaminophen) Penetrates
Readily into the Cerebrospinal Fluid of Children after Intravenous Administration. Pediatrics 2007, 119, 766–771. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 18 of 19
11. Courade, J.P .; Besse, D.; Delchambre, C.; Hanoun, N.; Hamon, M.; Eschalier, A.; Caussade, F.; Cloarec, A. Acetaminophen
Distribution in the Rat Central Nervous System. Life Sci. 2001, 69, 1455–1464. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Ayoub, S.S. Paracetamol (Acetaminophen): A Familiar Drug with an Unexplained Mechanism of Action. Temperature2021, 8,
351–371. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Fegley, D.; Kathuria, S.; Mercier, R.; Li, C.; Goutopoulos, A.; Makriyannis, A.; Piomelli, D. Anandamide Transport Is Independent
of Fatty-Acid Amide Hydrolase Activity and Is Blocked by the Hydrolysis-Resistant Inhibitor AM1172. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
2004, 101, 8756–8761. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Jurkowski, M.P .; Bettio, L.; Woo, E.K.; Patten, A.; Yau, S.Y.; Gil-Mohapel, J. Beyond the Hippocampus and the SVZ: Adult
Neurogenesis throughout the Brain. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 2020, 14, 576444. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Bauer, A.Z.; Kriebel, D.; Herbert, M.R.; Bornehag, C.G.; Swan, S.H. Prenatal Paracetamol Exposure and Child Neurodevelopment:
A Review. Horm. Behav. 2018, 101, 125–147. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Philippot, G.; Hellsten, S.V .; Viberg, H.; Fredriksson, R. Evaluation of the Dentate Gyrus in Adult Mice Exposed to Acetaminophen
(Paracetamol) on Postnatal Day 10. Int. J. Dev. Neurosci. 2021, 81, 91–97. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Talge, N.M. Prenatal Acetaminophen Exposure and Neurodevelopment: State of the Evidence. Paediatr. Perinat. Epidemiol. 2020,
34, 227–229. [CrossRef]
18. Hill, M.N.; Kambo, J.S.; Sun, J.C.; Gorzalka, B.B.; Galea, L.A.M. Endocannabinoids Modulate Stress-Induced Suppression of
Hippocampal Cell Proliferation and Activation of Defensive Behaviours. Eur. J. Neurosci. 2006, 24, 1845–1849. [CrossRef]
19. Lourenço, D.M.; Soares, R.; Sá-Santos, S.; Mateus, J.M.; Rodrigues, R.S.; Moreira, J.B.; Vaz, S.H.; Sebastião, A.M.; Solá, S.; Xapelli, S.
Unravelling a Novel Role for Cannabidivarin in the Modulation of Subventricular Zone Postnatal Neurogenesis. Eur. J. Pharmacol.
2023, 959, 176079. [CrossRef]
20. Jaworski, J.; Kalita, K.; Knapska, E. C-Fos and Neuronal Plasticity: The Aftermath of Kaczmarek’s Theory. Acta Neurobiol. Exp.
2018, 78, 287–296. [CrossRef]
21. Rivera, P .; Vargas, A.; Pastor, A.; Boronat, A.; López-Gambero, A.J.; Sánchez-Marín, L.; Medina-Vera, D.; Serrano, A.; Pavón, F.J.;
de la Torre, R.; et al. Differential Hepatoprotective Role of the Cannabinoid CB1 and CB2 Receptors in Paracetamol-Induced Liver
Injury. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2020, 177, 3309–3326. [CrossRef]
22. Rivera, P .; Pastor, A.; Arrabal, S.; Decara, J.; Vargas, A.; Sánchez-Marín, L.; Pavón, F.J.; Serrano, A.; Bautista, D.; Boronat, A.; et al.
Acetaminophen-Induced Liver Injury Alters the Acyl Ethanolamine-Based Anti-Inflammatory Signaling System in Liver. Front.
Pharmacol. 2017, 8, 705. [CrossRef]
23. Rivera, P .; Bindila, L.; Pastor, A.; Pérez-Martín, M.; Pavón, F.J.; Serrano, A.; de la Torre, R.; Lutz, B.; de Fonseca, F.R.; Suárez, J.
Pharmacological Blockade of the Fatty Acid Amide Hydrolase (FAAH) Alters Neural Proliferation, Apoptosis and Gliosis in
the Rat Hippocampus, Hypothalamus and Striatum in a Negative Energy Context. Front. Cell. Neurosci. 2015, 9, 98. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
24. Yang, J.; Betterton, R.D.; Williams, E.I.; Stanton, J.A.; Reddell, E.S.; Ogbonnaya, C.E.; Dorn, E.; Davis, T.P .; Lochhead, J.J.;
Ronaldson, P .T. High-Dose Acetaminophen Alters the Integrity of the Blood–Brain Barrier and Leads to Increased CNS Uptake of
Codeine in Rats. Pharmaceutics 2022, 14, 949. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Suda, N.; Hernandez, J.C.; Poulton, J.; Jones, J.P .; Konsoula, Z.; Smith, C.; Parker, W. Therapeutic Doses of Acetaminophen with
Coadministration of Cysteine and Mannitol during Early Development Result in Long Term Behavioral Changes in Laboratory
Rats. PLoS ONE 2021, 16, e0253543. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Parker, W.; Hornik, C.D.; Bilbo, S.; Holzknecht, Z.E.; Gentry, L.; Rao, R.; Lin, S.S.; Herbert, M.R.; Nevison, C.D. The Role of
Oxidative Stress, Inflammation and Acetaminophen Exposure from Birth to Early Childhood in the Induction of Autism. J. Int.
Med. Res. 2017, 45, 407–438. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Vlenterie, R.; Wood, M.E.; Brandlistuen, R.E.; Roeleveld, N.; van Gelder, M.M.H.J.; Nordeng, H. Neurodevelopmental Problems
at 18 Months among Children Exposed to Paracetamol in Utero: A Propensity Score Matched Cohort Study. Int. J. Epidemiol. 2016,
45, 1998–2008. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28. Philippot, G.; Gordh, T.; Fredriksson, A.; Viberg, H. Adult Neurobehavioral Alterations in Male and Female Mice Following
Developmental Exposure to Paracetamol (Acetaminophen): Characterization of a Critical Period. J. Appl. Toxicol. 2017, 37,
1174–1181. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
29. Posadas, I.; Santos, P .; Blanco, A.; Muñoz-Fernández, M.; Ceña, V . Acetaminophen Induces Apoptosis in Rat Cortical Neurons.
PLoS ONE 2010, 5, e15360. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30. Butterworth, R.F. Pathogenesis of Hepatic Encephalopathy and Brain Edema in Acute Liver Failure. J. Clin. Exp. Hepatol. 2015, 5,
S96–S103. [CrossRef]
31. Wijdicks, E.F.M. Hepatic Encephalopathy. N. Engl. J. Med. 2016, 375, 1660–1670. [CrossRef]
32. Upadhya, S.C.; Tirumalai, P .S.; Boyd, M.R.; Mori, T.; Ravindranath, V . Cytochrome P4502E (CYP2E) in BRAIN: Constitutive
Expression, Induction by Ethanol and Localization by Fluorescence in Situ Hybridization. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2000, 373, 23–34.
[CrossRef]
33. Howard, L.A.; Miksys, S.; Hoffmann, E.; Mash, D.; Tyndale, R.F. Brain CYP2E1 Is Induced by Nicotine and Ethanol in Rat and Is
Higher in Smokers and Alcoholics. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2003, 138, 1376–1386. [CrossRef]
34. Micheli, L.; Fiaschi, A.I.; Cerretani, D.; Giorgi, G. Effect of Acetaminophen on Glutathione Levels in Several Regions of the Rat
Brain. Curr. Ther. Res. 1993, 53, 730–736. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2024, 25, 1964 19 of 19
35. Johnson, W.M.; Wilson-Delfosse, A.L.; Mieyal, J.J. Dysregulation of Glutathione Homeostasis in Neurodegenerative Diseases.
Nutrients 2012, 4, 1399–1440. [CrossRef]
36. Högestätt, E.D.; Jönsson, B.A.G.; Ermund, A.; Andersson, D.A.; Björk, H.; Alexander, J.P .; Cravatt, B.F.; Basbaum, A.I.; Zygmunt,
P .M. Conversion of Acetaminophen to the Bioactive N-Acylphenolamine AM404 via Fatty Acid Amide Hydrolase-Dependent
Arachidonic Acid Conjugation in the Nervous System. J. Biol. Chem. 2005, 280, 31405–31412. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Mallet, C.; Desmeules, J.; Pegahi, R.; Eschalier, A. An Updated Review on the Metabolite (AM404)-Mediated Central Mechanism
of Action of Paracetamol (Acetaminophen): Experimental Evidence and Potential Clinical Impact. J. Pain Res. 2023, 16, 1081–1094.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Mallet, C.; Daulhac, L.; Bonnefont, J.; Ledent, C.; Etienne, M.; Chapuy, E.; Libert, F.; Eschalier, A. Endocannabinoid and
Serotonergic Systems Are Needed for Acetaminophen-Induced Analgesia. Pain 2008, 139, 190–200. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Aguado, T.; Monory, K.; Palazuelos, J.; Stella, N.; Cravatt, B.; Lutz, B.; Marsicano, G.; Kokaia, Z.; Guzmán, M.; Galve-Roperh, I.
The Endocannabinoid System Drives Neural Progenitor Proliferation. FASEB J. 2005, 19, 1704–1706. [CrossRef]
40. Galve-Roperh, I.; Aguado, T.; Palazuelos, J.; Guzmán, M. The Endocannabinoid System and Neurogenesis in Health and Disease.
Neuroscientist 2007, 13, 109–114. [CrossRef]
41. Goncalves, M.B.; Suetterlin, P .; Yip, P .; Molina-Holgado, F.; Walker, D.J.; Oudin, M.J.; Zentar, M.P .; Pollard, S.; Yáñez-Muñoz, R.J.;
Williams, G.; et al. A Diacylglycerol Lipase-CB2 Cannabinoid Pathway Regulates Adult Subventricular Zone Neurogenesis in an
Age-Dependent Manner. Mol. Cell. Neurosci. 2008, 38, 526–536. [CrossRef]
42. Rivera, P .; Romero-Zerbo, Y.; Pavón, F.J.; Serrano, A.; López-Ávalos, M.D.; Cifuentes, M.; Grondona, J.M.; Bermúdez-Silva, F.J.;
Fernández-Llebrez, P .; de Fonseca, F.R.; et al. Obesity-Dependent Cannabinoid Modulation of Proliferation in Adult Neurogenic
Regions. Eur. J. Neurosci. 2011, 33, 1577–1586. [CrossRef]
43. Jin, K.; Xie, L.; Kim, S.H.; Parmentier-Batteur, S.; Sun, Y.; Mao, X.O.; Childs, J.; Greenberg, D.A. Defective Adult Neurogenesis in
CB1 Cannabinoid Receptor Knockout Mice. Mol. Pharmacol. 2004, 66, 204–208. [CrossRef]
44. Jiang, W.; Zhang, Y.; Xiao, L.; Van Cleemput, J.; Ji, S.P .; Bai, G.; Zhang, X. Cannabinoids Promote Embryonic and Adult
Hippocampus Neurogenesis and Produce Anxiolytic- and Antidepressant-like Effects. J. Clin. Investig. 2005, 115, 3104–3116.
[CrossRef]
45. Zygmunt, P .M.; Chuang, H.H.; Movahed, P .; Julius, D.; Högestätt, E.D. The Anandamide Transport Inhibitor AM404 Activates
Vanilloid Receptors. Eur. J. Pharmacol. 2000, 396, 39–42. [CrossRef]
46. Ross, R.A.; Gibson, T.M.; Brockie, H.C.; Leslie, M.; Pashmi, G.; Craib, S.J.; Di Marzo, V .; Pertwee, R.G. Structure-Activity
Relationship for the Endogenous Cannabinoid, Anandamide, and Certain of Its Analogues at Vanilloid Receptors in Transfected
Cells and Vas Deferens. Br. J. Pharmacol. 2001, 132, 631–640. [CrossRef]
47. Stock, K.; Garthe, A.; De Almeida Sassi, F.; Glass, R.; Wolf, S.A.; Kettenmann, H. The Capsaicin Receptor TRPV1 as a Novel
Modulator of Neural Precursor Cell Proliferation. Stem Cells 2014, 32, 3183–3195. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Castilla-Ortega, E.; Ladrón de Guevara-Miranda, D.; Serrano, A.; Pavón, F.J.; Suárez, J.; Rodríguez de Fonseca, F.; Santín, L.J.
The Impact of Cocaine on Adult Hippocampal Neurogenesis: Potential Neurobiological Mechanisms and Contributions to
Maladaptive Cognition in Cocaine Addiction Disorder. Biochem. Pharmacol. 2017, 141, 100–117. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. Andrade, R.J.; Robles, M.; Ulzurrun, E.; Lucena, M.I. Drug-induced liver injury: Insights from genetic studies. Pharmacogenomics
2009, 10, 1467–1487. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Paxinos, G.; Watson, C. The Rat Brain in Stereotaxic Coordinates, 6th ed.; Elsevier Science Publishing Co. Inc.: San Diego, CA, USA,
2007; ISBN 9780125476126.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.