International Journal of 
Molecular Sciences
Review
The Second Life of Methylarginines as
Cardiovascular Targets
Natalia Jarzebska 1,2 , Arduino A. Mangoni 3
 , Jens Martens-Lobenhoﬀer 4,
Stefanie M. Bode-Böger 4 and Roman N. Rodionov 1, *
1 Division of Angiology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University Center for Vascular Medicine,
Technische Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany; natalia.jarzebska@uniklinikum-dresden.de
2 Department of Anaesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, University Hospital Dresden, Technische
Universität Dresden, 01307 Dresden, Germany
3 Department of Clinical Pharmacology, College of Medicine and Public Health, Flinders University and
Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park 5042, Adelaide, Australia; arduino.mangoni@ﬂinders.edu.au
4 Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Otto-von-Guericke University, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany;
jens.martens-lobenhoﬀer@med.ovgu.de (J.M.-L.); stefanie.bode-boeger@med.ovgu.de (S.M.B.-B.)
* Correspondence: Roman.Rodionov@uniklinikum-dresden.de; Tel.: +49-351-458-3659
Received: 14 August 2019; Accepted: 15 September 2019; Published: 17 September 2019
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045/gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Abstract: Endogenous methylarginines were proposed as cardiovascular risk factors more than two
decades ago, however, so far, this knowledge has not led to the development of novel therapeutic
approaches. The initial studies were primarily focused on the endogenous inhibitors of nitric oxide
synthases asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA) and monomethylarginine (MMA) and the main
enzyme regulating their clearance dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase 1 (DDAH1). To date,
all the screens for DDAH1 activators performed with the puriﬁed recombinant DDAH1 enzyme
have not yielded any promising hits, which is probably the main reason why interest towards this
research ﬁeld has started to fade. The relative contribution of the second DDAH isoenzyme DDAH2
towards ADMA and MMA clearance is still a matter of controversy. ADMA, MMA and symmetric
dimethylarginine (SDMA) are also metabolized by alanine: glyoxylate aminotransferase 2 (AGXT2),
however, in addition to methylarginines, this enzyme also has several cardiovascular protective
substrates, so the net eﬀect of possible therapeutic targeting of AGXT2 is currently unclear. Recent
studies on regulation and functions of the enzymes metabolizing methylarginines have given a second
life to this research direction. Our review discusses the latest discoveries and controversies in the
ﬁeld and proposes novel directions for targeting methylarginines in clinical settings.
Keywords: asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA); symmetric dimethylarginine (SDMA);
dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase (DDAH); alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase 2
(AGXT2); asymmetric α-keto-dimethylguanidinovaleric acid (ADGV); symmetric α-keto-
dimethylguanidinovaleric acid (SDGV); Homoarginine; beta-aminoisobutyric acid (BAIBA);
6-guanidino-2- oxocaproic acid (GOCA)
1. Introduction
Despite signiﬁcant advances in prevention and therapy, cardiovascular disease (CVD) remains the
leading cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide, thus warranting the search for novel markers for
early identiﬁcation of individuals at high risk for cardiovascular complications and new therapeutic
approaches to further decrease cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. Endogenous methylated
analogues of the essential amino acid l-arginine were proposed more than 20 years ago as promising
markers of increased cardiovascular risk and potential mediators of cardiovascular complications.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592; doi:10.3390/ijms20184592 www.mdpi.com /journal/ijms
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 2 of 16
The biological and clinical signiﬁcance of endogenous methylarginines as cardiovascular markers
was demonstrated in multiple epidemiological studies. At the same time, experimental studies
demonstrated that at least in some pathological conditions, endogenous methylarginines can directly
contribute to development of cardiovascular, metabolic and renal damage. Despite these promising
ﬁndings the interest towards methylarginines eventually plateaued, presumably because of the lack of
therapies that selectively lower their concentrations. However, the recent discovery of new functions
of the enzymes that metabolize endogenous methylarginines has led to a renewed impetus in this
ﬁeld. The aim of this review is to discuss these discoveries and their therapeutic potential, as well as to
address the key controversies and unanswered questions.
2. Endogenous Methylarginines as Cardiovascular Risk Factors
There are three di ﬀerent types of endogenous methylated analogues of l-arginine: (1) N G-
monomethyl-l-arginine (NMMA), (2) symmetric N G,N’G-dimethyl-l-arginine (SDMA), and (3)
asymmetric NG,NG-dimethyl-l-arginine (ADMA) (Figure 1) [ 1]. Two of these molecules, NMMA
and ADMA, are able to competitively inhibit nitric oxide (NO) synthases with similar half maximal
inhibitory concentrations (IC 50) of about 2–3 µM [2,3]. Nitric oxide (NO) plays a key protective
role in the cardiovascular system via multiple mechanisms including regulation of vascular tone,
protection from oxidative stress, inhibition of platelets activation, modulation of smooth muscle cells
proliferation and stimulation of angiogenesis. The discovery that both ADMA and NMMA inhibit
NO production led to the hypothesis that their increased concentrations may facilitate cardiovascular
damage. ADMA is present in blood at 5–10 times higher concentrations than NMMA [4,5], so most of
the epidemiological studies focused on ADMA while the levels of NMMA were often not reported.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 2 of 16 
 
complications. The biological and clinical significance of endogenous methylarginines as 
cardiovascular markers was demonstrated in multiple epidemiological studies. At the same time, 
experimental studies demonstrated that at least in some pathological conditions, endogenous 
methylarginines can directly contribute to development of cardiovascular, metabolic and renal 
damage. Despite these promising findings the interest towards methylarginines e ventually 
plateaued, presumably because of the lack of therapies that selectively lower their concentrations. 
However, the recent discovery of new functions of the enzymes that metabolize endogenous 
methylarginines has led to a renewed impetus in this fiel d. The aim of this review is to discuss these 
discoveries and their therapeutic potential, as well as to address the key controversies and 
unanswered questions. 
2. Endogenous Methylarginines as Cardiovascular Risk Factors 
There are three different types of  endogenous methylated analogues of L-arginine: (1) 
NG-monomethyl-L-arginine (NMMA), (2) symmetric N G,N’G-dimethyl-L-arginine (SDMA), and (3) 
asymmetric NG,NG-dimethyl-L-arginine (ADMA) (Figure 1) [1]. Two of these molecules, NMMA and 
ADMA, are able to competitively inhibit nitric oxide (NO) synthases with similar half maximal 
inhibitory concentrations (IC 50) of about 2 –3 μM [2,3]. Nitric oxide (NO) plays a key protective role 
in the cardiovascular system via multiple mechanisms including regulation of v ascular tone, 
protection from oxidative stress, inhibition of platelets activation, modulation of smooth muscle cells 
proliferation and stimulation of angiogenesis. The discovery that both ADMA and NMMA inhibit 
NO production led to the hypothesis that thei r increased concentrations may facilitate 
cardiovascular damage. ADMA is present in blood at 5–10 times higher concentrations than NMMA 
[4,5], so most of the epidemiological studies focused on ADMA while the levels of NMMA were 
often not reported. 
 
Figure 1. Metabolism of endogenous methylarginines.  NG-monomethyl-L-arginine ( NMMA), 
asymmetric N G,NG-dimethyl-L-arginine ( ADMA) and symmetric N G,N’G-dimethyl-L-arginine 
(SDMA) derive upon hydrolysis of proteins methylated on arginine residues. ADMA and NMMA 
are further hydrolyzed to citrulline by dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase (DDAH). All three 
endogenous methylarginines are also converted to the corresponding α -keto-derivatives by 
Figure 1. Metabolism of endogenous methylarginines. N G-monomethyl-l-arginine (NMMA),
asymmetric NG,NG-dimethyl-l-arginine (ADMA) and symmetric NG,N’G-dimethyl-l-arginine (SDMA)
derive upon hydrolysis of proteins methylated on arginine residues. ADMA and NMMA are further
hydrolyzed to citrulline by dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase (DDAH). All three endogenous
methylarginines are also converted to the corresponding α-keto-derivatives by alanine:glyoxylate
aminotransferase 2 (AGXT2). NMMA, ADMA and SDMA could be also N- α-acetylated, however,
the enzyme, which is responsible for this reaction, is still unknown. All three endogenous
methylarginines are excreted by kidneys.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 3 of 16
The association between elevated ADMA levels and endothelial dysfunction was first demonstrated
by Vallance and colleagues in 1992 [ 4]. Subsequent studies showed that elevated plasma ADMA
concentrations correlate with increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality [ 6]. The list of the
diseases and pathological conditions associated with increased ADMA concentrations includes, but is
not limited to, hypercholesterolemia [7], hypertension [8], type 2 diabetes and insulin resistance [9],
hypertriglyceridemia [10], coronary artery disease [11], stroke [12], peripheral arterial disease [ 13],
chronic kidney disease [14] and preeclampsia [15].
In addition to being elevated in cardiovascular, renal and metabolic diseases, ADMA has been
shown to be a strong predictor of cardiovascular complications and increased mortality in patients
at risk. The Ludwigshafen Risk and Cardiovascular Health Study, a large prospective study with a
median follow-up of 5.5 years, documented that plasma ADMA was independently associated with
all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in patients with stable and unstable ischemic heart disease [16].
Similarly, Leong et al. found that elevated ADMA plasma concentrations were associated with
increased incidence of myocardial infarction and stroke in women after 24 years of follow-up [ 17].
ADMA was also shown to be an independent predictor of mortality in patients with end-stage renal
disease [18].
In their original work, Vallance and coauthors showed that the acute infusion of ADMA in
healthy volunteers leads to endothelial dysfunction in the brachial artery [4]. Kielstein and colleagues
demonstrated that infusion of ADMA in humans decreases renal blood ﬂow and increases renovascular
resistance, sodium retention and systemic blood pressure [ 19]. The same group demonstrated
that ADMA infusion in healthy volunteers decreases total cerebral perfusion and increases arterial
stiﬀness [20]. These studies suggest that ADMA may not only be a marker of cardiovascular disease,
but can also play a direct role in cardiovascular damage in at least some of the pathological conditions
associated with increased systemic ADMA concentrations.
The presence of endogenous NO synthase inhibitors such as ADMA may explain the “arginine
paradox”, which refers to the apparently paradoxical observation that NO production increases in
response to administration of l-arginine [21–23]. For example, infusion of l-arginine has been found to
aﬀect NO-dependent vasomotor responses in vivo, even though the normal concentration ofl-arginine
in plasma is 30-fold higher than the Michaelis–Menton constant (Km) for l-arginine of puriﬁed NO
synthase [21,24]. This response to l-arginine was initially considered paradoxical because NO synthase
was thought to be saturated with its substrate ( l-arginine) so that further addition of l-arginine
should not have aﬀected the rate of NO production [23]. In the presence of ADMA, however, higher
concentrations of l-arginine are needed to saturate NO synthase, providing a potential explanation for
the observed “paradox” [23].
In contrast to ADMA and NMMA, SDMA (a structural analogue of ADMA [ 25]) does not
directly inhibit nitric oxide synthase (NOS) [ 4]. Consequently, SDMA was initially thought to be
biologically inert and was therefore included into the early epidemiological studies as a negative
control. SDMA was shown to be a sensitive parameter of renal function, sometimes even more sensitive
than creatinine [26]. Interestingly, a recent study showed that SDMA predicts all-cause mortality
following ischemic stroke even after adjustment for renal function and novel risk factors such as
C-reactive protein, albumin, beta-thromboglobulin, and the von Willebrand factor [27]. Furthermore,
SDMA predicted all-cause-mortality in the general population after adjustment for traditional and
novel cardiovascular risk factors, and renal function [28]. It is being currently investigated whether
SDMA is indeed biologically inert or whether it exerts some physiological or pathophysiological eﬀects.
Consistent with the second possibility, it has been shown that SDMA may inﬂuence NO metabolism by
interfering with l-arginine transport through cellular membrane by the cationic amino acid transporter
2B (CAT-2B) [29]. It has also been proposed that SDMA accumulates in high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
fraction from patients with chronic kidney disease causing activation of toll like receptor 2 (TLR-2) and
enhancing endothelial proinﬂammatory response [30].
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 4 of 16
3. Metabolism of Endogenous Methylarginines
To our current knowledge, there is no enzyme in mammals capable of directly methylating free
l-arginine. Several enzymes, however, can methylate arginine residues that are incorporated into
proteins. These enzymes are called protein arginine N-methyl transferases (PRMTs). The PRMTs
transfer methyl groups from S-adenosylmethionine to arginine residues within proteins, generating
S-adenosylhomocysteine as a byproduct. Subsequent proteolysis of the methylated proteins leads to
the release of free ADMA, SDMA and NMMA into the cytoplasm (Figure 1) [31]. The substrates of
PRMTs include but are not limited to RNA processing proteins, histones and transcription factors [31].
There are two types of PRMTs: type I and type II. Type I PRMTs monomethylate and asymmetrically
dimethylate arginine residues within proteins, which leads to the formation of NMMA and ADMA,
while type II PRMTs monomethylate and symmetrically dimethylate arginine residues within proteins,
thus generating NMMA and SDMA [32,33].
The major routes of metabolism of endogenous methylarginines were described by Ogawa and
colleagues [34]. After injection of radiolabeled ADMA into rats, the authors recovered 14% of the
radioactivity in the urine and 3% in expired CO 2, while the remainder accumulated in the tissues
primarily in the form of citrulline. Most of the tissue radioactivity was found in the kidney, pancreas and
liver, suggesting that these organs play a major role in ADMA metabolism. In contrast, after injection
of radiolabeled SDMA into rats, the authors did not detect accumulation of radioactive citrulline in the
tissues. In subsequent studies, Ogawa and colleagues identiﬁed the enzyme metabolizing ADMA to
citrulline as dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase (DDAH) [35]. Consistent with the results of
the ADMA and SDMA infusion experiments, DDAH was shown to use ADMA, but not SDMA as a
substrate. Currently the ADMA/SDMA ration is used as a marker of ADMA catabolism, with a high
ADMA/SDMA ratio being suggestive of reduced ADMA excretion [36]. Another substrate of DDAH is
NMMA [35].
Infusion of both radiolabeled ADMA and SDMA led to formation of the corresponding
α-keto-derivatives: asymmetric α-keto-dimethylguanidinovaleric acid (ADGV , also abbreviated as
DMGV) from ADMA and symmetricα-keto-dimethylguanidinovaleric acid (SDGV , also abbreviated as
DM’GV) from SDMA. In subsequent studies, Ogawa and coauthors identiﬁed the enzyme responsible for
transamination of endogenous methylarginines with formation of the correspondingα-keto-derivatives
as alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase 2 (AGXT2) [37].
The activities of DDAH and AGXT2 could explain the presence of all the observed radioactive
metabolites of ADMA and SDMA except for their N- α-acetylated derivatives: asymmetric N- α-
acetyl-NG, NG-dimethyl-l-arginine (N-α-acetyl-ADMA) and symmetric N-α-acetyl- NG,N’G-dimethyl-
l-arginine [34,38]. N- α-acetylation has also been observed in humans as a minor pathway for the
elimination of ADMA and SDMA [39,40]. Further studies are needed to identify the enzyme system
responsible for N-α-acetylation of endogenous methylarginines and to assess its relative contribution
to their metabolism (Figure 1).
4. Transport of Endogenous Methylarginines
The transport of NMMA, ADMA and SDMA across the plasma membrane is not well characterized.
Studies in Xenopus laevis oocytes showed that all the three endogenous methylarginines can compete
with l-arginine for the y+ cationic amino acid transporter 2B (CAT-2B) suggesting that this transporter
may be involved in the uptake from an extracellular to intracellular environment of not onlyl-arginine,
but also of NMMA, ADMA and SDMA [29]. It was also shown that at least ADMA can under certain
conditions use several other cationic transport systems, such as cationic amino acid transporter 2 A
(CAT2A), organic cation transporter 2 (OCT2) and multidrug and toxin extrusion protein 1 (MATE1) [41].
Further studies are needed to determine the relative contribution of each of these transport systems
to the transport of endogenous methylarginines across the plasma membrane in vivo. In addition to
transport across the plasma membrane, endogenous methylarginines could also be transported into
mitochondria by the mitochondrial transporter SLC25A2 [42].
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 5 of 16
5. Dimethylarginine Dimethylaminohydrolases
The primary pathway for catabolism of ADMA and NMMA is via DDAH-catalyzed hydrolysis
to citrulline (Figure 1) [35]. There are two isoforms of DDAH (DDAH1 and DDAH2) in mammals,
each encoded by a separate gene [ 43]. Original analysis of tissue expression of human DDAH
isoforms by Tran and colleagues suggested that DDAH1 was primarily expressed in the central
nervous, gastrointestinal, respiratory, excretory and male reproductive systems, while DDAH2 was
primarily expressed in blood cells, bone marrow, cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, respiratory, excretory
and female reproductive systems [ 44]. Subsequent studies regarding the relative expression of
diﬀerent isoforms of DDAH in the cardiovascular system have been contradictory. Wang et al. used
immunostaining to show that DDAH2 was the predominant DDAH isoform in mesenteric resistance
vessels, while hardly any DDAH1 expression could be detected [45]. Dowsett and colleagues on the
other hand demonstrated expression of DDAH1 in primary mouse pulmonary endothelial cells [46].
Zhang and coauthors reported expression of both DDAH1 and DDAH2 in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells [47]. Schwedhelm and colleagues reported expression of both DDAH1 and DDAH2
in mouse hearts and aortas [48].
6. DDAH1 and ADMA
In order to determine the physiological and pathophysiological roles of DDAH isoforms, several
groups generated genetically modiﬁed models with either upregulation or downregulation of DDAH
expression. Dayoub and colleagues showed that transgenic overexpression of DDAH1 in mice decreases
ADMA concentrations in plasma and tissue and increases NO production [49]. DDAH1 transgenic
mice have increased basal NO production in the aorta and are protected from ADMA-mediated
endothelial dysfunction in cerebral arterioles [50]. DDAH1 knockout mice have elevated plasma and
tissue ADMA concentrations, endothelial dysfunction and hypertension [ 51,52]. Development of
the experimental approaches for the manipulation of DDAH activity in vivo allowed testing of the
potential role of ADMA/DDAH pathway in diﬀerent mouse models of human diseases. Thus, it was
shown that DDAH1 overexpression and ADMA lowering improves angiogenesis in the ischemic hind
limb model [53] and protects from myocardial and renal ischemia-reperfusion injury [54,55]. Jacobi and
colleagues demonstrated that DDAH1 overexpression ameliorated atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein
E (ApoE)-deﬁcient mice [56]. DDAH1 transgenic mice were protected from renal injury in a murine
model of hypertension [57]. DDAH1 knockout mice were shown to have increased survival in septic
shock, presumably due to ADMA-mediated inhibition of excessive NO production by inducible NOS
(iNOS) [58].
Most of the existing evidence suggests that therapeutic strategies aimed at upregulation of
DDAH activity and subsequent ADMA lowering might be beneﬁcial to patients with CVD. As a
result, several groups performed experimental screens for modulators of DDAH activity to identify
DDAH-activators [59–61]. These screens led to discovery of speciﬁc DDAH inhibitors [62,63], however,
no speciﬁc and eﬃcient DDAH activators were reported. One of the potential explanations for this is
that both DDAH isoenzymes are small proteins and, therefore, it is unlikely that they have any sites for
allosteric activation. All the screens for DDAH activators, performed with the puriﬁed recombinant
enzymes, have not been suitable for the identiﬁcation of small molecules capable of regulating the
DDAH isoenzymes at the level of post-translational modiﬁcations and protein–protein interactions.
7. Controversy 1: DDAH2 and ADMA
There is still a debate in the ﬁeld about the relative contribution of DDAH2 towards the total
DDAH activity. In contrast to the initial observation that DDAH2 is active towards ADMA in vitro,
Pope and colleagues could not detect any signiﬁcant increase in total DDAH activity in the lysate of
endothelial cells with massive overexpression of DDAH2 even though those cells were producing
higher amounts of NO [ 64]. Knockdown of DDAH1 but not of DDAH2 gene in cultured human
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 6 of 16
umbilical vein endothelial cells led to increased accumulation of ADMA in the cell culture medium [52].
siRNA-mediated knockdown of Ddah1, but not of Ddah2 gene led to increase in plasma ADMA
concentrations in rats [45]. On the other hand Hasegawa and colleagues reported increased tissue
DDAH activity in skeletal muscles and decreased plasma ADMA concentrations in mice with ubiquitous
transgenic overexpression of mouse Ddah2 gene [65]. DDAH2 transgenic mice were protected from
ADMA- and angiotensin-II-induced oxidative stress, medial thickening and perivascular ﬁbrosis in
coronary microvessels [65]. Knockout of Ddah2 gene in mice did not lead to changes in plasma ADMA
concentrations, but nevertheless resulted in decreased ADMA concentration in urine, myocardium
and kidneys as well as in impairment of endothelial function in aortic rings [66]. However, a potential
confounding factor in this model might have been that Ddah2 knockout mice also had decreased
expression of Ddah1 gene in the kidneys as compared to their wild type littermates, which could have
aﬀected ADMA metabolism independently of DDAH2 [66]. With the contradictory data on the role of
DDAH2 in ADMA clearance, it is still unclear, which of the biological eﬀects caused by modulation of
DDAH2 expression in animal models are mediated by ADMA and which are ADMA-independent.
8. Non-Enzymatic Function of DDAHs
Both DDAH isoforms have been suggested to possess some nonenzymatic eﬀects (summarized
in Figure 2) in addition to their accepted main function of hydrolysis of ADMA and NMMA. Tokuo
and colleagues demonstrated that DDAH1 can bind to tumor suppressor neuroﬁbromin 1 (NF1),
which is a negative regulator of the Ras oncogene pathway, and increases its phosphorylation at
the cysteine/serine-rich domain by protein kinase A [ 67]. NF1 can regulate the proliferation and
migration of vascular smooth muscle cells [68], so it is possible that altered NF1 function may have
contributed to some of the vascular phenotypic eﬀects seen in DDAH1 transgenic mice. The presence of
ADMA-independent eﬀects of DDAH1 is also supported by the observation that overexpression of the
active site mutant of DDAH1 was able to aﬀect the growth of glioma xenografts, while the total DDAH
activity in the lysates of tumor cells remained unchanged [69]. Furthermore, downregulation of DDAH1
in a murine model of bleomycin-induced pulmonary ﬁbrosis reduced collagen production by ﬁbroblasts
in the ﬁbrotic lungs in an ADMA-independent manner [70]. Taking into account that overexpression
of DDAH1 protected from hyperhomocysteinemia-induced hypertrophic changes in the vessel wall,
but not from impairment in the NO-mediated endothelial function in our study, it is possible that the
observed eﬀects of DDAH1 in the vascular wall were at least partially ADMA- and NO-independent [71].
Hasegawa and colleagues demonstrated that, similar to DDAH1, DDAH2 can also participate in
protein-protein interactions and can upregulate vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression
in an NO-independent manner by increasing binding activity of SP1 transcription factor to VEGF
promoter in a PKA-dependent manner [72]. Protein–protein interactions of DDAH2 might regulate its
activity, which would provide an explanation for the described above observations that even massive
overexpression of DDAH2 results in only mild, if any, increase in the total DDAH activity. Reversing
potential negative protein-protein interactions of DDAH1 and DDAH2 may yield a novel therapeutic
approach for upregulation of DDAH activity and treatment of ADMA-mediated pathologies.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 7 of 16
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 16 
 
 
Figure 2.  Protective effects of DDAHs . Solid lines —proven effects. Dashed lines —hypothesized 
effects. DDAH1 lowers ADMA, which leads to elevation in NO bioavailability and protects from 
cardiovascular injury. The relative contribution of DDAH2 to ADMA clearance is still not entirely 
clear. Both DDAH1 and DDAH2 have been shown to have ADMA-independent effects. 
9. Alanine:Glyoxylate Aminotransferase 2 
Endogenous methylarginines can also be metabolized through an alternative pathway by 
AGXT2 with formation of the corresponding ketoacid derivatives: asymmetric 
α-keto-dimethylguanidinovaleric acid (ADGV, also abbreviated as DMGV) from ADMA, symmetric 
α-keto-dimethylguanidinovaleric acid (SDGV, also abbreviated as DM’GV) from SDMA (Figure 1) 
and α-keto-methylguanidinovaleric acid from NMMA [34,37]. It has been suggested that at least two 
of the α -keto-derivatives of endogenous methylarginines, namely ADGV and SDGV, can undergo 
further oxidation with formation of asymmetric dimethylguanidinobutyric acid (ADGB) and 
symmetric dimethylguanidinobutyric acid (SDGB), respectivel y [34]. When radiolabeled ADMA 
was injected into rats, most of the radioactivity recovered in the urine was in the form of either 
unmodified ADMA or the products of AGXT2 -mediated hydrolysis of ADMA (ADGV and ADGB) 
[34]. This observation suggests that ther e are two main mechanisms for the renal clearance of 
ADMA: “direct”, when ADMA is excreted unchanged and “AGXT2-mediated”, when ADMA is first 
metabolized by AGXT2 and then excreted. A composite compound, consisting of both ADGV and 
SDGV has been recently r ecognized as an independent biomarker of CT -defined non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease in the offspring cohort of the Framingham Heart Study participants and as a predictor 
of future diabetes up to 12 years before disease onset [73]. 
AGXT2 is a pyridoxal ph osphate-dependent mitochondrial enzyme that is expressed in the 
liver and in the epithelial cells of Henle ’s loop of the kidney [74,75]. It was discovered as early as in 
1978 that mammals have two distinct isoenzymes possessing alanine -glyoxylate aminotran sferase 
activity: alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase 1 (AGXT1) and AGXT2 [76]. Both isoenzymes are able 
to catalyze the alanine-glyoxylate amino transfer reaction [76]. However, it has been shown that only 
the deficiency of AGXT1, but not of AGXT2, leads to primary hyperoxaluria type I in humans, 
suggesting that AGXT1, but not AGXT2, plays the major role in glyoxalate detoxification [77]. 
AGXT2 can also utilize D -beta-aminoisobutyric acid (BAIBA), endogenous nonproteinogenic 
amino acid, as an alternative a mino donor [78]. There are two biologically active enantiomers of 
BAIBA: L -BAIBA and D -BAIBA, with presumably distinct physiological functions. L -BAIBA is 
produced from L-lysine [79], while D-BAIBA is an intermediate product of thymine catabolism [80]. 
Figure 2. Protective eﬀects of DDAHs. Solid lines—proven e ﬀects. Dashed lines—hypothesized e ﬀects.
DDAH1 lowers ADMA, which leads to elevation in NO bioavailability and protects from cardiovascular
injury. The relative contribution of DDAH2 to ADMA clearance is still not entirely clear. Both DDAH1
and DDAH2 have been shown to have ADMA-independent eﬀects.
9. Alanine: Glyoxylate Aminotransferase 2
Endogenous methylarginines can also be metabolized through an alternative pathway by AGXT2
with formation of the corresponding ketoacid derivatives: asymmetricα-keto-dimethylguanidinovaleric
acid (ADGV , also abbreviated as DMGV) from ADMA, symmetricα-keto-dimethylguanidinovaleric
acid (SDGV , also abbreviated as DM’GV) from SDMA (Figure 1) andα-keto-methylguanidinovaleric
acid from NMMA [ 34,37]. It has been suggested that at least two of the α-keto-derivatives of
endogenous methylarginines, namely ADGV and SDGV , can undergo further oxidation with formation
of asymmetric dimethylguanidinobutyric acid (ADGB) and symmetric dimethylguanidinobutyric acid
(SDGB), respectively [34]. When radiolabeled ADMA was injected into rats, most of the radioactivity
recovered in the urine was in the form of either unmodiﬁed ADMA or the products of AGXT2-mediated
hydrolysis of ADMA (ADGV and ADGB) [ 34]. This observation suggests that there are two main
mechanisms for the renal clearance of ADMA: “direct”, when ADMA is excreted unchanged and
“AGXT2-mediated”, when ADMA is ﬁrst metabolized by AGXT2 and then excreted. A composite
compound, consisting of both ADGV and SDGV has been recently recognized as an independent
biomarker of CT-deﬁned non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in the oﬀspring cohort of the Framingham
Heart Study participants and as a predictor of future diabetes up to 12 years before disease onset [73].
AGXT2 is a pyridoxal phosphate-dependent mitochondrial enzyme that is expressed in the liver
and in the epithelial cells of Henle’s loop of the kidney [ 74,75]. It was discovered as early as in
1978 that mammals have two distinct isoenzymes possessing alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase
activity: alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase 1 (AGXT1) and AGXT2 [76]. Both isoenzymes are able to
catalyze the alanine-glyoxylate amino transfer reaction [76]. However, it has been shown that only the
deﬁciency of AGXT1, but not of AGXT2, leads to primary hyperoxaluria type I in humans, suggesting
that AGXT1, but not AGXT2, plays the major role in glyoxalate detoxiﬁcation [77].
AGXT2 can also utilize D-beta-aminoisobutyric acid (BAIBA), endogenous nonproteinogenic
amino acid, as an alternative amino donor [78]. There are two biologically active enantiomers of BAIBA:
L-BAIBA and D-BAIBA, with presumably distinct physiological functions. L-BAIBA is produced
from L-lysine [79], while D-BAIBA is an intermediate product of thymine catabolism [80]. The Km
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 8 of 16
for D-BAIBA at the physiological pH is lower than the Kms of AGXT2 for the other amino donors,
including L-alanine, suggesting that D-BAIBA may be the preferred AGXT2 substrate [81]. This would
be consistent with the observation that patients with AGXT2 loss-of-function polymorphisms develop
an autosomal recessive metabolic trait hyper-beta-aminoisobutyric aciduria, which is characterized by
elevation of BAIBA concentration in urine and plasma [78]. The physiological role of BAIBA and the
potential consequences of its elevations are still unclear, partially because in most of the experimental
studies with BAIBA supplementation the animals were given a mixture of both D and B enantiomers.
Recent studies, however, suggest that BAIBA may regulate lipid metabolism and induce browning
of white adipose tissue through inducing gene expression of the mitochondrial uncoupling protein
UCP-1, mitochondrial biogenesis transcription coactivator PGC-1 α, and respiratory chain protein
cytochrome c in a PPARα-dependent manner [82,83].
AGXT2 is also involved in the metabolism of some other bioactive substances. One of them is
β-alanine, a nonproteinogenic amino acid which is a rate-limiting precursor of carnosine, a compound
needed for high-intensity performance [84]. Interestingly, a recent genome-wide association study
demonstrated that systemic concentrations of another nonproteinogenic amino acid, L-homoarginine,
are elevated in patients with AGXT2 loss-of-function polymorphisms [85]. Recent epidemiological
studies have demonstrated an association between low circulating concentrations of L-homoarginine
and an increased risk of cardiovascular and all-cause mortality [86,87]. Our group showed that AGXT2
can metabolize homoarginine in vivo [88] and that homoarginine supplementation protects from
cardiac remodeling in a mouse model of coronary artery disease [89]. The known substrates of AGXT2
are summarized in Figure 3.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 8 of 16 
 
The Km for D -BAIBA at the physiological pH is lower than the Kms of AGXT2 for the other amino 
donors, including L -alanine, suggesting that D -BAIBA may be the preferred AGXT2 substrate [81]. 
This would be consistent with the observation that patients with  AGXT2 loss -of-function 
polymorphisms develop an autosomal recessive metabolic trait hyper -beta-aminoisobutyric 
aciduria, which is characterized by elevation of BAIBA concentration in urine and plasma [78]. The 
physiological role of BAIBA and the potential  consequences of its elevations are still unclear, 
partially because in most of the experimental studies with BAIBA supplementation the animals were 
given a mixture of both D and B enantiomers. Recent studies, however, suggest that BAIBA may 
regulate lipid  metabolism and induce browning of white adipose tissue through inducing gene 
expression of the mitochondrial uncoupling protein UCP -1, mitochondrial biogenesis transcription 
coactivator PGC -1α, and respiratory chain protein cytochrome c in a PPARα -dependent manner 
[82,83]. 
AGXT2 is also involved in the metabolism of some other bioactive substances. One of them is 
β-alanine, a nonproteinogenic amino acid which is a rate -limiting precursor of carnosine, a 
compound needed for high -intensity performance  [84]. Interestingly, a recent genome -wide 
association study demonstrated that systemic concentrations of another nonproteinogenic amino 
acid, L -homoarginine, are elevated in patients with AGXT2 loss -of-function polymorphisms [85]. 
Recent epidemiological studies have demonstrated an association between low circulating 
concentrations of L -homoarginine and an increased risk of cardiovascular and all -cause mortality 
[86,87]. Our group showed that AGXT2 can metabolize homoarginine in vivo [88] and that 
homoarginine su pplementation protects from cardiac remodeling in a mouse model of coronary 
artery disease [89]. The known substrates of AGXT2 are summarized in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. Biologically active metabolites of AGXT2. ADMA: asymmetric dimethyarginine; ADGV: 
asymmetric α -keto-dimethylguanidinovaleric acid; SDMA: symmetric dimethylarginine; SDGV: 
symmetric α -keto-dimethylguanidinovaleric acid; GOCA:  6-guanidino-2-oxocaproic acid;  BAIBA: 
beta-aminoisobutyric acid. Alanine and glyoxylate (another substrate s of AGXT2) ar e intentionally 
not included in the figure, as it is not clear whether AGXT2 plays a biologically significant role in 
regulation of their levels. 
It still remains to be established whether AGXT2 can play a direct role in the pathogenesis of 
diseases associated with decreased homoarginine concentrations. 
Considerable clinical and experimental evidence suggest that reduction in NO availability 
might facilitate the development of chronic kidney disease (CKD) and kidney impairment [90–92]. In 
addition, experime ntal studies demonstrated that increased systemic ADMA concentrations are a 
Figure 3. Biologically active metabolites of AGXT2. ADMA: asymmetric dimethyarginine; ADGV:
asymmetric α-keto-dimethylguanidinovaleric acid; SDMA: symmetric dimethylarginine; SDGV:
symmetric α-keto-dimethylguanidinovaleric acid; GOCA: 6-guanidino-2-oxocaproic acid; BAIBA:
beta-aminoisobutyric acid. Alanine and glyoxylate (another substrates of AGXT2) are intentionally not
included in the ﬁgure, as it is not clear whether AGXT2 plays a biologically signiﬁcant role in regulation
of their levels.
It still remains to be established whether AGXT2 can play a direct role in the pathogenesis of
diseases associated with decreased homoarginine concentrations.
Considerable clinical and experimental evidence suggest that reduction in NO availability
might facilitate the development of chronic kidney disease (CKD) and kidney impairment [ 90–92].
In addition, experimental studies demonstrated that increased systemic ADMA concentrations are
a powerful predictor of CKD independent of estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate (eGFR) and other
risk factors [18,93,94]. Decreased renal tubular ADMA metabolism was also shown to protect from
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 9 of 16
worsening of renal function and ADMA was suggested to play both pathogenic and protective
roles in diﬀerent disease sites and time points [ 95,96]. Other groups showed that systemic SDMA
concentrations are correlated with serum creatinine and eGFR, two key markers of renal function.
Plasma SDMA is also elevated in patients with renal disease and increase progressively with worsening
of renal function [ 93,94]. Recently, Bode-Böger et al. analyzed the role of homoarginine and
6-guanidino-2-oxocaproic acid (GOCA) (substrate and product of AGXT2, respectively) in patients
suﬀering from non-dialysis chronic kidney disease. They showed that low plasma homoarginine
concentrations and high GOCA concentrations are associated with worse prognosis. Elevated activity
of AGXT2 in those patients could provide a possible explanation for this phenomenon, which may be a
physiological reaction to elevated systemic ADMA and SDMA concentrations in those patients [97].
In addition, the AGXT2 rs37369 AA genotype was found to be signiﬁcantly associated with elevated
levels of blood urea nitrogen in chronic heart failure patients free from renal disease [98].
10. Controversy 2: AGXT2 as a Therapeutic Target
Our discovery of the role of AGXT2 in homoarginine metabolism further increases the complexity of
the potential cardiovascular eﬀects of AGXT2. On one hand upregulation of AGXT2 would be expected
to have a beneﬁcial inﬂuence on the cardiovascular system via lowering systemic concentrations of
ADMA and SDMA. On the other hand, upregulation of AGXT2 may also result in some negative
cardiovascular eﬀects via lowering systemic concentrations of homoarginine and BAIB, with the
latter being suggested to play a role in browning of adipose tissue, which is also thought to be
beneﬁcial for the cardiovascular system, and in mediating beneﬁcial eﬀects of exercise on endothelial
function [99]. Another substrate of AGXT2 is beta-alanine, which is the rate-limiting precursor for the
presumably cardiovascular protective antioxidant dipeptide carnosine [100]. While these opposite
cardiovascular eﬀects of diﬀerent AGXT2 substrates might explain, why AGXT2 polymorphisms are so
common in the general population, they might also make therapeutic targeting of AGXT2 challenging
(Figure 4). However, it is still possible that therapeutic modulation of AGXT2 activity would be of a
clinical beneﬁt in selected groups of patients with pathologies mediated primarily by certain AGXT2
substrates with the other ones playing only a minor role. Solving the crystal structure of human
AGXT2 should signiﬁcantly advance the ﬁeld and facilitate a better understanding of the regulation
of substrate speciﬁcity of AGXT2 with the possible goal of identiﬁcation of the small molecules
or genetic modiﬁcations, which will increase substrates speciﬁcity of AGXT2 towards endogenous
methylarginines, without a ﬀecting or decreasing its speciﬁcity to potentially “cardiovascular and
metabolically beneﬁcial” substrates.
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2019, 20, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 16 
 
powerful predictor of CKD independent of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) and other 
risk factors [18,93,94]. Decreased renal tubular ADMA metabolism was also shown to pr otect from 
worsening of renal function and ADMA was suggested to play both pathogenic and protective roles 
in different disease sites and time points [95,96]. Other groups showed that systemic SDMA 
concentrations are correlated with serum creatinine and eG FR, two key markers of renal function. 
Plasma SDMA is also elevated in patients with renal disease and increase progressively with 
worsening of renal function [93,94]. Recently, Bode -Böger et al . analyzed the role of homoarginine 
and 6-guanidino-2-oxocaproic acid  (GOCA) (substrate and product of AGXT2, respectively) in 
patients suffering from non -dialysis chronic kidney disease. They showed that low plasma 
homoarginine concentrations and high GOCA concentrations are associated with worse prognosis. 
Elevated activity of AGXT2 in those patients could provide a possible explanation for this 
phenomenon, which may be a physiological reaction to elevated systemic ADMA and SDMA 
concentrations in those patients [97]. In addition, the AGXT2 rs37369 AA genotype was fo und to be 
significantly associated with elevated levels of blood urea nitrogen in chronic heart failure patients 
free from renal disease [98]. 
10. Controversy 2: AGXT2 as a Therapeutic Target 
Our discovery of the role of AGXT2 in homoarginine metabolism fu rther increases the 
complexity of the potential cardiovascular effects of AGXT2. On one hand upregulation of AGXT2 
would be expected to have a beneficial influence on the cardiovascular system via lowering systemic 
concentrations of ADMA and SDMA. On the o ther hand, upregulation of AGXT2 may also result in 
some negative cardiovascular effects via lowering systemic concentrations of homoarginine and 
BAIB, with the latter being suggested to play a role in browning of adipose tissue, which is also 
thought to be beneficial for the cardiovascular system, and in mediating beneficial effects of exercise 
on endothelial function [99]. Another substrate of AGXT2 is beta -alanine, which is the rate -limiting 
precursor for the presumably cardiovascular protective antioxidant dipeptide carnosine [100]. While 
these opposite cardiovascular effects of different AGXT2 substrates might explain, why AGXT2 
polymorphisms are so common in the general population, they might also make therapeutic 
targeting of AGXT2 challenging (Figure  4). However, it is still possible that therapeutic modulation 
of AGXT2 activity would be of a clinical benefit in selected groups of patients with pathologies 
mediated primarily by certain AGXT2 substrates with the other ones playing only a minor role. 
Solving the crystal structure of human AGXT2 should significantly advance the field and facilitate a 
better understanding of the regulation of substrate specificity of AGXT2 with the possible goal of 
identification of the small molecules or genetic modificat ions, which will increase substrates 
specificity of AGXT2 towards endogenous methylarginines, without affecting or decreasing its 
specificity to potentially “cardiovascular and metabolically beneficial” substrates.  
 
Figure 4.  Janus-faced cardiovascular consequences of AGXT2 upregulation. Therapeutic 
upregulation of AGXT2 may exert a positive effect on cardiovascular system via lowering of ADMA 
Figure 4. Janus-faced cardiovascular consequences of AGXT2 upregulation. Therapeutic upregulation
of AGXT2 may exert a positive eﬀect on cardiovascular system via lowering of ADMA and SDMA.
However, there may also be a possible harmful eﬀect caused by lowering of homoarginine, BAIBA and
β-alanine levels.
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 10 of 16
11. Future Perspectives
The work presented in this review has signiﬁcantly advanced our understanding of the multiple
cardiovascular and metabolic roles of endogenous methylarginines and the enzymes involved in their
metabolism. Furthermore, it has allowed identiﬁcation of the novel therapeutic targets and created the
basis for future translation of basic research ﬁndings into the clinical practice. The most promising
research directions in this ﬁeld include the further search for small molecules upregulating DDAH
activity and the identiﬁcation of the binding partners and regulatory posttranslational modiﬁcations
of DDAHs, which could also be potentially targeted therapeutically. A better understanding of the
regulation of AGXT2 activity with a speciﬁc focus on the role of the enzyme in liver and kidney
disease and on the potential therapeutic approaches modulating the relative substrate speciﬁcity of
AGXT2 is also of a signiﬁcant importance in parallel to further exploration of the biological eﬀects of
its individual substrates.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Acknowledgments: Open Access Funding by the Publication Fund of the TU Dresden.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Leiper, J.; Vallance, P . Biological signiﬁcance of endogenous methylarginines that inhibit nitric oxide synthases.
Cardiovasc. Res. 1999, 43, 542–548. [CrossRef]
2. Rees, D.D.; Palmer, R.M.; Schulz, R.; Hodson, H.F.; Moncada, S. Characterization of three inhibitors of
endothelial nitric oxide synthase in vitro and in vivo. Br. J. Pharmacol. 1990, 101, 746–752. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
3. Faraci, F.M.; Brian, J.E., Jr.; Heistad, D.D. Response of cerebral blood vessels to an endogenous inhibitor of
nitric oxide synthase. Am. J. Physiol.1995, 269 Pt 2, H1522–H1527. [CrossRef]
4. Vallance, P .; Leone, A.; Calver, A.; Collier, J.; Moncada, S. Accumulation of an endogenous inhibitor of nitric
oxide synthesis in chronic renal failure. Lancet 1992, 339, 572–575. [PubMed]
5. Ramuschkat, M.; Appelbaum, S.; Atzler, D.; Zeller, T.; Bauer, C.; Ojeda, F.M.; Sinning, C.R.; Hoﬀmann, B.;
Lackner, K.J.; Böger, R.H.; et al. ADMA, subclinical changes and atrial ﬁbrillation in the general population.
Int. J. Cardiol.2016, 203, 640–646. [CrossRef]
6. Boger, R.H.; Cooke, J.P .; Vallance, P . ADMA: An emerging cardiovascular risk factor.Vasc. Med. 2005, 10
(Suppl. 1), S1–S2. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Boger, R.H.; Bode-Böger, S.M.; Szuba, A.; Tsao, P .S.; Chan, J.R.; Tangphao, O.; Blaschke, T.F.; Cooke, J.P .
Asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA): A novel risk factor for endothelial dysfunction: Its role in
hypercholesterolemia. Circulation 1998, 98, 1842–1847. [CrossRef]
8. Surdacki, A.; Nowicki, M.; Sandmann, J.; Tsikas, D.; Boeger, R.H.; Bode-Boeger, S.M.;
Kruszelnicka-Kwiatkowska, O.; Kokot, F.; Dubiel, J.S.; Froelich, J.C. Reduced urinary excretion of nitric oxide
metabolites and increased plasma levels of asymmetric dimethylarginine in men with essential hypertension.
J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol.1999, 33, 652–658. [CrossRef]
9. Abbasi, F.; Asagmi, T.; Cooke, J.P .; Lamendola, C.; McLaughlin, T.; Reaven, G.M.; Stuehlinger, M.; Tsao, P .S.
Plasma concentrations of asymmetric dimethylarginine are increased in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Am. J. Cardiol.2001, 88, 1201–1203. [CrossRef]
10. Lundman, P .; Eriksson, M.J.; Stühlinger, M.; Cooke, J.P .; Hamsten, A.; Tornvall, P . Mild-to-moderate
hypertriglyceridemia in young men is associated with endothelial dysfunction and increased plasma
concentrations of asymmetric dimethylarginine. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol.2001, 38, 111–116. [CrossRef]
11. Krempl, T.K.; Maas, R.; Sydow, K.; Meinertz, T.; Böger, R.H.; Kähler, J. Elevation of asymmetric
dimethylarginine in patients with unstable angina and recurrent cardiovascular events. Eur. Heart J.
2005, 26, 1846–1851. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
12. Yoo, J.H.; Lee, S.C. Elevated levels of plasma homocyst(e)ine and asymmetric dimethylarginine in elderly
patients with stroke. Atherosclerosis 2001, 158, 425–430. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 11 of 16
13. Boger, R.H.; Bode-Böger, S.M.; Thiele, W.; Junker, W.; Alexander, K.; Frölich, J.C. Biochemical evidence for
impaired nitric oxide synthesis in patients with peripheral arterial occlusive disease. Circulation 1997, 95,
2068–2074. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Fleck, C.; Schweitzer, F.; Karge, E.; Busch, M.; Stein, G. Serum concentrations of asymmetric (ADMA) and
symmetric (SDMA) dimethylarginine in patients with chronic kidney diseases. Clin. Chim. Acta2003, 336,
1–12. [CrossRef]
15. Pettersson, A.; Hedner, T.; Milsom, I. Increased circulating concentrations of asymmetric dimethyl arginine
(ADMA), an endogenous inhibitor of nitric oxide synthesis, in preeclampsia. Acta Obstet. Gynecol. Scand.
1998, 77, 808–813. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Meinitzer, A.; Seelhorst, U.; Wellnitz, B.; Halwachs-Baumann, G.; Boehm, B.O.; Winkelmann, B.R.; März, W.
Asymmetrical dimethylarginine independently predicts total and cardiovascular mortality in individuals
with angiographic coronary artery disease (the Ludwigshafen Risk and Cardiovascular Health study).
Clin. Chem.2007, 53, 273–283. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Leong, T.; Zylberstein, D.; Graham, I.; Lissner, L.; Ward, D.; Fogarty, J.; Bengtsson, C.; Björkelund, C.;
Thelle, D. Swedish-Irish-Norwegian Collaboration. Asymmetric dimethylarginine independently predicts
fatal and nonfatal myocardial infarction and stroke in women: 24-year follow-up of the population study of
women in Gothenburg. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.2008, 28, 961–967.
18. Zoccali, C.; Bode-Böger, S.; Mallamaci, F.; Benedetto, F.; Tripepi, G.; Malatino, L.; Cataliotti, A.; Bellanuova, I.;
Fermo, I.; Frölich, J.; et al. Plasma concentration of asymmetrical dimethylarginine and mortality in patients
with end-stage renal disease: A prospective study. Lancet 2001, 358, 2113–2117. [CrossRef]
19. Kielstein, J.T.; Impraim, B.; Simmel, S.; Bode-Böger, S.M.; Tsikas, D.; Frölich, J.C.; Hoeper, M.M.;
Haller, H.; Fliser, D. Cardiovascular eﬀects of systemic nitric oxide synthase inhibition with asymmetrical
dimethylarginine in humans. Circulation 2004, 109, 172–177. [CrossRef]
20. Kielstein, J.T.; Impraim, B.; Simmel, S.; Bode-Böger, S.M.; Tsikas, D.; Frölich, J.C.; Hoeper, M.M.; Haller, H.;
Fliser, D. ADMA increases arterial stiﬀness and decreases cerebral blood ﬂow in humans. Stroke 2006, 37,
2024–2029. [CrossRef]
21. Creager, M.A.; Gallagher, S.J.; Girerd, X.J.; Coleman, S.M.; Dzau, V .J.; Cooke, J.P . l-arginine improves
endothelium-dependent vasodilation in hypercholesterolemic humans. J. Clin. Investig.1992, 90, 1248–1253.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
22. Boger, R.H.; Bode-Böger, S.M.; Mügge, A.; Kienke, S.; Brandes, R.; Dwenger, A.; Frölich, J.C. Supplementation
of hypercholesterolaemic rabbits with l-arginine reduces the vascular release of superoxide anions and
restores NO production. Atherosclerosis 1995, 117, 273–284. [CrossRef]
23. Boger, R.H. Asymmetric dimethylarginine, an endogenous inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase, explains the
“l-arginine paradox” and acts as a novel cardiovascular risk factor.J. Nutr.2004, 134, 2842S–2847S; discussion
2853S. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Pollock, J.S.; Förstermann, U.; Mitchell, J.A.; Warner, T.D.; Schmidt, H.H.; Nakane, M.; Murad, F. Puriﬁcation
and characterization of particulate endothelium-derived relaxing factor synthase from cultured and native
bovine aortic endothelial cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA1991, 88, 10480–10484. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Bode-Boger, S.M.; Scalera, F.; Kielstein, J.T.; Martens-Lobenhoﬀer, J.; Breithardt, G.; Fobker, M.; Reinecke, H.
Symmetrical dimethylarginine: A new combined parameter for renal function and extent of coronary artery
disease. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol.2006, 17, 1128–1134. [CrossRef]
26. Kielstein, J.T.; Martens-Lobenhoﬀer, J.; Vollmer, S.; Bode-Böger, S.M.l-arginine, ADMA, SDMA, creatinine,
MDRD formula: Detour to renal function testing. J. Nephrol.2008, 21, 959–961. [PubMed]
27. Schulze, F.; Carter, A.M.; Schwedhelm, E.; Ajjan, R.; Maas, R.; von Holten, R.A.; Atzler, D.; Grant, P .J.;
Böger, R.H. Symmetric dimethylarginine predicts all-cause mortality following ischemic stroke.Atherosclerosis
2010, 208, 518–523. [CrossRef]
28. Gore, M.O.; Lüneburg, N.; Schwedhelm, E.; Ayers, C.R.; Anderssohn, M.; Khera, A.; Atzler, D.; de Lemos, J.A.;
Grant, P .J.; McGuire, D.K.; et al. Symmetrical dimethylarginine predicts mortality in the general population:
Observations from the Dallas heart study. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.2013, 33, 2682–2688. [CrossRef]
29. Closs, E.I.; Basha, F.Z.; Habermeier, A.; Förstermann, U. Interference ofl-arginine analogues with l-arginine
transport mediated by the y+ carrier hCAT-2B.Nitric Oxide1997, 1, 65–73. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 12 of 16
30. Speer, T.; Rohrer, L.; Blyszczuk, P .; Shro ﬀ, R.; Kuschnerus, K.; Kränkel, N.; Kania, G.; Zewinger, S.;
Akhmedov, A.; Shi, Y.; et al. Abnormal high-density lipoprotein induces endothelial dysfunction via
activation of Toll-like receptor-2. Immunity 2013, 38, 754–768. [CrossRef]
31. Anthony, S.; Leiper, J.; Vallance, P . Endogenous production of nitric oxide synthase inhibitors.Vasc. Med.
2005, 10 (Suppl. 1), S3–S9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Ghosh, S.K.; Paik, W.K.; Kim, S. Puriﬁcation and molecular identiﬁcation of two protein methylases I from calf
brain. Myelin basic protein- and histone-speciﬁc enzyme. J. Biol. Chem.1988, 263, 19024–19033. [PubMed]
33. Rawal, N.; Rajpurohit, R.; Paik, W.K.; Kim, S. Puriﬁcation and characterization of
S-adenosylmethionine-protein-arginine N-methyltransferase from rat liver. Biochem. J. 1994, 300 Pt 2,
483–489. [CrossRef]
34. Ogawa, T.; Kimoto, M.; Watanabe, H.; Sasaoka, K. Metabolism of NG, NG-and NG, N’G-dimethylarginine in
rats. Arch. Biochem. Biophys.1987, 252, 526–537. [CrossRef]
35. Ogawa, T.; Kimoto, M.; Sasaoka, K. Puriﬁcation and properties of a new enzyme, NG, NG-dimethylarginine
dimethylaminohydrolase, from rat kidney. J. Biol. Chem.1989, 264, 10205–10209.
36. Bassareo, P .P .; Fanos, V .; Puddu, M.; Flore, G.; Mercuro, G. Advanced intrauterine growth restriction is
associated with reduced excretion of asymmetric dimethylarginine. Early Hum. Dev. 2014, 90, 173–176.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Ogawa, T.; Kimoto, M.; Sasaoka, K. Dimethylarginine: Pyruvate aminotransferase in rats. Puriﬁcation,
properties, and identity with alanine: Glyoxylate aminotransferase 2. J. Biol. Chem.1990, 265, 20938–20945.
[PubMed]
38. Sasaoka, K.; Ogawa, T.; Kimoto, M. N-Acetyl conjugates of basic amino acids newly identiﬁed in rat urine.
Arch. Biochem. Biophys.1982, 219, 454–458. [CrossRef]
39. Martens-Lobenhoﬀer, J.; Rodionov, R.N.; Bode-Boger, S.M. Determination of asymmetric Nalpha-
acetyldimethylarginine in humans: A phase II metabolite of asymmetric dimethylarginine. Anal. Biochem.
2014, 452, 25–30. [CrossRef]
40. Martens-Lobenhoﬀer, J.; Bode-Boger, S.M. Amino acid N-acetylation: Metabolic elimination of symmetric
dimethylarginine as symmetric N(alpha)-acetyldimethylarginine, determined in human plasma and urine
by LC-MS/MS. J. Chromatogr. B Anal. Technol. Biomed. Life Sci.2015, 975, 59–64. [CrossRef]
41. Strobel, J.; Müller, F.; Zolk, O.; Endreß, B.; König, J.; Fromm, M.F.; Maas, R. Transport of asymmetric
dimethylarginine (ADMA) by cationic amino acid transporter 2 (CAT2), organic cation transporter 2 (OCT2)
and multidrug and toxin extrusion protein 1 (MATE1). Amino Acids2013, 45, 989–1002. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Porcelli, V .; Longo, A.; Palmieri, L.; Closs, E.I.; Palmieri, F. Asymmetric dimethylarginine is transported by
the mitochondrial carrier SLC25A2. Amino Acids2016, 48, 427–436. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Leiper, J.M.; Santa Maria, J.; Chubb, A.; MacAllister, R.J.; Charles, I.G.; Whitley, G.S.; Vallance, P . Identiﬁcation
of two human dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolases with distinct tissue distributions and homology
with microbial arginine deiminases. Biochem. J.1999, 343 Pt 1, 209–214. [CrossRef]
44. Tran, C.T.; Fox, M.F.; Vallance, P .; Leiper, J.M. Chromosomal localization, gene structure, and expression
pattern of DDAH1: Comparison with DDAH2 and implications for evolutionary origins. Genomics 2000, 68,
101–105. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Wang, D.; Gill, P .S.; Chabrashvili, T.; Onozato, M.L.; Raggio, J.; Mendonca, M.; Dennehy, K.;
Li, M.; Modlinger, P .; Leiper, J.; et al. Isoform-Speciﬁc Regulation by NG-NG-Dimethylarginine
Dimethylaminohydrolase of Rat Serum Asymmetric Dimethylarginine and Vascular Endothelium-Derived
Relaxing Factor/NO. Circ. Res. 2007, 101, 627–635. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
46. Dowsett, L.; Piper, S.; Slaviero, A.; Dufton, N.; Wang, Z.; Boruc, O.; Delahaye, M.; Colman, L.; Kalk, E.;
Tomlinson, J.; et al. Endothelial Dimethylarginine Dimethylaminohydrolase 1 Is an Important Regulator of
Angiogenesis but Does Not Regulate Vascular Reactivity or Hemodynamic Homeostasis. Circulation 2015,
131, 2217–2225. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Zhang, P .; Hu, X.; Xu, X.; Chen, Y.; Bache, R.J. Dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase 1 modulates
endothelial cell growth through nitric oxide and Akt. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.2011, 31, 890–897.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 13 of 16
48. Schwedhelm, E.; Leitner, E.; Atzler, D.; Schmitz, C.; Jacobi, J.; Meinertz, T.; Münzel, T.; Baldus, S.; Cooke, J.P .;
Böger, R.H.; et al. Extensive characterization of the human DDAH1 transgenic mice. Pharmacol. Res. 2009,
60, 494–502. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. Dayoub, H.; Achan, V .; Adimoolam, S.; Jacobi, J.; Stuehlinger, M.C.; Wang, B.Y.; Tsao, P .S.; Kimoto, M.;
Vallance, P .; Patterson, A.J.; et al. Dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase regulates nitric oxide synthesis:
Genetic and physiological evidence. Circulation 2003, 108, 3042–3047. [CrossRef]
50. Dayoub, H.; Rodionov, R.N.; Lynch, C.; Cooke, J.P .; Arning, E.; Bottiglieri, T.; Lentz, S.R.; Faraci, F.M.
Overexpression of dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase inhibits asymmetric dimethylarginine-induced
endothelial dysfunction in the cerebral circulation. Stroke 2008, 39, 180–184. [CrossRef]
51. Leiper, J.; Nandi, M.; Torondel, B.; Murray-Rust, J.; Malaki, M.; O’Hara, B.; Rossiter, S.; Anthony, S.;
Madhani, M.; Selwood, D.; et al. Disruption of methylarginine metabolism impairs vascular homeostasis.
Nat. Med. 2007, 13, 198–203. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Hu, X.; Atzler, D.; Xu, X.; Zhang, P .; Guo, H.; Lu, Z.; Fassett, J.; Schwedhelm, E.; Böger, R.H.; Bache, R.J.;
et al. Dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase-1 is the critical enzyme for degrading the cardiovascular
risk factor asymmetrical dimethylarginine. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.2011, 31, 1540–1546. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
53. Jacobi, J.; Sydow, K.; von Degenfeld, G.; Zhang, Y.; Dayoub, H.; Wang, B.; Patterson, A.J.; Kimoto, M.;
Blau, H.M.; Cooke, J.P . Overexpression of dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase reduces tissue
asymmetric dimethylarginine levels and enhances angiogenesis. Circulation 2005, 111, 1431–1438. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
54. Stuhlinger, M.C.; Conci, E.; Haubner, B.J.; Stocker, E.M.; Schwaighofer, J.; Cooke, J.P .; Tsao, P .S.; Pachinger, O.;
Metzler, B. Asymmetric dimethyl l-arginine (ADMA) is a critical regulator of myocardial reperfusion injury.
Cardiovasc. Res. 2007, 75, 417–425. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
55. Nakayama, Y.; Ueda, S.; Yamagishi, S.; Obara, N.; Taguchi, K.; Ando, R.; Kaida, Y.; Iwatani, R.; Kaifu, K.;
Yokoro, M.; et al. Asymmetric dimethylarginine accumulates in the kidney during ischemia /reperfusion
injury. Kidney Int. Suppl.2014, 85, 570–578. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Jacobi, J.; Maas, R.; Cardounel, A.J.; Arend, M.; Pope, A.J.; Cordasic, N.; Heusinger-Ribeiro, J.; Atzler, D.;
Strobel, J.; Schwedhelm, E.; et al. Dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase overexpression ameliorates
atherosclerosis in apolipoprotein E-deﬁcient mice by lowering asymmetric dimethylarginine. Am. J. Pathol.
2010, 176, 2559–2570. [CrossRef]
57. Sydow, K.; Schmitz, C.; von Leitner, E.C.; von Leitner, R.; Klinke, A.; Atzler, D.; Krebs, C.; Wieboldt, H.;
Ehmke, H.; Schwedhelm, E.; et al. Dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase1 is an organ-speciﬁc mediator
of end organ damage in a murine model of hypertension. PLoS ONE2012, 7, e48150. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Nandi, M.; Kelly, P .; Torondel, B.; Wang, Z.; Starr, A.; Ma, Y.; Cunningham, P .; Stidwill, R.; Leiper, J. Genetic
and pharmacological inhibition of dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase 1 is protective in endotoxic
shock. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.2012, 32, 2589–2597. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59. Ghebremariam, Y.T.; Erlanson, D.A.; Yamada, K.; Cooke, J.P . Development of a dimethylarginine
dimethylaminohydrolase (DDAH) assay for high-throughput chemical screening. J. Biomol. Screen.2012, 17,
651–661. [CrossRef]
60. Linsky, T.W.; Fast, W. Discovery of structurally-diverse inhibitor scaﬀolds by high-throughput screening of a
fragment library with dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase. Bioorg. Med. Chem.2012, 20, 5550–5558.
[CrossRef]
61. Hartzoulakis, B.; Rossiter, S.; Gill, H.; O’Hara, B.; Steinke, E.; Gane, P .J.; Hurtado-Guerrero, R.; Leiper, J.M.;
Vallance, P .; Rust, J.M.; et al. Discovery of inhibitors of the pentein superfamily protein dimethylarginine
dimethylaminohydrolase (DDAH), by virtual screening and hit analysis. Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett.2007, 17,
3953–3956. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Kami Reddy, K.R.; Dasari, C.; Vandavasi, S.; Natani, S.; Supriya, B.; Jadav, S.S.; Sai Ram, N.; Kumar, J.M.;
Ummanni, R. Novel Cellularly Active Inhibitor Regresses DDAH1 Induced Prostate Tumor Growth by
Restraining Tumor Angiogenesis through Targeting DDAH1/ADMA/NOS Pathway. ACS Comb. Sci.2019,
21, 241–256. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 14 of 16
63. Hulin, J.A.; Tommasi, S.; Elliot, D.; Mangoni, A.A. Small molecule inhibition of DDAH1 signiﬁcantly
attenuates triple negative breast cancer cell vasculogenic mimicry in vitro. Biomed. Pharmacother.2019, 111,
602–612. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
64. Pope, A.J.; Karrupiah, K.; Kearns, P .N.; Xia, Y.; Cardounel, A.J. Role of dimethylarginine
dimethylaminohydrolases in the regulation of endothelial nitric oxide production. J. Biol. Chem.2009, 284,
35338–35347. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
65. Hasegawa, K.; Wakino, S.; Tatematsu, S.; Yoshioka, K.; Homma, K.; Sugano, N.; Kimoto, M.; Hayashi, K.;
Itoh, H. Role of asymmetric dimethylarginine in vascular injury in transgenic mice overexpressing
dimethylarginie dimethylaminohydrolase 2. Circ. Res. 2007, 101, e2–e10. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Lambden, S.; Kelly, P .; Ahmetaj-Shala, B.; Wang, Z.; Lee, B.; Nandi, M.; Torondel, B.; Delahaye, M.;
Dowsett, L.; Piper, S.; et al. Dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase 2 regulates nitric oxide synthesis and
hemodynamics and determines outcome in polymicrobial sepsis. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.2015, 35,
1382–1392. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Tokuo, H.; Yunoue, S.; Feng, L.; Kimoto, M.; Tsuji, H.; Ono, T.; Saya, H.; Araki, N. Phosphorylation
of neuroﬁbromin by cAMP-dependent protein kinase is regulated via a cellular association of N(G),
N(G)-dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase. FEBS Lett.2001, 494, 48–53. [CrossRef]
68. Li, F.; Munchhof, A.M.; White, H.A.; Mead, L.E.; Krier, T.R.; Fenoglio, A.; Chen, S.; Wu, X.; Cai, S.; Yang, F.C.;
et al. Neuroﬁbromin is a novel regulator of RAS-induced signals in primary vascular smooth muscle cells.
Hum. Mol. Genet.2006, 15, 1921–1930. [CrossRef]
69. Boult, J.K.; Walker-Samuel, S.; Jamin, Y.; Leiper, J.M.; Whitley, G.S.; Robinson, S.P . Active site mutant
dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase 1 expression confers an intermediate tumour phenotype in C6
gliomas. J. Pathol.2011, 225, 344–352. [CrossRef]
70. Pullamsetti, S.S.; Savai, R.; Dumitrascu, R.; Dahal, B.K.; Wilhelm, J.; Konigsho ﬀ, M.; Zakrzewicz, D.;
Ghofrani, H.A.; Weissmann, N.; Eickelberg, O.; et al. The role of dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase
in idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis. Sci. Transl. Med.2011, 3, 87ra53. [CrossRef]
71. Rodionov, R.N.; Dayoub, H.; Lynch, C.M.; Wilson, K.M.; Stevens, J.W.; Murry, D.J.; Kimoto, M.; Arning, E.;
Bottiglieri, T.; Cooke, J.P .; et al. Overexpression of dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase protects against
cerebral vascular eﬀects of hyperhomocysteinemia. Circ. Res. 2010, 106, 551–558. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
72. Hasegawa, K.; Wakino, S.; Tanaka, T.; Kimoto, M.; Tatematsu, S.; Kanda, T.; Yoshioka, K.; Homma, K.;
Sugano, N.; Kurabayashi, M.; et al. Dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase 2 increases vascular
endothelial growth factor expression through Sp1 transcription factor in endothelial cells. Arterioscler.
Thromb. Vasc. Biol.2006, 26, 1488–1494. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
73. O’Sullivan, J.F.; Morningstar, J.E.; Yang, Q.; Zheng, B.; Gao, Y.; Jeanfavre, S.; Scott, J.; Fernandez, C.;
Zheng, H.; O’Connor, S.; et al. Dimethylguanidino valeric acid is a marker of liver fat and predicts diabetes.
J. Clin. Investig.2017, 127, 4394–4402. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74. Lee, I.S.; Nishikimi, M.; Inoue, M.; Muragaki, Y.; Ooshima, A. Speciﬁc expression of alanine-glyoxylate
aminotransferase 2 in the epithelial cells of Henle’s loop.Nephron 1999, 83, 184–185. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75. Kittel, A.; Maas, R.; König, J.; Mieth, M.; Weiss, N.; Jarzebska, N.; Hohenstein, B.; Martens-Lobenhoﬀer, J.;
Bode-Böger, S.M.; Rodionov, R.N.In vivo evidence that Agxt2 can regulate plasma levels of dimethylarginines
in mice. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.2013, 430, 84–89. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Noguchi, T.; Minatogawa, Y.; Takada, Y.; Okuno, E.; Kido, R. Subcellular distribution of pyruvate (glyoxylate)
aminotransferases in rat liver. Biochem. J.1978, 170, 173–175. [CrossRef]
77. Cellini, B.; Lorenzetto, A.; Montioli, R.; Oppici, E.; Voltattorni, C.B. Human liver peroxisomal alanine:
Glyoxylate aminotransferase: Diﬀerent stability under chemical stress of the major allele, the minor allele,
and its pathogenic G170R variant. Biochimie 2010, 92, 1801–1811. [CrossRef]
78. Kakimoto, Y.; Taniguchi, K.; Sano, I. D-beta-aminoisobutyrate: Pyruvate aminotransferase in mammalian
liver and excretion of beta-aminoisobutyrate by man. J. Biol. Chem.1969, 244, 335–340.
79. Pollitt, R.J.; Green, A.; Smith, R. Excessive excretion of beta-alanine and of 3-hydroxypropionic, R- and
S-3-aminoisobutyric, R- and S-3-hydroxyisobutyric and S-2-(hydroxymethyl)butyric acids probably due to a
defect in the metabolism of the corresponding malonic semialdehydes. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis.1985, 8, 75–79.
[CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 15 of 16
80. Fink, K.; Cline, R.E.; Henderson, R.B.; Fink, R.M. Metabolism of thymine (methyl-C14 or -2-C14) by rat liver
in vitro. J. Biol. Chem.1956, 221, 425–433.
81. Kontani, Y.; Kaneko, M.; Kikugawa, M.; Fujimoto, S.; Tamaki, N. Identity of D-3-aminoisobutyrate-pyruvate
aminotransferase with alanine-glyoxylate aminotransferase 2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta1993, 1156, 161–166.
[CrossRef]
82. Rhee, E.P .; Ho, J.E.; Chen, M.H.; Shen, D.; Cheng, S.; Larson, M.G.; Ghorbani, A.; Shi, X.; Helenius, I.T.;
O’Donnell, C.J.; et al. A Genome-wide Association Study of the Human Metabolome in a Community-Based
Cohort. Cell Metab.2013, 18, 130–143. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Roberts, L.D.; Boström, P .; O’Sullivan, J.F.; Schinzel, R.T.; Lewis, G.D.; Dejam, A.; Lee, Y.K.; Palma, M.J.;
Calhoun, S.; Georgiadi, A.; et al. Beta-Aminoisobutyric acid induces browning of white fat and hepatic
beta-oxidation and is inversely correlated with cardiometabolic risk factors. Cell Metab.2014, 19, 96–108.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
84. Harris, R.C.; Tallon, M.J.; Dunnett, M.; Boobis, L.; Coakley, J.; Kim, H.J.; Fallowﬁeld, J.L.; Hill, C.A.; Sale, C.;
Wise, J.A. The absorption of orally supplied beta-alanine and its e ﬀect on muscle carnosine synthesis in
human vastus lateralis. Amino Acids2006, 30, 279–289. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
85. Kleber, M.E.; Seppälä, I.; Pilz, S.; Hoﬀmann, M.M.; Tomaschitz, A.; Oksala, N.; Raitoharju, E.; Lyytikäinen, L.P .;
Mäkelä, K.M.; Laaksonen, R.; et al. Genome-wide association study identiﬁes 3 genomic loci signiﬁcantly
associated with serum levels of homoarginine: The AtheroRemo Consortium. Circ. Cardiovasc. Genet.2013,
6, 505–513. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
86. Pilz, S.; Meinitzer, A.; Gaksch, M.; Grübler, M.; Verheyen, N.; Drechsler, C.; Hartaigh, B. Ó.; Lang, F.;
Alesutan, I.; Voelkl, J.; et al. Homoarginine in the renal and cardiovascular systems. Amino Acids2015, 47,
1703–1713. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87. Atzler, D.; Schwedhelm, E.; Choe, C.U. L-homoarginine and cardiovascular disease. Curr. Opin. Clin. Nutr.
Metab. Care2015, 18, 83–88. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
88. Rodionov, R.N.; Oppici, E.; Martens-Lobenhoﬀer, J.; Jarzebska, N.; Brilloﬀ, S.; Burdin, D.; Demyanov, A.;
Kolouschek, A.; Leiper, J.; Maas, R.; et al. A Novel Pathway for Metabolism of the Cardiovascular Risk Factor
Homoarginine by alanine: Glyoxylate aminotransferase 2. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 35277. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
89. Rodionov, R.N.; Begmatov, H.; Jarzebska, N.; Patel, K.; Mills, M.T.; Ghani, Z.; Khakshour, D.; Tamboli, P .;
Patel, M.N.; Abdalla, M.; et al. Homoarginine Supplementation Prevents Left Ventricular Dilatation and
Preserves Systolic Function in a Model of Coronary Artery Disease. J. Am. Heart Assoc.2019, 8, e012486.
[CrossRef]
90. Baylis, C. Nitric oxide deﬁciency in chronic kidney disease. Am. J. Physiol. Ren. Physiol.2008, 294, F1–F9.
[CrossRef]
91. Martens, C.R.; Edwards, D.G. Peripheral vascular dysfunction in chronic kidney disease. Cardiol. Res. Pract.
2011, 2011, 267257. [CrossRef]
92. Baylis, C. Nitric oxide synthase derangements and hypertension in kidney disease. Curr. Opin.
Nephrol. Hypertens.2012, 21, 1–6. [CrossRef]
93. Fliser, D.; Kronenberg, F.; Kielstein, J.T.; Morath, C.; Bode-Böger, S.M.; Haller, H.; Ritz, E. Asymmetric
dimethylarginine and progression of chronic kidney disease: The mild to moderate kidney disease study.
J. Am. Soc. Nephrol.2005, 16, 2456–2461. [CrossRef]
94. Schwedhelm, E.; Boger, R.H. The role of asymmetric and symmetric dimethylarginines in renal disease.
Nat. Rev. Nephrol.2011, 7, 275–285. [CrossRef]
95. Caplin, B.; Leiper, J. Endogenous nitric oxide synthase inhibitors in the biology of disease: Markers, mediators,
and regulators? Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol.2012, 32, 1343–1353. [CrossRef]
96. Tomlinson, J.A.; Caplin, B.; Boruc, O.; Bruce-Cobbold, C.; Cutillas, P .; Dormann, D.; Faull, P .; Grossman, R.C.;
Khadayate, S.; Mas, V .R.; et al. Reduced Renal Methylarginine Metabolism Protects against Progressive
Kidney Damage. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol.2015, 26, 3045–3059. [CrossRef]
97. Martens-Lobenhoﬀer, J.; Emrich, I.E.; Zawada, A.M.; Fliser, D.; Wagenpfeil, S.; Heine, G.H.; Bode-Böger, S.M.
L-Homoarginine and its AGXT2-metabolite GOCA in chronic kidney disease as markers for clinical status
and prognosis. Amino Acids2018, 50, 1347–1356. [CrossRef]
98. Hu, X.L.; Zeng, W.J.; Li, M.P .; Yang, Y.L.; Kuang, D.B.; Li, H.; Zhang, Y.J.; Jiang, C.; Peng, L.M.; Qi, H.; et al.
AGXT2 rs37369 polymorphism predicts the renal function in patients with chronic heart failure. Gene 2017,
637, 145–151. [CrossRef]
Int. J. Mol. Sci.2019, 20, 4592 16 of 16
99. Sawada, M.; Yamamoto, H.; Ogasahara, A.; Tanaka, Y.; Kihara, S. Beta-aminoisobutyric acid protects against
vascular inﬂammation through PGC-1beta-induced antioxidative properties. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun.
2019, 516, 963–968. [CrossRef]
100. Albrecht, T.; Schilperoort, M.; Zhang, S.; Braun, J.D.; Qiu, J.; Rodriguez, A.; Pastene, D.O.; Krämer, B.K.;
Köppel, H.; Baelde, H.; et al. Carnosine Attenuates the Development of both Type 2 Diabetes and Diabetic
Nephropathy in BTBR ob/ob Mice. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 44492. [CrossRef]
© 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).