The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
1
Introduction
B cells decode a multitude of membrane receptor stimuli to 
decide whether and how to respond to myriad innate and adaptive 
immune stimuli. Collective B lymphocyte responses to receptor sig-
nals drive humoral and cell-mediated immune responses but also 
underlie autoimmune and B cell lymphoma disease states. In addi-
tion to their obligatory role in humoral immunity, B cells also carry 
out major immune functions, including initiating T cell responses, 
maintaining immune homeostasis, and driving tumor responses to 
checkpoint blockade (1, 2). Yet, much remains to be learned about 
how human B cell immunometabolism response to distinct T cell–
dependent versus T cell–independent signals, received either alone 
or in combination, drive rapid immune responses.
B cells recognize a remarkable range of antigens via the cell 
surface B cell receptor (BCR), composed of immunoglobulin heavy 
and light chains and associated CD79a/Iga and CD79b/Igb sig-
naling chains. After BCR activation, immunogens are internalized 
and processed in lysosomes, where peptide antigens are present-
ed via MHC class II molecules to CD4 + T cells. In turn, activated 
CD4+ T cells can then provide crucial second signals to drive B 
cell activation, and two signals are generally needed to drive B cell 
proliferation (2). These include CD40-ligand (CD40L/CD154) and 
IL-4 (3). CD40L trimers activate cognate B cell plasma membrane 
CD40 receptors, which stimulate NF-κB, MAPK, and AKT/PI3K 
pathways (4, 5), whereas the IL-4 receptor (IL-4R) stimulates JAK/
STAT pathways to drive B cell activation and differentiation (6). T 
cell CD40L and cytokine cues are critical for major B cell activities, 
including germinal center formation, class-switch recombination, 
and somatic hypermutation. Receipt of multiple activating signals 
rescues B cells from death (7) and induces rapid B cell proliferation, 
which serves to expand the pool of antigen-specific B cells and sup-
ports B cell differentiation and the formation of germinal centers.
B lymphocytes play major adaptive immune roles, producing antibodies and driving T cell responses. However, how 
immunometabolism networks support B cell activation and differentiation in response to distinct receptor stimuli remains 
incompletely understood. To gain insights, we systematically investigated acute primary human B cell transcriptional, 
translational, and metabolomic responses to B cell receptor (BCR), TLR9, CD40-ligand (CD40L), IL -4, or combinations 
thereof. T cell–independent BCR/TLR9 costimulation, which drives malignant and autoimmune B cell states, highly induced 
transaminase branched chain amino acid transaminase 1 (BCAT1), which localized to lysosomal membranes to support 
branched chain amino acid synthesis and mTORC1 activation. BCAT1 inhibition blunted BCR/TLR9, but not CD40L/IL -4–
triggered B cell proliferation, IL -10 expression, and BCR/TLR pathway–driven lymphoma xenograft outgrowth. These results 
provide a valuable resource, reveal receptor-mediated immunometabolism remodeling to support key B cell phenotypes, and 
identify BCAT1 as an activated B cell therapeutic target.
Multiomic analysis reveals a key BCAT1 role in mTOR 
activation by B cell receptor and TLR9
Rui Guo,1,2,3 Yizhe Sun,1,2,3 Matthew Y . Lim,4,5 Hardik Shah,6 Joao A. Paulo,4 Rahaman A. Ahmed,7 ,8,9 Weixing Li,10  
Yuchen Zhang,1,2,3 Haopeng Yang,11 Liang Wei Wang,1,2,3,5 Daniel Strebinger,9 Nicholas A. Smith,1,2,3 Meng Li,12  
Merrin Man Long Leong,1,2,3 Michael Lutchenkov,1,2,3 Jin Hua Liang,1,2,3 Zhixuan Li,1,2,3 Yin Wang,1,2,3 Rishi Puri,13 Ari Melnick,12 
Michael R. Green,11 John M. Asara,14 Adonia E. Papathanassiu,10 Duane R. Wesemann,7 ,8,9 Steven P . Gygi,4 Vamsi K. Mootha,2,6,9 
and Benjamin E. Gewurz1,2,3,5
1Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 2Center for Integrated Solutions in Infectious Disease, Broad Institute, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA. 3Department of Microbiology and 4Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 5Harvard Program in Virology, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 
6Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 7Department of Medicine, Division of Allergy and Clinical 
Immunology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 8Ragon Institute of Massachusetts General Hospital and 9Broad Institute of Harvard and 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. 10Ergon Pharmaceuticals, LLC, Silver Spring, Maryland, USA. 11Department of Lymphoma/Myeloma, University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. 12Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology & Medical Oncology, Weill Cornell Medicine, New York, New York, USA. 13Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA. 14Mass Spectrometry Core, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
Authorship note: RG and YS contributed equally to this work.
Conflict of interest: AEP is an employee of Ergon Pharmaceuticals Ltd. VKM is a 
consultant to 5AM Ventures. AM has research funding from Janssen, Epizyme, and 
Daiichi Sankyo. AM has consulted for Exo Therapeutics, Treeline Biosciences, Astra 
Zeneca, and Epizyme. MRG reports research funding from Sanofi, Kite/Gilead, Abb-
Vie, and Allogene Therapeutics; consulting for AbbVie, Allogene Therapeutics, and 
Bristol Myers Squibb; honoraria from Bristol Myers Squibb, Daiichi Sankyo, and DAVA 
Oncology; and stock ownership of KDAc Therapeutics.
Copyright: © 2025, Guo et al. This is an open access article published under the terms 
of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
Submitted: September 27 , 2024; Accepted: September 3, 2025;  
Published: September 9, 2025.
Reference information: J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258. 
https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI186258.
The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI1862582
To model responses to key T cell–dependent stimuli, B cells were 
instead stimulated with trimeric CD40 ligand (CD40L) and/or 
IL-4 (Figure 1, A and B). We also activated B cells with CD40L + 
CpG to model bystander B cell activation or with CD40L + α IgM 
± IL-4 to model antigen receptor stimulation with T cell help. To 
facilitate cross-comparison between agonists, we tested the effects 
of 5 different concentrations for each agonist to define a dosage 
that produced a maximal or near-maximal response (Supplemen-
tal Figure 1, A and B; supplemental material available online 
with this article; https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI186258DS1). We 
then profiled cells at 24 hours after stimulation, a time point prior 
to the first mitotic division of both naive B cells and circulating 
memory B cells (Supplemental Figure 2, A and B), in order to 
permit cross-comparison with the basal unstimulated state. Indic-
ative of distinct biological outcomes, B cells exhibited markedly 
different morphological changes in response to these stimuli. For 
instance, B cells stimulated by α IgM + CpG appeared larger but 
formed smaller aggregates by comparison with cells stimulated by 
T cell–dependent signals (Supplemental Figure 3A).
In order to systematically investigate how individual versus 
combinatorial stimuli altered B cell expression and immunometab-
olism networks, we conducted parallel RNA-Seq, tandem-mass-tag 
mass spectrometry proteomic and polar metabolite liquid chro-
matography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) profiling across all 10 
conditions (Supplemental Table 1). Principal component analysis 
(PCA) yielded triplicates that closely clustered together from each 
condition, indicating a high level of reproducibility across condi-
tions and human donors (Figure 1, C–E). Notably, transcriptomic 
responses to T cell–dependent stimuli modeled by CD40L + IL-4 
± αIgM clustered oppositely from responses to T cell–independent 
αIgM + CpG (Figure 1C).
We next cross-compared differentially expressed genes 
(DEGs), differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), and differen-
tially expressed metabolites (DEMs) across the 10 conditions to 
broadly characterize stimulus-specific B cell responses. Response 
magnitude was generally higher at the transcriptomic than pro-
teomic level at this early time point, with CD40L or CpG stim-
ulation eliciting larger numbers of DEGs than stimulation by 
either αIgM or IL-4 alone (Figure 1F and Supplemental Figure 
3B). Interestingly, similar numbers of DEGs were observed in 
response to CD40L, CpG, and to the combinatorial stimuli test-
ed, suggesting dominant effects of these ligands. Combinatorial 
stimulation differentially regulated a large gene set, with 1,077 
DEGs overlapping across all 5 combinatorial stimulation groups, 
despite these varying by the degree of T cell–dependent versus T 
cell–independent signaling (Supplemental Figure 3C).
Despite a degree of overlap, we nonetheless observed that each of 
the 9 stimulation conditions most dynamically regulated a small set 
of genes often implicated in B cell biology, most of which were upreg-
ulated (Supplemental Figure 4). These included well-characterized  
T cell–dependent genes upregulated by CD40/IL-4, including  
AICDA, which encodes the enzyme AID, and XBP1, which stimu-
lates plasma cell differentiation (30). Interestingly, IL-4 stimulation 
alone most highly induced the transcriptional repressor BCL6, which 
is critical for germinal center formation and for preventing prema-
ture B cell activation and differentiation (31, 32) (Supplemental Fig-
ure 4). By contrast, T cell–independent αIgM + CpG costimulation 
B cells can also be activated by innate immune signals, includ-
ing pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) that are 
recognized by TLRs. TLR9 recognizes unmethylated CpG dinu-
cleotides within endosomal compartments, where it then signals 
through the adaptor protein MyD88 to activate IL-1 receptor–asso-
ciated kinases 1 and 4 to activate NF-κB, MAPK, and IFN regula-
tory factor pathways (8–13). PAMPs provide the adaptive immune 
system with an additional layer of self/nonself-discrimination (14, 
15). TLR9 signaling, together with BCR stimulation, drives type 
1 T cell–independent responses (2). By contrast, certain highly 
multivalent antigens trigger type 2 T cell–independent respons-
es (16). However, TLR9 can downmodulate antigen presentation 
and disrupt affinity maturation downstream of BCR engagement 
(17). Gain-of-function CD79 and MyD88 mutations hyperactivate 
BCR/TLR9 signaling in several types of lymphoma, including the 
diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) MyD88/CD79B-mutated 
(MCD) subtype (18–20). MCD DLBCLs are aggressive and typi-
cally have inferior clinical outcomes, highlighting the need for novel 
therapeutic approaches (19). In MCD DLBCL, TLR9/BCR coact-
ivation drives the formation of the internalized MyD88-TLR9-
BCR (My-T-BCR) complex, which hyperactivates mTOR from late 
endosomes (21). TLR signaling also plays key roles in B cell auto-
immune responses, including in systemic lupus erythematosus (8, 
22, 23). Interestingly, although TLR9 promotes loss of tolerance to 
DNA in lupus, it is protective against systemic lupus erythematosus 
through MyD88-independent roles (24, 25).
An open question is how immunometabolism networks sup-
port B cell activation, differentiation, rapid proliferation, and 
humoral responses to distinct stimuli. Whereas resting prima-
ry human B cells have low basal metabolism (26), B cells rapidly 
remodel metabolism pathways in response to receptor stimuli (7, 
27, 28). For example, human B cells rapidly increase oxidative 
phosphorylation (OXPHOS) and glycolysis in response to BCR 
stimulation, but are unable to sustain this in the absence of T cell 
help or TLR9 costimulation (7). IL-4 costimulates B cell responses, 
in part through increasing the abundance of α-ketoglutarate (αKG), 
a key TCA intermediate and anaplerotic substrate (29).
To gain insights into ex vivo primary human B cell respons-
es, we leveraged bulk transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic 
approaches to characterize responses to 9 major routes of immune 
receptor stimulation. BCR/TLR9 coactivation highly induced the 
enzyme branched chain amino acid transaminase 1 (BCAT1) and 
drove its lysosomal subcellular localization, where it synthesized 
branched chain amino acids (BCAAs) to support mTOR activation 
critical for primary B cell growth and survival. A BCAT1 antag-
onist diminished outgrowth of BCR/TLR9-driven lymphomas in 
vivo, including a patient-derived xenograft (PDX).
Results
Multiomics profiling of  differential primary human B cell responses to 
immune receptor stimuli. To systematically investigate acute prima-
ry human B cell transcriptional, translational, and metabolom-
ic responses to key T cell–dependent versus T cell–independent 
receptor cues, peripheral blood CD19 + cells were purified by neg-
ative selection. We modeled responses to key T cell–independent 
stimuli by anti-immunoglobulin cross-linking to drive BCR signal-
ing and/or with the TLR9-activating PAMP CpG oligonucleotide. 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
3J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI186258

The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI1862584
demands. Yet, large clusters of metabolic genes were more highly 
induced by αIgM + CpG than by CD40L + IL-4 (Supplemental 
Figure 5A). Gene ontology (GO) analysis indicated that OXPHOS, 
fatty acid metabolism, purine metabolism, and amino acid catabo-
lism were all more highly induced by αIgM + CpG than by CD40L 
+ IL-4 (Figure 2, A and B, and Supplemental Figure 5, A and B).
Components of all 5 electron transport chain complexes were 
the most highly upregulated by αIgM + CpG, whereas stimulation 
by a CD40L-containing regimen induced these to a lesser extent 
(Figure 2C). Phenotypically, Seahorse metabolic flux analysis 
identified that αIgM + CpG and CD40L + IL-4 nonetheless simi-
larly induced basal respiration and maximal respiratory capacity, 
perhaps suggesting posttranscriptional level compensatory regula-
tion (Figure 2D). Consistent with prior analyses (7), combinatorial 
αIgM + CpG stimuli more strongly induced oxygen consumption 
rate (OCR) than either αIgM or CpG alone. A similar phenom-
enon was observed with CD40L and IL-4 stimuli (Figure 2D). 
Of the transcription factors implicated in control of respiratory 
chain component expression, MYC was the most highly induced 
by CD40L and a regimen containing CD40L, although combi-
natorial αIgM + CpG also highly induced MYC (Supplemental 
Figure 5C). Notably, CD40 + IL-4 costimulation elicited a high-
er extracellular acidification rate, a measure of glycolysis (Figure 
2D). Taken together with our GSEA, which identified hypoxia 
gene upregulation in CD40L/IL-4–stimulated cells (Figure 2B), 
these results suggest that T cell–dependent B cell responses may be 
more reliant on aerobic glycolysis. However, while CD40L/IL-4 
and αIgM/CpG stimulation each significantly increased glucose 
uptake, αIgM + CpG did so more strongly (Figure 2E).
Across individual stimuli, CD40L or CpG more highly affect-
ed the intracellular B cell metabolite landscape than either αIgM 
or IL-4, consistent with the magnitude of their transcription level 
effects. As shown in Figure 2F, αIgM + CpG produced the strongest 
cellular metabolome-wide effect, which triggered higher metabolite 
levels of the purine and pyrimidine nucleotide, methionine, nicoti-
nate/nicotinamide, and glutathione metabolism pathways (Figure 
2, G and H, and Supplemental Table 1). Despite these differences, 
combinatorial CD40L + IL-4 + αIgM stimulation, which models 
a key T cell–dependent germinal center light zone B cell stimulus, 
produced somewhat overlapping metabolomic responses with T 
cell–independent αIgM + CpG stimulation (Figure 2F and Supple-
mental Figure 5, A and B). Collectively, these findings highlight 
that distinct types of receptor stimuli, including a T cell–dependent 
versus T cell–independent regimen, produce myriad metabolomic 
responses in primary human CD19 + B cells, with potential major 
effects on key humoral immune phenotypes.
selectively induced a wider range of targets, including the de novo 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide biosynthetic enzyme NAMPT 
and the neutral amino acid transporter SLC7A5 (Supplemental 
Figure 4). CpG alone, but to a greater extent α IgM + CpG, highly 
induced PRDM1, which encodes BLIMP1, the master regulator of 
antibody-secreting cell differentiation. Gene Set Enrichment Analy-
sis (GSEA) (33) highlighted that αIgM + CpG stimuli more strongly 
induced mTORC1 signaling, MYC targets, and OXPHOS (group 9, 
Figure 1, G and H), suggesting that T cell–independent stimulation 
may preferentially upregulate these key immunometabolic pathways. 
By contrast, CD40L + IL-4 or CD40L + IL-4 + α IgM stimulation 
more strongly induced TNF-α, IL-2/STAT5, and IFN-γ signaling 
(group 7, Figure 1, G and I). These gene sets included transcription 
factors, metabolic enzymes, and cell surface receptors with critical 
roles in B cell adhesion, activation, survival, and antigen presentation 
(Figure 1H), highlighting multiple levels of T/B cell crosstalk.
To gain further insights into B cell responses to T cell–dependent 
versus T cell–independent stimuli, we next directly cross-compared 
the CD40L + IL-4 versus αIgM + CpG conditions. Volcano plot 
analysis highlighted CD40L + IL-4 induction of mRNAs encoding 
the T cell chemoattractant chemokines CCL17 and CCL22, exem-
plifying B/T cell cross-communication even at the early 24-hour 
time point. Transcripts encoding multiple B cell surface proteins 
were likewise more highly induced by T cell–dependent signal-
ing, including FAS, ICAM-1, and CD23/FCER2. By contrast, 
αIgM + CpG more highly upregulated CD274, which encodes the 
immune checkpoint regulator PD-L1 (Figure 1J). On the protein 
level, CD40L + IL-4 more strongly upregulated the antiapoptotic 
proteins CFLAR/cFLIP and BCL2L1/Bcl-xL, even at this early 
time point, whereas αIgM + CpG more highly induced CLEC2D, 
the lectin receptor for the NK inhibitor receptor KLRB1. Taken 
together with effects on PD-L1, these results suggest that T cell–
independent stimulation may downmodulate key cellular immune 
responses. Suggestive also of key T cell–independent effects on B 
cell immunometabolism, αIgM + CpG also more highly induced 
dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR), the neutral amino acid trans-
porter (SLC7A5) and branched-chain amino acid transaminase  
1 (BCAT1), which are key regulators of folate, amino acid, and 
BCAA metabolism, respectively (Figure 1, J and K).
BCR and TLR9 coactivation hyperactivates key B cell immunometab-
olism pathways. To gain further insights into how T cell–dependent 
versus independent stimuli affect primary B cell immunometabo-
lism, we next analyzed metabolic gene responses using a curated 
gene set (34). As Figure 2A shows, αIgM + CpG and CD40/IL-4 
similarly induced multiple metabolic pathways, albeit to varying 
degrees, indicating responses to somewhat overlapping metabolic 
Figure 1. Receptor-driven B cell activation results in different cellular responses. (A) Schematic of T cell–dependent or –independent B cell activation 
pathways. (B) Multiomics profiling experimental design. Human primary peripheral blood CD19+ B cells were isolated by negative selection from 3 donors 
and stimulated by CD40L (50 ng/mL), CpG (0.5 μM), IL -4 (20 ng/mL), αIgM (1 mg/mL), or combinations thereof for 24 hours and then profiled. (C–E) 
Principal component analysis of transcriptomic (C), proteomic (D), and metabolomic (E) datasets. (F) Numbers of differentially expressed genes (DEGs), 
proteins (DEP), and metabolites (DEMs) across conditions using the numbering scheme in B, relative to unstimulated cells and using a P value < 0.01 and 
a fold-change > 2 or <0.5 cutoff. (G) GSEA of pathways enriched across conditions at the RNA (top) or protein (bottom) levels. (H) Heatmap visualization 
of row z scores of mRNA and protein abundance in GSEA Hallmark mTORC1 signaling (top) and MYC target V2 (bottom) gene set. (I) Heatmap visualization 
of row z scores of mRNA and protein abundance in GSEA TNF-α signaling via NF-κB gene set. (J) Volcano plot visualization of –log10 (P value statistical 
significance) versus log2 (mRNA abundance fold change) from RNA-Seq analysis of B cells stimulated with αIgM + CpG versus CD40L + IL -4. (K) Volcano 
plot visualization of –log10 (P value statistical significance) versus log2 (protein abundance fold change) from proteomic analysis of B cells stimulated with 
αIgM + CpG versus CD40L + IL -4.
The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
5J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI186258

The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI1862586
Multiple targets induced by αIgM/CpG stimulation, such as 
ASNS and MTHFD2, are targets of the activating transcription fac-
tor 4 (ATF4), which serves as a central mediator of cellular respons-
es to stress, including metabolic adaptation (35). For instance, 
ATF4 drives integrated stress responses by promoting expression 
of cytoprotective genes that program key metabolic pathways (36, 
37). We therefore further investigated agonist responses on ATF4 
expression. Transcriptomic analyses identified that multiple stim-
uli, including αIgM + CpG and CD40L + IL-4, increased ATF4 
mRNA levels by approximately 2-fold (Supplemental Figure 6A). 
ATF4 upregulation on the protein level was also observed by immu-
noblot (Supplemental Figure 6B). Given ATF4 roles in metabolic 
adaptation, we tested whether ATF4 induction was mTOR depen-
dent. Indeed, blockade of mTORC1 and 2 by the small molecule 
antagonist Torin 1 prevented ATF4 induction in αIgM/CpG-stimu-
lated Rael Burkitt B cells (Supplemental Figure 6C).
BCAT1 is essential for BCR/TLR9-driven B cell proliferation. We 
observed that BCR/TLR9 costimulation markedly upregulated 
BCAT1 expression on the mRNA and protein levels, whereas it 
was induced to a much lesser extent or not at all by the other stim-
uli (Figure 3A and Supplemental Figure 7A). BCAT1 is an ami-
notransferase that can either synthesize or catabolize the BCAAs 
leucine, isoleucine, and valine in reversible reactions, but it has not 
previously been studied in B cell activation. When running in the 
forward direction, BCAT1 converts the nitrogen donor glutamine 
and branched chain ketoacids (BCKAs) into αKG and BCAA, 
which support protein synthesis and mTOR activation. When run-
ning in the reverse direction, BCAT1 instead catabolizes αKG and 
BCAA to produce glutamine and BCKA, which fuel TCA and fatty 
acid synthesis (38–40).
We validated that αIgM + CpG more strongly upregulated 
BCAT1 by immunoblot (Figure 3C). By comparison, the mitochon-
drial BCAT2 isoform was expressed in unstimulated cells and was 
only modestly upregulated by any of the conditions (Figure 3, C 
and D). BCAT1 was induced by that αIgM + CpG in both periph-
eral blood CD27– naive B cells and in CD27 + circulating memory 
cells (Supplemental Figure 7B). Consistent with a key BCAA role 
in support of BCR/TLR9-costimulated B cells, the major plasma 
membrane BCAA transporter SLC7A5 was also highly induced 
(Figure 3, B–D). BCAA abundance was also higher in αIgM + 
CpG–stimulated cells than in B cells stimulated by combinato-
rial regimens, with the exception of CD40L + αIgM + IL-4. By 
contrast, subunits of the BCKA dehydrogenase complex (BCK-
DHA/B), which participate in BCKA catabolism to acetyl-CoA 
and CO2, were downmodulated on the protein level (Figure 3D). 
This raised the interesting possibility that BCAT1 may take on a 
selectively important role downstream of CD79 and MyD88.
To gain insights into BCAT1 roles in B cell activation, we test-
ed the effects of BCAT1 perturbation on proliferation and survival 
of peripheral blood B cells stimulated by αIgM + CpG versus by 
CD40L + IL-4. We electroporated freshly isolated B cells with Cas9 
ribonucleoprotein complexes containing control or BCAT1 target-
ing sgRNA (Supplemental Figure 7C) (41). Intriguingly, CRISPR 
BCAT1 KO strongly impaired αIgM + CpG– but not CD40L + 
IL-4–driven primary B cell outgrowth, as judged by a CFSE dye 
dilution assay (Figure 3E and Supplemental Figure 7D). Similar 
results were obtained with primary B cells treated with the highly 
selective leucine-based BCAT1 small molecule antagonist ERG245 
(42), suggestive of on-target effects at the level of BCAT1 (Figure 
3F and Supplemental Figure 7, E and F). We further validated 
ERG245 on-target effects by LC-MS analysis (Supplemental Fig-
ure 8 and Supplemental Table 2). In particular, ERG245 treatment 
produced similar results to BCAT1 KO in Rael Burkitt B cells, 
which we used to achieve higher levels of CRISPR editing than 
we could achieve in primary B cells (Supplemental Figure 8, A–C). 
To interrogate effects of BCAT1 KO on primary B cell survival, 
we next performed caspase activity assays. BCAT1 KO induced 
caspase-3/7 activity and cell death to a significantly greater extent 
in αIgM + CpG–stimulated than in CD40L + IL-4–stimulated pri-
mary B cells (Figure 3G and Supplemental Figure 9A).
We hypothesized that BCAT1 may be needed to support 
mTOR in αIgM + CpG–stimulated cells, given that α IgM + CpG 
most highly activated GSEA Hallmark mTORC1 signaling at the 
RNA and protein levels (Figure 1G). In support, proteomic analysis 
highlighted that clusters of mTORC1 pathway targets were more 
highly upregulated by αIgM + CpG than by CD40L/IL-4 stimula-
tion, including multiple components of the glycolysis, one-carbon 
metabolism, and amino acid metabolism pathways (Figure 3H). 
Consistent with this result, mTORC1 target S6K phosphorylation 
levels were higher in α IgM + CpG–stimulated cells, and BCAT1 
KO strongly impaired S6K phosphorylation (Figure 3I). BCAT1 
was similarly important for αIgM + CpG–driven phosphorylation 
of mTORC1 serine 2448, which is indicative of mTOR activation. 
Additionally, immunoblot analysis revealed that αIgM + CpG 
induced a much higher level of phospho-S6, further indicating 
hyperactivated mTORC1 signaling. Although phosphorylation 
of the mTOR-negative regulator AMPK was somewhat higher in 
αIgM + CpG–stimulated cells, this was not affected by BCAT1 KO, 
suggesting alternative route(s) by which BCAT1 supports mTOR. 
Since mTORC1 regulates translation, we also tested the translation  
Figure 2. Cross-comparison of αIgM + CpG versus CD40/IL -4–driven B cell metabolism remodeling. (A) Gene ontology (GO) biological process analysis of 
genes differentially expressed in B cells stimulated with αIgM + CpG versus CD40L + IL -4, using a curated metabolism gene set (34). (B) GSEA Hallmark 
pathway analysis of oxidative phosphorylation (top) and hypoxia genes in CD differentially expressed genes in B cells stimulated with αIgM + CpG versus 
CD40L + IL -4. (C) Heatmap analysis of mRNA encoding electron transport chain (ETC) components in cells stimulated as indicated. Columns display z score 
values for each ETC gene, produced by cross-comparison of the 10 conditions. (D) Seahorse oxygen consumption rate (OCR, top) and extracellular acidifi-
cation rate (ECAR, bottom) of primary B cells stimulated by indicated conditions for 24 hours and subject to flux analysis in the presence of indicated ETC 
inhibitors. Mean ± SEM from n = 7 replicates shown. P values calculated by 2-way ANOVA. (E) FACS analysis of primary B cell glucose analogue 2-(N-(7-
nitrobenz-2-oxa-1,3-diazol-4-yl)amino)-2-deoxyglucose uptake at the indicated time points after stimulation. Mean ± SEM from n = 3 replicates. P values 
calculated by 2-tailed paired Student’s t test. (F) Heatmap analysis showing intracellular metabolite z scores in primary human B cells stimulated for 24 
hours as indicated. (G) Volcano plot visualization of –log10 (P value statistical significance) versus log2 (fold-change metabolite abundance) from primary B 
cells stimulated by αIgM + CpG versus CD40L + IL -4 for 24 hours from n = 3 replicates. (H) MetaboAnalyst pathway enrichment analysis of metabolites that 
were higher in αIgM + CpG–stimulated cells than CD40L + IL -4–stimulated cells at 24 hours.
The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
7J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI186258

The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI1862588
3K). Together, these results indicate that BCAT1 is highly induced 
by combinatorial BCR + TLR stimulation in vivo, where it again 
plays key roles in support of mTOR activation.
Analysis of  mediators that induce BCAT1 and of  B cell genes regu-
lated by BCAT1. To gain insights into pathways that induce BCAT1 
expression, we stimulated human peripheral blood B cells by αIgM 
+ CpG in the presence of DMSO vehicle versus well-characterized 
small molecule inhibitors against downstream BCR and TLR9 
mediators. Inhibition of the kinases SYK or BTK by R406 or ibruti-
nib, respectively, each strongly impaired BCAT1 induction, suggest-
ing the importance of BCR proximal tyrosine kinase signaling in 
driving BCAT1 expression (Supplemental Figure 11A). Inhibition 
of PI3 kinase by idelalisib blocked BCAT1 induction to a similar 
extent, likewise implicating kinase signaling downstream of TLR9 
(Supplemental Figure 11A). By contrast, inhibition of NFAT, canon-
ical NF-κB, or JAK/STAT only modestly impaired BCAT1 induc-
tion (Supplemental Figure 11A). Interestingly, MAPK and mTOR 
are activated downstream of both BCR and TLR9, and inhibition 
of ERK, JNK, or p38 MAPK or mTOR each strongly impaired 
BCAT1 induction (Supplemental Figure 11A). Taken together, 
these data highlight roles of kinase signaling in rapid BCAT1 induc-
tion by BCR + TLR9 costimulation.
To next characterize potential BCAT1 roles in transcription 
regulation downstream of BCR and TLR9, we performed RNA-
Seq on αIgM + CpG–stimulated BCAT1 CRISPR KO versus 
control primary human B cells. BCAT1 KO upregulated 145 and 
downregulated 101 B cell genes at 24 hours of stimulation. GO 
analysis indicated that BCAT1 depletion resulted in downregula-
tion of E2F targets and G2-M checkpoint genes in αIgM + CpG–
stimulated cells (Supplemental Figure 11B and Supplemental Table 
3). The most highly downregulated genes included IL-10; the DNA 
methylation enzyme UHRF1; the transcription factor BATF; and 
the genes CDC25A, MCM10, and PCNA, each of which have key 
cell cycle roles (Supplemental Figure 11C). We validated that αIgM 
+ CpG induced IL-10 on the protein level in primary B cells. Fur-
thermore, BCAT1 KO reduced IL-10 abundance to levels observed 
in CD40L/IL-4–stimulated cells, in which BCAT1 KO did not sub-
stantially alter IL-10 levels (Supplemental Figure 11D). Interesting-
ly, BCAT1, IL-10, and PD-L1 mRNA amounts were each markedly 
higher at 48 hours of αIgM/CpG than in CD40L/IL-4–stimulated 
cells (Supplemental Figure 11E). Since IL-10 is a B regulatory cell 
hallmark (48–52), our data raise the possibility that BCAT1 may 
support B regulatory cell function upon BCR/TLR9 activation.
rate using puromycin pulse labeling, which detects puromycin 
incorporation into elongating protein chains (43). Puromycin 
labeling indicated that αIgM + CpG more highly induced nascent 
polypeptide synthesis than the other conditions (Supplemental 
Figure 9B). Similar results were observed by flow cytometry analy-
sis of total protein content and cell size, which is also controlled by 
mTORC1 (44). However, total protein content was slightly higher 
in cells stimulated by CD40L + αIgM + IL-4 (Supplemental Figure 
9C). These findings indicate that BCAT1 is a major positive regula-
tor of mTOR in αIgM + CpG–stimulated B cells.
BCR/TLR9 costimulation induces BCAT1 in vivo. To investigate 
whether BCAT1 is induced by BCR/TLR costimulation in support 
of mTOR activation in vivo, we utilized murine models. Since LPS 
is more commonly used than CpG to activate TLR signaling in 
mice, we first cross-compared BCAT1 induction in ex vivo murine 
splenic B cells stimulated by LPS + αIgM versus CpG + αIgM. 
Although both induced BCAT1, LPS + αIgM stimulation did so 
more strongly (Supplemental Figure 10A). We then stimulated 
C57BL/6J mice by i.p. injection of PBS vehicle, LPS + αIgM, or 
agonistic aCD40 mAb BE0016-2, together with IL-4, which we 
complexed with the mAb 11B11 to stabilize IL-4 in vivo (45, 46), 
in the absence or presence of ERG245. Consistent with our human 
B cell results, BCAT1 expression was highly induced on the protein 
level in murine splenic B cells by αIgM + LPS but not by CD40 + 
IL-4 stimulation (Figure 3J). Although ERG245 did not apprecia-
bly alter BCAT1 induction, it blocked αIgM + LPS–driven mTOR 
activation, as judged by S6K phosphorylation (Figure 3J).
To further test BCAT1 induction and support of mTOR 
activation in vivo in the context of physiological BCR stimula-
tion, we next utilized MD4 transgenic mice (47), which express 
BCR directed against hen egg lysosome (HEL). As observed with 
C57BL/6J mice above, BCAT1 was highly induced by incubation 
of ex vivo MD4 splenic B cells with HEL together with LPS, but 
not appreciably by negative control ovalbumin or by CD40L + 
IL-4 stimulation (Supplemental Figure 10B). We then stimulated 
MD4 mice by i.p. injection with LPS + HEL or by aCD40 + IL-4 
(stabilized by aIL-4 as above) for 48 hours, together with vehi-
cle or ERG245. BCAT1 expression was again highly induced by 
BCR stimulation by HEL, together with LPS, but not appreciably 
by aCD40 + IL-4 stimulation. Importantly, LPS + HEL strongly 
induced S6K phosphorylation in a manner that was nearly com-
pletely blocked by ERG245, whereas S6K phosphorylation down-
stream of aCD40 + IL-4 was not diminished by ERG245 (Figure 
Figure 3. BCR/TLR9 costimulation highly induces BCAT1, which is essential for αIgM/CpG but not CD40/IL -4–driven primary B cell mTORC1 activation, 
growth, and survival. (A) Log2-normalized protein abundance from proteomic analysis of primary B cells after 24-hour stimulation. BCAT1 protein levels 
are highlighted in red. (B) BCAA metabolism schematic. Cytosolic BCAT1 and mitochondrial BCAT2 catalyze reversible transamination of BCKA and BCAA.. 
(C) Immunoblot of BCAT1, BCAT2, SLC7A5, and DDX1 from whole-cell lysates (WCLs) of 24-hour stimulated B cells. DDX1 was the load control. (D) Heatmap 
analysis of key BCAA pathway RNA, protein, and metabolite z scores in 24-hour stimulated primary B cells. (E) CFSE analysis of primary B cells electro-
porated with Cas9 ribonucleoprotein complexes with control or BCAT1 targeting sgRNA, then stimulated for 5 days. (F) CFSE analysis of primary B cells 
treated with vehicle or ERG245 (100 mM) and stimulated. (G) Mean ± SEM caspase-3/7 activity of primary B cells with indicated Cas9 ribonucleoproteins 
after 48 hour stimulation. P values calculated by 2-tailed paired Student’s t test. (H) Heatmap of selected mTORC1 pathway target gene z scores, shown 
in vertical columns, in 24-hour stimulated primary B cells. Metabolic enzymes upregulated by αIgM + CpG vs. CD40L + IL -4 stimulation are highlighted. 
(I) Immunoblots of WCLs from 24-hour stimulated primary B cells expressing indicated Cas9 ribonucleoproteins. (J) Immunoblot of WCLs from C57BL/6J 
murine splenic B cells, harvested 48 hours after i.p. injection of PBS vehicle, 20 mg LPS + 250 mg αIgM, or 250 mg aCD40 antibody + 1 mg murine IL -4 in 
complex with 10 mg anti–IL -4, with vehicle or 20 mg/kg ERG245. (K) Immunoblot of WCLs from MD4 murine splenic B cells, harvested 48 hours after i.p. 
injection of PBS vehicle, 20 mg LPS + 10 mg HEL, or 250 mg aCD40 antibody + 1 mg IL -4 in complex with 10 mg αIL -4, with vehicle or 20 mg/kg ERG245. 
Representative of n = 3 replicates (E, F, and I–K). See also Supplemental Figure 4.
The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
9J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI186258
Supplemental Figure 12H). Notably, ERG245 did not significantly 
change aspartate abundance, despite it being a substrate for simi-
lar transamination reactions (Supplemental Figure 12I). Volcano 
plot and metabolism pathway impact analysis highlighted that 
ERG245 most strongly reduced the abundance of nucleotides and 
glutathione in BCR/TLR9-stimulated B cells, potentially due to 
effects at the level of mTOR (Figure 4, H and I) and reflecting that 
resting human B cells have low nucleotide and glutathione levels 
and must rapidly increase them upon activation (26). These find-
ings suggest that BCAT1 supports BCAA pools and mTOR upon 
BCR/TLR9-driven B cell activation.
Since import can also substantially affect BCAA intracellular 
levels, we next inhibited the plasma membrane neutral transport-
er LAT3 (also called SLC43A1), which is a major transporter of 
neutral amino acids including leucine, isoleucine, and valine. LAT3 
inhibition by the highly selective small molecule antagonist Venu-
loside A (53) did not appreciably affect proliferation of αIgM + 
CpG–stimulated peripheral blood B cells. However, Venuloside A 
LAT3 inhibition impaired αIgM + CpG–driven peripheral blood 
B cell proliferation when dosed in combination with either of two 
ERG245 doses, to a significantly greater degree than ERG245 
alone at either dose (Supplemental Figure 13). These results are 
consistent with a model in which BCAT1 inhibition renders cells 
more dependent on LAT3-mediated BCAA uptake.
BCR/TLR9 signaling targets BCAT1 to lysosome membranes to 
support mTOR. A complex of lysosomal membrane proteins sense 
amino acid levels to control mTORC1 recruitment and activation. 
When amino acids are abundant, mTORC1 is recruited to the out-
er lysosomal membrane, where it is activated by RHEB (54–57). 
When leucine levels are low , several mechanisms block mTORC1 
activation. Sestrin2 inhibits mTORC1 lysosomal recruitment 
and activation (58), SAR1B inhibits the mTORC1 activator 
GATOR2(59), leucyl-tRNA synthetase LARS fails to activate 
Rag GTPase (60), and Raptor acetylation decreases to further 
downmodulate mTORC1(61). Because BCAT1 is thought to be 
cytoplasmic, we hypothesized that BCR/TLR9-induced BCAT1 
supports mTORC1 by producing BCAA in close proximity with 
lysosomes. To test this, we performed confocal microscopy on pri-
mary B cells at rest or 24 hours after stimulation by CD40L/IL-4 
versus αIgM + CpG, which revealed a high degree of colocaliza-
tion between BCAT1 and lysosomal-associated membrane protein 
1 (LAMP1) but not with the mitochondrial marker translocase of 
outer mitochondrial membrane 20 homolog (TOMM20) (Figure 
5A and B, and Supplemental Figure 14, A–C). Thus, a major pop-
ulation of BCAT1 homes to lysosomes in BCR/TLR9-stimulated 
primary human B cells, presumably to the lysosomal outer mem-
brane as BCAT1 does not appear to contain a targeting sequence 
for lysosomal uptake.
To further investigate BCAT1 subcellular localization, we 
then leveraged the LysoIP approach, in which stably expressed 
HA-epitope tagged transmembrane protein 192 (TMEM192) is 
used as a bait for lysosomal affinity purification (62) ( Figure 5, 
C and D). We stably expressed TMEM192 in Rael Burkitt lym-
phoma B cells, in which BCAT1 and LAMP1 colocalization was 
increased by α IgM + CpG stimulation (Supplemental Figure 
14D). The lysosomal marker LAMP1 was enriched in material 
anti–HA-TMEM192 immunopurified from Rael cells, whereas 
BCAT1 supports BCAA production in BCR/TLR9-stimulated B cells. 
We next used [13C]-leucine_m+6 and [15N]-glutamine_m+2 isotope 
tracing to investigate the directionality of BCR/TLR9-induced 
BCAT1 BCAA metabolism. To trace BCAT1 conversion of BCAA 
and αKG to BCKA and glutamate (Glu), we incubated αIgM + 
CpG–stimulated cells with 0.381mM [ 13C]-leucine_m+6 to survey 
for the appearance of labeled BCKA catabolites. However, since 
BCKA can then be reaminated by BCAT1 using glutamine (Gln) as 
the amino donor, we also added 2 mM [ 15N]-Gln_m+2. We mea-
sured BCAA catabolism by detecting [13C]-ketoisocaproate (KIC)_
m+6 levels. Likewise, we measured BCAA anabolism by detecting 
the appearances of [ 15N]-labeled leucine (Leu)_m+1, isoleucine 
(Ile)_m+1, and valine (Val)_m+1 (Figure 4A). B cells were pretreat-
ed with either vehicle or ERG245 for 1 hour before αIgM + CpG 
stimulation, and then incubated in medium containing [ 13C]-Leu_
m+6 and [15N]-Gln_m+2 starting from 24 hours after stimulation. 
Labeled and unlabeled metabolite abundance was quantitated at 
32, 48, and 72 hours after stimulation (Figure 4B).
Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry metabolite tracing 
indicated that BCAT1 does contribute to B cell BCKA pools upon 
its induction by αIgM + CpG, as [13C]-KIC_m+6 levels significant-
ly increased between 32 and 72 hours after stimulation. [13C]-KIC_
m+6 levels then decreased at the 72-hour time point, potentially 
indicating a balance between production and consumption (Fig-
ure 4C and Supplemental Table 4). BCAT1 inhibition by ERG245 
strongly decreased [13C]-KIC_m+6 levels at all time points, indicat-
ing BCAT1 roles in KIC generation (Figure 4C). However, we also 
observed steadily increasing [15N]-labeled Leu_m+1, Ile_m+1, and 
to a lesser extent Val_m+1 levels, each of which were suppressed 
by ERG245, indicating that BCAT1 also consumes glutamine to 
synthesize BCAA and produce αKG ( Figure 4, D–F). [ 13C,15N]-
Leu_m+7 composed the majority of the [ 15N]-labeled Leu pool, 
indicating that BCAT1 preferentially reaminated [13C]-KIC_m+6 at 
this time point (Figure 4D). However, the fraction of [ 15N]-labeled 
Val_m+1 was comparatively smaller, suggesting that BCAT1 may 
preferentially synthesize Leu and Ile at the early stage of αIgM + 
CpG–driven B cell activation (Figure 4, D–F). In contrast to serving 
as a substrate for BCAA biosynthesis, [ 13C]-KIC_m+6 was not a 
major TCA cycle anaplerotic input. TCA intermediate m+2 isotope 
signals remained low throughout the time course, despite marked 
increases in unlabeled TCA metabolite abundance (Supplemen-
tal Figure 12, A–G). Intriguingly, ERG245 nonetheless strongly 
decreased levels of most TCA cycle intermediates, indicating that 
BCAT1 plays a crucial role in coordinating TCA metabolism in 
BCR/TLR9 coactivated cells, potentially via effects on mTOR 
(Supplemental Figure 12, A–G).
To broadly profile BCAT1 contributions to α IgM + CpG 
versus CD40L/IL-4 coactivated peripheral blood B cells, we per-
formed LC/MS metabolome profiling on cells stimulated in the 
presence of DMSO vehicle control or ERG245. Whereas ERG245 
had minimal effects on unstimulated cells, ERG245 broadly 
restrained BCR/TLR9-driven metabolite increases. Comparative-
ly smaller effects were observed on CD40L/IL-4–treated cells, and 
ERG245 only modestly affected the metabolome (Figure 4G and 
Supplemental Table 5). Leucine-isoleucine and 2-keto-isovalerate 
levels were higher in α IgM + CpG–stimulated cells, whereas glu-
tamine was higher in CD40/IL-4–stimulated cells (Figure 4G and 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI18625810

The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
11J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI186258
BCAT1 inhibition suppresses MCD DLBCL tumor growth in vitro 
and in vivo. mTORC1 is hyperactivated by the My-T-BCR com-
plex in MCD DLBCL, where BCR, TLR9, and MyD88 form a 
super-complex that colocalizes with mTORC1 on endolysosomes 
(21). To gain insights into whether TLR9/BCR coactivation causes 
similar remodeling in primary B cells and in MCD DLBCL, we 
cross-compared proteomes from αIgM/CpG-stimulated primary 
B cells or the tumor-derived MCD DLBCL HBL1 cell line with 
resting primary B cells. Interestingly, a group of metabolic proteins 
were similarly upregulated in αIgM + CpG and in HBL1, presum-
ably by My-T-BCR signaling in both contexts, including BCAT1 
and SLC7A5. Using a fold-change of 2 or greater as the threshold, 
we identified that 1,280 proteins were commonly upregulated by 
αIgM + CpG and in HBL1, relative to their resting primary B cell 
levels (Figure 6A and Supplemental Table 7). STRING analysis 
(68) identified multiple metabolic subnetworks upregulated in both 
activated B cell contexts, including BCAA metabolism (Figure 6B).
To determine whether BCAT1 activity is likewise important for 
MCD DLBCL proliferation in vitro, we tested ERG245 effects on 
HBL1 and OCI-LY10. ERG245 reduced phospho-S6 levels, indicat-
ing its inhibitory effects on mTOR signaling (Figure 6C). ERG245 
significantly reduced proliferation of both MCD cell lines (Figure 
6D), which was further supported by the observation that CRISPR 
editing of BCAT1 also impaired HBL1 proliferation (Figure 6E). To 
extend this observation in vivo, we established HBL1 xenografts in 
NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm1Wjl/SzJ (NSG) mice. HBL1 tumors 
were grown for approximately 14 days after implantation until 
tumor volumes reached 32–64 mm3. Mice were then treated week-
ly with either vehicle control or ERG245 at doses of 5 or 20 mg/
kg via i.p. injection (Figure 6F). There was no significant difference 
in body weight observed between mice treated with vehicle control 
versus ERG245 at either the 5 or 20 mg/kg dose over the following 3 
weeks (Supplemental Figure 14G), indicating that ERG245 was well 
tolerated. However, tumor volumes were significantly smaller from 
day 12 onward in ERG245-treated mice in a dose-dependent man-
ner (Figure 6G). Tumor volumes of OCI-LY10 xenografts were also 
significantly reduced by ERG245 (Supplemental Figure 14H). To fur-
ther extend these results, we next tested ERG245’s effects on an MCD 
DLBCL PDX model. Two weeks after establishment of the C007 
PDX, ERG245 was dosed 3 times per week at 20 mg/kg (Figure 6H). 
ERG245 significantly decreased PDX tumor volumes beginning at 
day 7 after ERG245 dosing and significantly increased body weight of  
C007 PDX–carrying mice (Figure 6I and Supplemental Figure 14I).
cytosolic GAPDH was highly depleted, suggesting successful 
lysosome isolation. Importantly, BCAT1 was also enriched in 
immunopurified lysosomes, particularly after α IgM + CpG stim-
ulation, even though in Rael cells total BCAT1 levels remained 
similar (Figure 5E). Confocal microscopy again highlighted that 
αIgM + CpG increased BCAT1/LAMP1 colocalization in Rael 
TMEM192+ cells (Supplemental Figure 14D). BCAT1/LAMP1 
colocalization was similarly evident in HBL1 MCD DLBCL cells 
(Supplemental Figure 14, E and F). These results suggest that 
BCR/TLR9 signaling contributes to BCAT1 lysosomal subcellu-
lar localization, likely at the outer membrane.
To gain further insights into how BCR/TLR9 stimulation 
remodels Rael lysosomes, we performed LC/MS proteomic pro-
filing of lysosomes immunopurified from α IgM + CpG versus 
unstimulated LysoIP Rael cells. Consistent with our immunoblot 
and microscopy analyses, BCAT1 was enriched in lysosomes 
purified from stimulated Rael cells (Figure 5F and Supplemental 
Table 6). Intriguingly, BCR/TLR9 signaling also increased lyso-
somal levels of LAMTOR1, which has a key role in assembly 
of the Ragulator complex that together with the Rag GTPases 
control mTORC1 lysosomal recruitment (63, 64). Further sug-
gestive of crosstalk between BCR/TLR9 and mTORC1 at the 
level of the lysosome, SLC38A1/2 abundance was also increased 
in lysosomes of stimulated Rael cells. SLC38A1/2 are membrane 
transporters that specialize in the uptake of neutral amino acids 
and that are implicated in mTORC1 regulation in T cells (65), but 
they have not yet been studied in B cells (Figure 5F and Supple-
mental Table 6). Of note, SLC38A2 family member SLC38A9 is 
a lysosomal membrane protein that is a major regulator of lyso-
somal amino acid sensing (66, 67).
To then directly investigate BCR/TLR coactivation effects on 
lysosomal BCAA and BCKA, we performed targeted LC/MS anal-
ysis in whole cells or in lysosomes immunopurified from resting 
versus αIgM + CpG–stimulated Rael HA-LysoIP cells. Whole-cell 
Leu, Ile, and Val BCAA pools each significantly increased upon 
BCR/TLR9 costimulation. However, lysosomal Leu and Ile levels 
instead substantially decreased, suggesting that these amino acids 
were exported from lysosomes upon αIgM + CpG stimulation. 
Whole-cell BCKAs remained unchanged by BCR/TLR stimula-
tion, whereas BCKAs were not detected in immunopurified lyso-
somes (Figure 5G). Collectively, our results support a model where 
BCAT1 augments Leu and Ile synthesis at the lysosomal membrane 
to support mTORC1 hyperactivation (Figure 5H).
Figure 4. BCR/TLR9 stimulation drives BCAA synthesis in human primary B cells. (A) Isotope tracing schematic. [13C]-L -leucine_m+6 was used to trace 
BCAT1 BCAA catabolism to a-keto-isocaproic acid (KIC); [15N]-glutamine_m+2 was used to monitor BCAT1 BCAA biosynthesis from KIC, a-keto-isovaleric 
acid (KIV), or a-keto b-methylvaleric acid (KMV). Gln, glutamine. Glu, glutamate. (B) Isotope tracing experimental design. Primary B cells from n = 4 donors 
were pretreated with vehicle or ERG245(100 μM) for 1 hour and then stimulated by αIgM + CpG for 24 hours in the presence of vehicle or ERG245. Cells 
were washed with PBS 3 times and resuspended in glutamine/leucine-free media supplemented with 381 mM 13C6-leucine and 2.054 mM 15N2-glutamine 
+ 10% dialyzed FBS. ERG245(100 μM) and αIgM + CpG stimulants were also refreshed at this time point. Intracellular metabolites were profiled at 8, 24, 
and 48 hours later. (C) Ion intensities of m+6-labeled and -unlabeled KIC at the indicated times in cells treated with vehicle control or ERG245. (D) Ion 
intensities of labeled and unlabeled leucine (Leu) at the indicated times in cells treated with vehicle control or ERG245. (E) Ion intensities of labeled and 
unlabeled isoleucine (Ile) at the indicated times in cells treated with vehicle control or ERG245. (F) Ion intensities of labeled and unlabeled valine (Val) at 
the indicated times in cells treated with vehicle control or ERG245. (G) Heatmap analysis of metabolite z scores in primary B cells treated with vehicle or 
ERG245 (100 μM) and stimulated as indicated for 24 hours. (H) Volcano plot visualization of –log10 (P value statistical significance) and log2 (fold-change 
metabolite abundance) from metabolomic analysis of ERG245-treated versus vehicle-treated primary B cells stimulated by αIgM + CpG for 24 hours from 
n = 4 replicates. (I) MetaboAnalyst pathway enrichment analysis of metabolites diminished by ERG245 treatment in αIgM + CpG–stimulated B cells at 24 
hours. P values were calculated by 2-way ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple-comparison test (C–F).
The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI18625812

The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
13J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI186258
BCAT1 is expressed in CD4 + T cells, where it drives BCAA 
catabolism to instead downmodulate mTORC1 activity (79). 
BCAT1 also catabolizes BCAA in activated macrophages (39). 
Interestingly, CD8 T cell BCAT1 instead supports effector functions, 
although it does not influence BCAA levels (42). We speculate that 
differences in glutamine and BCKA levels may account for these 
differences. Notably, increased glutamate levels in EZH2-mutant 
acute myelogenous leukemia drive BCAA production by BCAT1 to 
support mTORC1 and to restrict αKG levels (80). It will therefore 
be of interest to determine whether BCAT1 homes to lysosomes in 
these other hematopoietic cell contexts.
Our results indicate that BCAT1 is not required for CD40L 
+ IL-4–induced mTOR activation. Although BCAAs are well-  
established mTOR activators, other amino acids such as argi-
nine can also activate mTOR (81, 82). CD40L + IL-4 stimula-
tion may preferentially utilize alternative amino acid–dependent 
pathways for mTOR activation. Even under amino acid–depleted  
conditions, mTOR can remain active when AKT and ERK sig-
naling are elevated (83, 84). CD40L + IL-4 may induce stron-
ger activation of these pathways as compared with αIgM + CpG 
stimulation, thereby maintaining mTOR activity independently 
of BCAT1-mediated BCAA production.
Novel therapeutic targets are needed for the treatment of a 
wide range of pathological B cell states (71). BCAT1 may therefore 
constitute an intriguing metabolic vulnerability, including in MCD 
DLBCL and in certain autoimmunity states, including systemic 
lupus erythematosus, where BCR/TLR7 drives pathology. Since 
BCAT1 inhibition also increases CD4+ T cell mTORC1 activation 
and ameliorates CD8+ T cell exhaustion, BCAT1 antagonists may 
be particularly promising for DLBCL. BCAT1 antagonists may 
also exert synergy with glutaminase to further reduce BCAA levels 
and mTORC1. BCAT1 may also serve as a biomarker for patholog-
ical BCR/TLR9-driven B cell states.
We acknowledge several limitations of the above studies. First, 
most of our studies were performed in vitro so that we could char-
acterize the initial responses of peripheral blood primary human 
B cells to a range of defined receptor stimuli over a key time point 
of B cell activation and differentiation. Although extensive studies 
have been performed on murine B cells, we chose this approach to 
address the relative gap in studies of primary human B cell respons-
es. Although performed ex vivo, nearly all studies were done with-
in the first 24 hours of harvest, a time point prior to the onset of 
proliferation and designed to minimize the effects of tissue culture. 
However, key findings were validated in vivo using murine models. 
Future studies could utilize humanized mice to validate and extend 
aspects of these studies in vivo, although harvesting sufficient num-
bers of B cells would require significant cell handling after stimu-
lation such as FACS from explanted spleen, which could perturb 
Discussion
B lymphocytes are uniquely positioned to integrate a wide range 
of antigenic, PAMP , and T cell cues (1, 2, 69–72). As a result, it is 
hypothesized that a signaling code drives distinct B cell responses to 
receptor stimuli (28). However, much remains to be learned about 
how key T cell–dependent versus T cell–independent B cell stim-
uli remodel immunometabolism networks to control B cell activ-
ity. Here, we present a multiomics compendium of acute primary 
human CD19+ peripheral blood B cell responses to BCR, TLR9, 
CD40, and/or IL-4R activation, each of which are prominent driv-
ers of naive B cell responses. We found that BCR and TLR9 jointly 
induce PD-L1 as well as the transaminase BCAT1, which is target-
ed to lysosomes to support mTORC1 activation.
Immunometabolic regulation is critical for supporting B cell 
proliferation and effector functions (28, 73). Our data suggest 
that BCR/TLR9 induce BCAA production by BCAT1 at the 
lysosome membrane to support mTORC1 activation and B cell 
growth and survival. How BCAT1 homes to lysosomal mem-
branes remains an intriguing question. Since this has not been 
observed in other cell types, an intriguing possibility is that a 
complex containing the BCR and TLR9 analogous to the My-T-
BCR described in DLBCL may recruit BCAT1 to endolysosomes 
(21). Alternatively, BCR/TLR9 stimulation causes major lyso-
somal remodeling and may induce a protein or posttranslational 
modification to target BCAT1 to lysosomes. In support of this 
idea, highly spatially delineated roles are emerging as a theme 
in BCAT biology. For instance, a distinct spatially constrained 
mitotic spindle BCAT1-localized role was recently observed in 
epithelial cells (74), and BCAT2 also exerts a spatially regulated 
role, in which it forms a mitochondrial BCAA metabolon togeth-
er with branched-chain α -keto acid dehydrogenase to shuttle 
BCAA catabolites into the TCA cycle (75).
Although BCAT1 catalyzes reversible transamination reac-
tions, BCAA catabolism typically predominates (76, 77). We 
provide evidence that BCAT1 fluxes in both directions in BCR/
TLR9-stimulated cells, but the majority of labeled leucine was 
[13C,15N]-leucine (m+7), suggesting that BCAA synthesis pre-
dominates. We speculate that the specific location of BCAT1 can 
determine its catabolic and anabolic activity. To test this hypothe-
sis, subcellular mass spectrometry imaging (78) could be used to 
measure [13C,15N]-leucine in the lysosomal vicinity. Also suggestive 
of an anabolic role, BCR/TLR9 did not increase protein levels of 
the branched-chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase complex (BCKDC), 
which catalyzes the irreversible conversion of BCKA to acetyl- and 
succinyl-CoA for TCA metabolism. Notably, BCAT1 promotes 
BCAA production in BCR-ABL–driven chronic myelogenous leu-
kemia, in which BCAT1 blockade impairs B cell proliferation and 
causes differentiation (77).
Figure 5. BCR/TLR9 but not CD40/IL -4 costimulation targets BCAT1 to remodeled lysosomes. (A) Confocal microscopy analysis of BCAT1 (red) colocaliza-
tion with the lysosomal LAMP1 (top, green) or mitochondrial TOMM20 (bottom, green) markers in primary B cells stimulated for 24 hours as indicated. (B) 3D 
Z-stack reconstruction of BCAT1, LAMP1, and TOMM20 in primary B cells stimulated by αIgM + CpG for 24 hours. (C) Confocal analysis of BCAT1 and LAMP1 
colocalization in Rael TMEM192-HA+ B cells (HA-Lyso cells) stimulated by αIgM + CpG for 24 hours, as indicated. (D) Lyso-IP proteomic analysis workflow. (E) 
Immunoblot of whole-cell lysates or anti-HA immunopurified lysosomes from Rael Lyso cells stimulated as in D. (F) Volcano plot of –log10 (P value) versus 
log2 (fold-change) of tandem-mass-tag protein abundance in immunopurified lysosomes from Rael Lyso-IP cells as in D. (G) Normalized BCAAs and BCKA 
ion intensities in whole-cell lysates versus lysosomes immunopurified from Rael Lyso-IP cells as in D. P values were calculated by 2-tailed paired Student’s t 
test. (H) Schematic of BCAT1 lysosomal targeting and BCAA production to support mTORC1 hyperactivation.
The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI18625814

The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
15J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI186258
study examined male and female animals, and similar findings 
are reported for both sexes.
Cell lines, reagents, and antibodies. All cell lines, reagents, and anti-
bodies used in this study are detailed in the Supplemental Methods.
Primary human B cells. Discarded, deidentified leukocyte 
fractions left over from platelet donations were obtained from 
the Brigham and Women’s Hospital Blood Bank or from the 
Gulf Coast Medical Center after collection of informed consent. 
Blood cells were collected from platelet donors following insti-
tutional guidelines. Since these were deidentified samples, the 
gender was unknown. Our studies on primary human blood cells 
were approved by the Brigham & Women’s Hospital IRB. B cells 
from Gulf Coast Medical Center were used for RNA-Seq anal-
yses. Primary human B cells were isolated by negative selection 
using RosetteSep human B cell enrichment and EasySep human 
B cell enrichment kits (Stem Cell Technologies), according to the 
manufacturers’ protocols. B cell purity was confirmed by FACS 
analysis of plasma membrane CD19 positivity. Cells were then 
cultured with RPMI 1640 with 10% FCS; 7 × 10 6 B cells were 
used for each stimulation condition. Stimulants were added at 
the following concentrations: CD40L, 50 ng/mL (Enzo Life Sci-
ences); CpG, 0.5 μ M (IDT); IL-4, 20 ng/mL (R&D Systems); 
and αIgM, 1 μg/mL (Sigma-Aldrich.). Cells were cultured in the 
absence of stimulation or stimulated by CD40L only, CpG only, 
IL-4 only, α IgM only, CD40L + CpG, CD40L + IL-4, CpG + 
αIgM, CD40L + α IgM, and CD40L + α IgM + IL-4. Cells were 
treated for 24 hours. For each experiment, cells from 3 donors 
were isolated and treated separately. At 24 hours, cells were 
counted and viability was measured using trypan blue staining 
and counted on a TC20 automated cell counter (Bio-Rad).
Mice. For in vitro and in vivo B cell stimulation experiments, 
C57BL/6-Tg(IghelMD4)4Ccg/J (MD4, 002595) transgenic mouse 
strain (87) and C57BL/6J (stock 000664) were procured from The 
Jackson Laboratory. MD4 mice were maintained as hemizygous 
strains with C57BL/6J mice because homozygous MD4 strains 
breed poorly. All mice were bred and housed in a specific patho-
gen–free environment at the Karp Research Facility of Boston Chil-
dren’s Hospital. All mice used in this study were 6–8 weeks old 
and animal experiments were approved by the IACUC of Boston 
Children’s Hospital (approval 00001696).
For mouse xenograft experiments, NOD.Cg-Prkdcscid Il2rgtm-
1Wjl/SzJ (NSG) immunocompromised mice were procured from 
The Jackson Laboratory (stock number 005557) and maintained 
in Weill Cornell Medical Center (WCMC) in accordance with the 
IACUC of WCMC (2017-0035).
key metabolic, transcriptomic, and proteomic responses. Second, 
although effects of BCAT1 inhibition were studied on primary 
human B cells in vitro and in transformed human B cells in vivo, 
BCAT1 roles in primary human cells remain to examined in vivo. 
Given concurrent BCAT1 roles in T cell and macrophage activa-
tion, B cell–specific BCAT1-KO murine models could be used to 
characterize B cell–intrinsic BCAT1 roles in vivo. However, murine 
B cell responses may differ from those in humans. Third, our stud-
ies focused on purified B lymphocyte responses and therefore do 
not capture additional effects of a more complex immune milieu, 
such as occurs in secondary lymphoid organs. Future studies could 
harness human tonsil organoids, which provide a controlled yet 
rich cellular milieu for studies of B cell responses (85), though sec-
ondary effects of TLR9, CD40, and IL-4 stimulation on additional 
immune cells such as monocyte/macrophages could complicate 
such analyses. Fourth, most of our studies characterized bulk B cell 
responses to receptor stimuli rather than responses at the single-cell 
level. Future studies could harness single-cell RNA-Seq to charac-
terize distinct primary human B cell subpopulation responses to 
stimuli. Fifth, we performed lysosomal immunopurification assays 
in transformed rather than primary B cells because we were unable 
to achieve sufficient TMEM192 transgene expression in freshly iso-
lated human B cells within 24 hours of harvest. Finally, we used 
IL-4 in combination with CD40L, and it will be of interest to test 
effects of other B cell–activating cytokines such as IL-21 or IFN-γ, 
which also activate JAK/STAT pathways and which may therefore 
have considerable overlap in phenotypes with IL-4 (86).
In summary, we used multiomics profiling to systematically 
characterize primary human B cell responses to key receptor stimuli. 
Collectively, our studies provide a major resource for primary human 
B cell immunometabolism investigation. We identified major immu-
nometabolism pathways that differ on the transcriptional, proteomic, 
and metabolomic levels with receptor-driven metabolism reprogram-
ming. BCR/TLR9 but not CD40/IL-4 costimulation highly induced 
BCAT1, which trafficked to lysosomal membranes to support BCAA 
synthesis and mTORC1 hyperactivation. BCAT1 was critical for 
BCR/TLR9– but not CD40/IL-4–driven primary B cell growth and 
survival. BCAT1 inhibition significantly impaired growth of BCR/
TLR9 pathway–dependent MDC DLBCL xenografts in vivo, iden-
tifying BCAT1 as a promising B cell lymphoma therapeutic target.
Methods
Sex as a biological variable. Primary human B cells used in this 
study were isolated from deidentified, discarded leukocyte frac-
tions and may be derived from both male and female donors. Our 
Figure 6. BCAT1 is highly expressed in BCR/TLR9-driven MCD DLBCL, where it supports B cell proliferation in vitro and in vivo. (A) Volcano plot com-
paring tandem-mass-tag proteomic log2 (fold change) of whole cell protein abundance in HBL1 DLBCL versus unstimulated primary B cell (y axis) versus 
24 hours αIgM + CpG–stimulated versus unstimulated primary B cell (x axis). Proteins from a curated metabolic gene set are shown (34). From n = 3 
proteomics dataset. (B) String analysis of protein-protein interactions among factors upregulated in both αIgM + CpG–stimulated and HBL1 (fold change 
>2) relative to unstimulated primary B cells. (C) Immunoblots of whole-cell lysates from HBL1 cells treated with vehicle, 10, 50, and 100 μM ERG245 as 
indicated for 24 hours. (D) Growth curve analysis of vehicle or 100 μM ERG245-treated HBL1 (left) or OCI-L Y10 MCD DLBCL cells. Mean ± SD values from n 
= 3 replicates. (E) Growth curve analysis of Cas9 + HBL1 cells expressing control or BCAT1 sgRNAs. Mean ± SD values from n = 3 replicates. (F) Schematic 
of HBL1 MCD DLBCL mouse xenograft experiments. HBL1 tumors were implanted in mouse flanks 2 weeks prior to administration of vehicle versus 5 mg/
kg or 20 mg/kg ERG245. (G) Mean ± SEM HBL1 tumor volumes in mice treated as indicated. (H) Schematic of C007 MCD DLBCL patient-derived xenograft 
(PDX) experiments. Tumors were implanted in mouse flanks 2 weeks prior to administration of vehicle versus 20 mg/kg ERG245. (I) Mean ± SEM C007 
PDX tumor volumes in mice treated as indicated. P values were calculated by 2-way ANOVA followed by Šídák’s multiple-comparison test (D, E, and G) or 
Tukey’s multiple-comparison test (I).
The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI18625816
 1. LeBien TW , Tedder TF . B lymphocytes: 
how they develop and function. Blood. 
2008;112(5):1570–1580.
 2. Cyster JG, Allen CDC. B cell responses: cell 
interaction dynamics and decisions. Cell. 
2019;177(3):524–540.
 3. De Silva NS, Klein U. Dynamics of B cells in germi-
nal centres. Nat Rev Immunol. 2015;15(3):137–148.
 4. Elgueta R, et al. Molecular mechanism and func-
tion of CD40/CD40L engagement in the immune 
system. Immunol Rev. 2009;229(1):152–172.
 5. Jiang C, et al. CRISPR/Cas9 screens reveal mul-
tiple layers of B cell CD40 regulation. Cell Rep. 
2019;28(5):1307–1322.
 6. Junttila IS. Tuning the cytokine responses: an 
update on interleukin (IL)-4 and IL-13 receptor 
complexes. Front Immunol. 2018;9:888.
 7. Akkaya M, et al. Second signals rescue B cells 
from activation-induced mitochondrial dysfunc-
tion and death. Nat Immunol. 2018;19(8):871–884.
 8. Leadbetter EA, et al. Chromatin-IgG complexes 
activate B cells by dual engagement of IgM and Toll-
like receptors. Nature. 2002;416(6881):603–607.
 9. Akira S, et al. Pathogen recognition and innate 
immunity. Cell. 2006;124(4):783–801.
 10. Kawai T, Akira S. Toll-like receptors and their 
crosstalk with other innate receptors in infection 
and immunity. Immunity. 2011;34(5):637–650.
 11. Ruprecht CR, Lanzavecchia A. Toll-like receptor 
stimulation as a third signal required for acti-
vation of human naive B cells. Eur J Immunol. 
2006;36(4):810–816.
 12. Rawlings DJ, et al. Integration of B cell responses 
through Toll-like receptors and antigen receptors. 
Nat Rev Immunol. 2012;12(4):282–294.
 13. Chaturvedi A, Pierce SK. How location 
governs toll-like receptor signaling. Traffic. 
2009;10(6):621–628.
 14. Janeway CA Jr. Approaching the asymptote? Evo-
lution and revolution in immunology. Cold Spring 
Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1989;54 Pt 1:1–13.
 15. Medzhitov R. Approaching the asymptote: 20 
years later. Immunity. 2009;30(6):766–775.
 16. Vos Q, et al. B-cell activation by T-cell-indepen-
dent type 2 antigens as an integral part of the 
humoral immune response to pathogenic micro-
organisms. Immunol Rev. 2000;176:154–170.
 17. Akkaya M, et al. Toll-like receptor 9 antagoniz-
es antibody affinity maturation. Nat Immunol. 
2018;19(3):255–266.
 18. Wright GW , et al. A probabilistic classification 
undertaken by RG, BEG, and VKM. The original draft was writ-
ten by RG, YS, and BEG. Review and editing of the manuscript 
were performed by all authors. RG and YS contributed equally 
to this work.
Funding support
This work is the result of NIH funding, in whole or in part, and is 
subject to the NIH Public Access Policy. Through acceptance of 
this federal funding, the NIH has been given a right to make the 
work publicly available in PubMed Central.
• NIH grants R01 DE033907, AI137337, and U01CA275301 
(to BEG); R00 DE031016, to RG; GM67945, to SPG; and 
GM132129, to JAP .
• Burroughs Wellcome Career Award in Medical Sciences, to BEG.
• Lymphoma Research Foundation Fellowship, to RG.
• American Cancer Society Postdoctoral Fellowship, PF-23-
1144614-01-IBCD, to YS.
• Howard Hughes Medical Institute, to VKM.
• National Science Scholarship, Singapore, to LWW .
• Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) Bio-
medical Research Council Central Research Fund for Use-In-
spired Research, Singapore, to LWW .
• Swiss National Science Foundation, P400PB_199261 and 
P2ELP3_187926, to DS.
Address correspondence to: Benjamin E. Gewurz, 181 Longwood 
Ave., Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA; Phone: 617.525.4282; 
Email: bgewurz@bwh.harvard.edu. Or to: Rui Guo, 150 Harrison 
Ave, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA. Phone: 617.636.0457; 
Email: Rui.Guo@tufts.edu.
RG’s present address is: Department of Molecular Biology and 
Microbiology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02111, USA
HS’s present address is: Metabolomics Platform, University of 
Chicago, 900 E. 57th street, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
LWW’s present address is: Singapore Immunology Network (SIgN), 
Agency for Science, Technology and Research, 8A Biomedical 
Grove, Immunos #04-06, Singapore 138648, Singapore.
Statistics. Unless otherwise indicated, all bar graphs and line 
graphs represent the arithmetic mean of 3 independent experiments, 
with error bars denoting standard deviations. Data were analyzed 
using 2-tailed paired Student’s t test or 1- or 2-way ANOVA with the 
appropriate post test using GraphPad Prism7 software. GO analy-
sis was done with the Enrichr module using the Kyoto Encyclope-
dia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway databases. Default 
parameters of the Enrichr module were used, with the exception 
that the enrichment statistic was set as classic. Metabolic pathway 
analyses were performed using MetaboAnalyst 3.0. Figures were 
drawn with commercially available GraphPad, BioRender, and 
Microsoft PowerPoint software. A P value less than 0.05 was con-
sidered statistically significant.
Study approval. Research involving primary human blood 
cells was conducted with approval from the Brigham & Wom-
en’s Hospital IRB (protocol 2022p001270). All study partici-
pants provided written informed consent. In vitro and in vivo 
stimulation experiments using mouse B cells received ethical 
approval from the IACUC at Boston Children’s Hospital (pro-
tocol 00001696). All mouse xenograft procedures were per-
formed in compliance with the IACUC guidelines at WCMC  
(protocol 2017-0035).
Data availability. All RNA-Seq datasets have been depos-
ited in NCBI’s Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO). The acces-
sion number for the RNA-Seq dataset reported in this paper is 
GSE232769. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been 
deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE 
partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD016961. Orig-
inal data values are available in the Supporting Data Values file. 
All plasmids and cell lines generated in this study will be made 
available on request.
Code availability. No custom code was used for this study.
Author contributions
Conceptualization was carried out by RG and BEG. Methodol-
ogy was developed by RG, YS, RAA, DRW , MRG, SPG, BEG, 
VKM, HS, AM, JAP , and JMA. Investigation was performed by 
MYL, MMLL, YZ, LWW , DS, NAS, M Lutchenkov , JHL, ZL, 
YW , RP , RAA, DRW , YS, and RG. M Li contributed through 
helpful discussions. HY , WL, and AEP provided key reagents. 
Visualization was provided by RG and YS. Supervision was 
The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
17J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI186258
tool for genetic subtypes of diffuse large B cell 
lymphoma with therapeutic implications. Cancer 
Cell. 2020;37(4):551–568.
 19. Schmitz R, et al. Genetics and pathogenesis of 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. N Engl J Med. 
2018;378(15):1396–407.
 20. Shah SB, et al. Combinatorial treatment rescues 
tumour-microenvironment-mediated attenuation 
of MALT1 inhibitors in B-cell lymphomas. Nat 
Mater. 2023;22(4):511–523.
 21. Phelan JD, et al. A multiprotein supercomplex 
controlling oncogenic signalling in lymphoma. 
Nature. 2018;560(7718):387–391.
 22. Green NM, Marshak-Rothstein A. Toll-like 
receptor driven B cell activation in the induction 
of systemic autoimmunity. Semin Immunol. 
2011;23(2):106–112.
 23. Viglianti GA, et al. Activation of autoreactive B cells 
by CpG dsDNA. Immunity. 2003;19(6):837–847.
 24. Fillatreau S, et al. Toll-like receptor signalling in 
B cells during systemic lupus erythematosus. Nat 
Rev Rheumatol. 2021;17(2):98–108.
 25. Leibler C, et al. Genetic dissection of TLR9 
reveals complex regulatory and cryptic proin-
flammatory roles in mouse lupus. Nat Immunol. 
2022;23(10):1457–1469.
 26. Wang LW , et al. Epstein-Barr-virus-induced 
one-carbon metabolism drives B cell transforma-
tion. Cell Metab. 2019;30(3):539–555.
 27. Waters LR, et al. Initial B cell activation induces 
metabolic reprogramming and mitochondrial 
remodeling. iScience. 2018;5:99–109.
 28. Boothby M, Rickert RC. Metabolic regulation 
of the immune humoral response. Immunity. 
2017;46(5):743–755.
 29. Dufort FJ, et al. Cutting edge: IL-4-mediated 
protection of primary B lymphocytes from apop-
tosis via Stat6-dependent regulation of glycolytic 
metabolism. J Immunol. 2007;179(8):4953–4957.
 30. Trezise S, Nutt SL. The gene regulatory network 
controlling plasma cell function. Immunol Rev. 
2021;303(1):23–34.
 31. Bunting KL, Melnick AM. New effector functions 
and regulatory mechanisms of BCL6 in normal 
and malignant lymphocytes. Curr Opin Immunol. 
2013;25(3):339–346.
 32. Basso K, Dalla-Favera R. Roles of BCL6 in 
normal and transformed germinal center B cells. 
Immunol Rev. 2012;247(1):172–183.
 33. Subramanian A, et al. Gene set enrichment anal-
ysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting 
genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2005;102(43):15545–15550.
 34. Birsoy K, et al. An essential role of the mito-
chondrial electron transport chain in cell pro-
liferation is to enable aspartate synthesis. Cell. 
2015;162(3):540–551.
 35. Quiros PM, et al. Multi-omics analysis identi-
fies ATF4 as a key regulator of the mitochon-
drial stress response in mammals. J Cell Biol. 
2017;216(7):2027–2045.
 36. Pakos-Zebrucka K, et al. The integrated stress 
response. EMBO Rep. 2016;17(10):1374–1395.
 37. Harding HP , et al. An integrated stress response 
regulates amino acid metabolism and resistance 
to oxidative stress. Mol Cell. 2003;11(3):619–633.
 38. Brosnan JT, Brosnan ME. Branched-chain amino 
acids: enzyme and substrate regulation. J Nutr. 
2006;136(1 suppl):207S–211S.
 39. Papathanassiu AE, et al. BCAT1 controls meta-
bolic reprogramming in activated human mac-
rophages and is associated with inflammatory 
diseases. Nat Commun. 2017;8:16040.
 40. Tonjes M, et al. BCAT1 promotes cell pro-
liferation through amino acid catabolism in 
gliomas carrying wild-type IDH1. Nat Med. 
2013;19(7):901–908.
 41. Akidil E, et al. Highly efficient CRIS-
PR-Cas9-mediated gene knockout in primary 
human B cells for functional genetic studies 
of Epstein-Barr virus infection. PLoS Pathog. 
2021;17(4):e1009117.
 42. Francesca L, et al. BCAT1 inhibition affects 
CD8+ T cell activation, exhaustion, and tumoral 
immunity by altering iron homeostasis [preprint]. 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.02.25.530034. 
Posted on bioRxiv February 26, 2023.
 43. Schmidt EK, et al. SUnSET, a nonradioactive 
method to monitor protein synthesis. Nat Methods. 
2009;6(4):275–277.
 44. Fingar DC, et al. Mammalian cell size is 
controlled by mTOR and its downstream 
targets S6K1 and 4EBP1/eIF4E. Genes Dev. 
2002;16(12):1472–1487.
 45. Finkelman FD, et al. Anti-cytokine antibodies as 
carrier proteins. Prolongation of in vivo effects of 
exogenous cytokines by injection of cytokine-an-
ti-cytokine antibody complexes. J Immunol. 
1993;151(3):1235–1244.
 46. Shintani Y , et al. IL-4 as a repurposed biological 
drug for myocardial infarction through augmenta-
tion of reparative cardiac macrophages: proof-of-
concept data in mice. Sci Rep. 2017;7(1):6877.
 47. Goodnow CC, et al. Altered immunoglobulin 
expression and functional silencing of self-reac-
tive B lymphocytes in transgenic mice. Nature. 
1988;334(6184):676–682.
 48. Glass MC, et al. Human IL-10-producing B cells 
have diverse states that are induced from multiple 
B cell subsets. Cell Rep. 2022;39(3):110728.
 49. Fillatreau S, et al. B cells regulate autoim-
munity by provision of IL-10. Nat Immunol. 
2002;3(10):944–950.
 50. Iwata Y , et al. Characterization of a rare 
IL-10-competent B-cell subset in humans that 
parallels mouse regulatory B10 cells. Blood. 
2011;117(2):530–541.
 51. Mauri C, et al. Prevention of arthritis by 
interleukin 10-producing B cells. J Exp Med. 
2003;197(4):489–501.
 52. Mizoguchi A, et al. Chronic intestinal inflam-
matory condition generates IL-10-producing 
regulatory B cell subset characterized by CD1d 
upregulation. Immunity. 2002;16(2):219–230.
 53. Wang Q, et al. Monoterpene glycoside ESK246 
from Pittosporum targets LAT3 amino acid trans-
port and prostate cancer cell growth. ACS Chem 
Biol. 2014;9(6):1369–1376.
 54. Lama-Sherpa TD, et al. Regulation of mTORC1 
by the Rag GTPases. Biochem Soc Trans. 
2023;51(2):655–664.
 55. Cui Z, et al. Amino acid sensing and lysosom-
al signaling complexes. Curr Opin Struct Biol. 
2023;79:102544.
 56. Liu GY , Sabatini DM. mTOR at the nexus of 
nutrition, growth, ageing and disease. Nat Rev Mol 
Cell Biol. 2020;21(4):183–203.
 57. Kim J, Guan KL. mTOR as a central hub of 
nutrient signalling and cell growth. Nat Cell Biol. 
2019;21(1):63–71.
 58. Wolfson RL, et al. Sestrin2 is a leucine 
sensor for the mTORC1 pathway. Science. 
2016;351(6268):43–48.
 59. Chen J, et al. SAR1B senses leucine levels 
to regulate mTORC1 signalling. Nature. 
2021;596(7871):281–284.
 60. Han JM, et al. Leucyl-tRNA synthetase is an 
intracellular leucine sensor for the mTORC1-sig-
naling pathway. Cell. 2012;149(2):410–424.
 61. Son SM, et al. Leucine regulates autophagy via 
acetylation of the mTORC1 component raptor. 
Nat Commun. 2020;11(1):3148.
 62. Abu-Remaileh M, et al. Lysosomal metabolomics 
reveals V-ATPase- and mTOR-dependent regula-
tion of amino acid efflux from lysosomes. Science. 
2017;358(6364):807–813.
 63. Egri SB, et al. Cryo-EM structures of the human 
GATOR1-Rag-Ragulator complex reveal a spa-
tial-constraint regulated GAP mechanism. Mol 
Cell. 2022;82(10):1836–1849.
 64. de Araujo MEG, et al. Crystal structure of 
the human lysosomal mTORC1 scaffold 
complex and its impact on signaling. Science. 
2017;358(6361):377–381.
 65. Huang H, et al. In vivo CRISPR screening reveals 
nutrient signaling processes underpinning CD8+ T 
cell fate decisions. Cell. 2021;184(5):1245–1261.
 66. Rebsamen M, et al. SLC38A9 is a component of the 
lysosomal amino acid sensing machinery that con-
trols mTORC1. Nature. 2015;519(7544):477–481.
 67. Fromm SA, et al. Structural mechanism for 
amino acid-dependent Rag GTPase nucleotide 
state switching by SLC38A9. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 
2020;27(11):1017–1023.
 68. Szklarczyk D, et al. STRING v11: protein-protein 
association networks with increased coverage, 
supporting functional discovery in genome-
wide experimental datasets. Nucleic Acids Res. 
2019;47(d1):D607–D613.
 69. Kwak K, et al. B cell signaling in context. Nat 
Immunol. 2019;20(8):963–969.
 70. Hirano M, et al. The evolution of adaptive 
immunity in vertebrates. Adv Immunol. 
2011;109:125–157.
 71. Rosser EC, Mauri C. The emerging field of reg-
ulatory B cell immunometabolism. Cell Metab. 
2021;33(6):1088–1097.
 72. Victora GD, Nussenzweig MC. Germinal centers. 
Annu Rev Immunol. 2022;40:413–442.
 73. Caro-Maldonado A, et al. Metabolic repro-
gramming is required for antibody production 
that is suppressed in anergic but exaggerated in 
chronically BAFF-exposed B cells. J Immunol. 
2014;192(8):3626–3636.
 74. Francois L, et al. BCAT1 redox function main-
tains mitotic fidelity. Cell Rep. 2022;41(3):111524.
 75. Patrick M, et al. Metabolon formation regulates 
branched-chain amino acid oxidation and homeo-
stasis. Nat Metab. 2022;4(12):1775–1791.
 76. Hutson SM, et al. Branched-chain [corrected] 
amino acid metabolism: implications for estab-
lishing safe intakes. J Nutr. 2005;135(6 sup-
pl):1557S–1564S.
 77. Hattori A, et al. Cancer progression by repro-
The Journal of Clinical Investigation    RESEARCH ARTICLE
J Clin Invest. 2025;135(22):e186258  https://doi.org/10.1172/JCI18625818
grammed BCAA metabolism in myeloid leukae-
mia. Nature. 2017;545(7655):500–504.
 78. Thomen A, et al. Subcellular mass spectrometry 
imaging and absolute quantitative analysis across 
organelles. ACS Nano. 2020;14(4):4316–4325.
 79. Ananieva EA, et al. Cytosolic branched chain 
aminotransferase (BCATc) regulates mTORC1 
signaling and glycolytic metabolism in CD4+ T 
cells. J Biol Chem. 2014;289(27):18793–18804.
 80. Gu Z, et al. Loss of EZH2 reprograms BCAA 
metabolism to drive leukemic transformation. 
Cancer Discov. 2019;9(9):1228–1247.
 81. Takahara T, et al. Amino acid-dependent control 
of mTORC1 signaling: a variety of regulatory 
modes. J Biomed Sci. 2020;27(1):87.
 82. Saxton RA, Sabatini DM. mTOR signaling 
in growth, metabolism, and disease. Cell. 
2017;168(6):960–976.
 83. Cheng X, et al. mTORC1-mediated amino acid 
signaling is critical for cell fate determination 
under transplant-induced stress. FEBS Lett. 
2021;595(4):462–475.
 84. Buel GR, et al. Prolonged deprivation of 
arginine or leucine induces PI3K/Akt-depen-
dent reactivation of mTORC1. J Biol Chem. 
2022;298(6):102030.
 85. Wagar LE, et al. Modeling human adaptive 
immune responses with tonsil organoids. Nat 
Med. 2021;27(1):125–135.
 86. Philips RL, et al. The JAK-STAT pathway 
at 30: Much learned, much more to do. Cell. 
2022;185(21):3857–3876.
 87. Mason DY , et al. Development and follicular 
localization of tolerant B lymphocytes in lyso-
zyme/anti-lysozyme IgM/IgD transgenic mice. 
Int Immunol. 1992;4(2):163–175.