Biocatalytic reductive amination 
with CRISPR-Cas9 engineered 
yeast
Arne Hagman 1, Olof Stenström 2, Göran Carlström 2, Mikael Akke 2, Carl Grey 1 & 
Magnus Carlquist 1
Metabolically engineered baker’s yeast can be used to produce chiral amines through whole-cell 
bioconversion of prochiral ketones. This study investigates the modulation of the alanine-pyruvate 
metabolic node to enhance reductive amination, using the stereoselective conversion of benzylacetone 
to (S)-1-methyl-3-phenylpropylamine (MPPA) as a model reaction. Chromosomal integration of 
multiple copies of the promiscuous omega transaminase from Chromobacterium violaceum (cv-ATA) 
resulted in an active yeast catalyst. Physiological characterization in bioreactors under aerobic batch 
cultivation revealed that amine production occurred only under post-diauxic growth on ethanol. 
To reduce native alanine utilization, the endogenous alanine aminotransferase (AL T1) was knocked 
out and replaced with cv-ATA. To rapidly employ this strategy in other strains, a simple CRISPR/
cas9 method for universal gene replacement was developed. The replacement of AL T1 with cv-ATA 
improved the reaction by 2.6-fold compared to the control strain with intact AL T1. NMR measurements 
of metabolites originating from 15N L-alanine and 13C glucose indicated that pyruvate formation 
during growth on glucose inhibited amine production. Under optimal conditions, the biocatalytic 
bioconversion of benzylacetone to MPPA reached a yield of 58%.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae  plays an important role in industrial biotechnology and has been successfully 
engineered for production of various commodity chemicals, biofuels and bioactive compounds 1,2. Relatively 
little attention has however been given to the development of yeast for production of amines, despite their 
central position as building blocks for pharmaceuticals (e.g., analgesics, antidiabetic, and antihypertensive 
drugs), agrochemicals (including herbicides, fungicides, and insecticides), solvents, vulcanization accelerators 
for rubber and plasticizers, and polymers (e.g., polyamides) 3,4. Currently, amines are primarily synthesized 
by dehydrating suitable alcohols with ammonia using a catalyst under harsh conditions. The use of enzyme 
or microbial catalysts has several potential benefits over chemical methods, such as high regio- and stereo-
selectivity, operating under ambient conditions, generating less nitrogenous waste, and enabling significant 
process intensification by supplying enzymes and reactants in situ5.
We have previously developed S. cerevisiae strains over-expressing specific amine transaminases (ATAs) (EC 
2.6.1.1) of plant or bacterial origin for kinetic resolution of racemic amines with glucose as source of amine 
acceptor6–9. In a previous comparative study between S. cerevisiae  and E. coli  over-expressing recombinant 
ATA for whole-cell amine production, the yeast displayed a higher robustness to process conditions enabling 
bioconversion over a longer time period8. Furthermore, S. cerevisiae was shown to have high capacity to supply 
the prosthetic group pyrodoxal-5-phosphate (PLP) de novo6. This is an advantage over in vitro enzyme catalysis 
or whole-cell biocatalysis with the more commonly used Escherichia coli, where PLP is typically added to the 
reaction broth10.
ATA-based reductive amination of carbonyl compounds, i.e., the reverse reaction compared to kinetic 
resolution, on the other hand, has shown to be challenging in yeast due to difficulty to achieve a favorable reaction 
equilibrium towards the amine product 11,12. Previously, the methylotrophic yeast Pichia pastoris expressing a 
recombinant ATA was developed for reductive amination of the prochiral ketone benzylacetone (BA) to (S)−1-
methyl-3-phenylpropylamine (MPPA)13. To push the reaction to the target product, the whole-cell bioconversion 
was operated at a high-cell density of P . pastoris, and the high-value compound (S)−1-phenylethylamine ((S)−1-
PEA)) was used as amine donor. Chiral amine production with endogenous amine donors, which could be 
supplied in vivo by the yeast would be an attractive alternative, but achieving high specific productivity has 
1Division of Biotechnology and Applied Microbiology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. 2Division of Biophysical 
Chemistry, Center for Molecular Protein Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. email: nhagman@gmail.com; 
magnus.carlquist@ple.lth.se
OPEN
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:16972 1| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01182-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports

hitherto not been described. Therefore, methods that modulate the intracellular environment of yeast in favor of 
the amine product need to be developed before this can be realized.
S. cerevisiae has previously been shown to be excellent expression host for the transaminase Cv-ATA 6. Cv-
ATA displays high activity in vivo for the conversion of amines to ketones with pyruvate as amine acceptor6, and 
high activity ex vivo in crude cell extract for the conversion of ketones to amines with L-alanine as amine donor. 
However, in vivo reductive amination has previously been shown to be difficult despite adding excess amount of 
L-alanine in the reaction broth6. S. cerevisiae is a Crabtree positive yeast that rapidly converts glucose to ethanol, 
via pyruvate under both fermentative and respiratory conditions 14,15. L-alanine is efficiently converted to 
pyruvate by alanine aminotransferase, encoded by ALT116, which may compete with heterologous transaminase 
reactions. In this study, we investigated the effects of engineering the alanine-pyruvate metabolic node on cell 
growth and bio-catalytic amine production. Whole-cell bioconversion of BA to MPPA by recombinant ATA 
from C. violaceum  (Cv-ATA) was used as model. A CRISPR/Cas9-method for universal gene replacement 
was developed and applied to replace ALT1 with Cv-ATA under constitutive regulation. Constructed strains 
were characterized in bioreactors, revealing conditions that favored reductive amination. HPLC profiling 
of metabolites, and NMR monitoring of reactants with 15N L-alanine as amine donor and 13C glucose were 
performed and provided a molecular explanation for the observations.
Results and discussion
Screening for amine-donor and whole-cell bioconversion
A range of amino acids may potentially be used as amine donor for the production of chiral amines in yeast that 
express recombinant aminotransaminase (ATA from C. violaceum) (Table 1, S1). MPPA production depends 
on the availability of endogenous amine donors that are accepted by recombinant ATA. The yeast TMB4375 6 
contain six copies of ATA, and it was used to screen for amine donors with the highest yields of MPPA (Fig. 1). 
TMB4131 was the reference strain in this study, and it does not contain ATA. We could not detect any MPPA 
produced by the reference strain at any concentrations of amine donors tested.
We utilized a simple explorative screening approach that did not take into account any possible differences 
in uptake kinetics nor any potential toxicity of amino acids in high amounts. The purpose of the screening 
was to identify good candidates that could be used by yeast for chiral amine production. We screened several 
amino acids with sufficient solubility in water at 250 mM up to 1 M, for conversion of benzylacetone to MPPA 
(Fig. 1a, Supplementary Table S2). Of all twenty proteinogenic amino acids, only five with the highest solubility 
could be tested up to 1  M; these comprise alanine, lysine, glycine, proline, and arginine. Two amino acids, 
valine and threonine, could be tested up to 500 mM. And three amino acids, methionine, serine, and histidine 
could be tested only at 250 mM. The remaining ten amino acids had too low solubility in aqueous solution to 
be considered as good candidates. The starting pH was in the range 6–7, and the end pH was in the range 5–6 
for all amino acids except for arginine. At concentrations above 250 mM, the pH deviated higher than 10 for 
arginine, and these results were for that reason not included in the analysis. The amino acid that consistently 
performed best, at all concentrations throughout the 6 days that the experiment lasted, was alanine (Fig.  1b, 
Supplementary Table S2). The highest detected yields of MPPA were close to 50% at 1 M, and 25% at 250 mM 
alanine. Other amino acids that performed well were lysine, glycine, proline and methionine. However, no 
MPPA yield above 25% could be detected at any concentrations, for any other amino acids but alanine. These 
results are in accordance with Cv-ATA having a broad substrate scope17 and with alanine being one of its most 
preferred natural substrates under physiological conditions.
Strain Reference Background Growth profile
Genotype*
rpl22p-mEGFP ALT1 ATA
cen.pk113-7D wt I - 1 -
TMB4131 Weber6 cen.pk2-1 C ND - 1 -
TMB4375 Weber6 cen.pk2-1 C ND - 1 6
TMBAH13 This study cen.pk113-7D ND 1 1 -
TMBAH19 This study cen.pk2-1 C I 1 1 -
TMBAH25 This study cen.pk2-1 C III 1 1 6
TMBAH57 This study cen.pk113-7D ND 1 - -
TMBAH58 This study cen.pk2-1 C II 1 - -
TMBAH59 This study cen.pk2-1 C III 1 - 6
TMBAH60 This study cen.pk113-7D III 1 - 1
TMBAH61 This study cen.pk2-1 C II 1 - 1
TMBAH62 This study cen.pk2-1 C III 1 - 7
Table 1. Engineered yeast strains and their origin. *see supplementary table S1 for more detailed information 
on genotype. Not determined (ND). Data availability. DNA sequences in this study are available in the 
Supplementary Information. Other relevant datasets used and/or analyzed during the study can be made 
available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author. Code availability. The custom made Matlab 
script that was used to analyze all flowcytometry data in this study can be downloaded from the following 
GitHub repository: https://github.com/MicrobialEngineeringGroupTMB/.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:16972 2| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01182-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Yeast as a cell-factory for production of chiral amine
A previous study by Weber and colleagues 6 successfully demonstrated the kinetic resolution of racemic 
amines by yeast expressing ATA. In that study, 25 mM racemic 1-phenylethylamine was converted to ( R)−1-
phenylethylamine with 50% conversion yield, resulting in an ee of > 99% of the R-enantiomer. The main reason 
for the efficient conversion is that the reaction is highly thermodynamically favorable towards the ketone. One 
way to force the reaction towards the amine is to add a high concentration of amine-donor. Our screening 
result reveal alanine as the most potent candidate for the conversion among amino acids: it is highly dissolved 
in aqueous solution, and is efficiently taken up by yeast. Based on these results, alanine was chosen as the best 
amine-donor candidate for this study.
Another way to make the reaction more favorable towards the amine is to enable continuous co-product 
removal. When yeast grows in the presence of glucose, it will rapidly convert the sugar to ethanol via pyruvate. 
We hypothesized that growing yeast cells would be a good production platform for chiral amines, owing 
to: (I) the continuous expression of ATA under physiological condition, (II) a sufficient supply of co-factor 
pyridoxal 5’phosphate (PLP) 8, and (III) a continuous removal of the co-product pyruvate. To investigate for 
any correlation between production of MPPA and growth-state of the cell, we developed a growth-reporter 
gene that was introduced in yeast. If there is a correlation between the growth state of the cells (as indicated by 
GFP fluorescence) and the production of MPPA, it would suggest that factors influencing cell growth may also 
affect amine production. This information can help to optimize growth conditions and genetic modifications to 
Fig. 1. (A) Y east expressing ATA (TMB4375) converts the pro-chiral ketone benzylacetone (BA) to the 
corresponding chiral-amine (S)−1-methyl-3-phenylpropylamine (MPPA). ATA catalyzes the transfer of an 
amine from the amine donor, which is converted to the corresponding ketone co-product. (B) Ten amino acids 
were screened for their potency as amine donor for this reaction in yeast. Depending on their solubility, amino 
acids were tested up to 1 M (Ala, Lys, Gly, Pro, Arg), 500 mM (Val, Thr), or 250 mM (Met, Ser, His).
 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:16972 3| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01182-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
improve amine production efficiency in yeast-based systems. The use of a green fluorescence protein expressed 
by the RPL22A promoter to follow growth has previously been demonstrated 18. In this study we also choose 
RPL22A as the growth-promoter, but after screening the literature and a database for fluorescence proteins 
(fpbase.org) we decided to use a monomeric version of GFP (mEGFP) that contain the monomerizing A206 K 
mutation, to avoid any potential aggregation caused by overexpression. The growth reporter gene was assembled 
and introduced with crispR-cas9 in the production strain TMB4375, and the reference strains TMB4131. Both 
strains originate from the parental strain cen.pk2-1 C. We also included the common laboratory strain cen.
pk113-7D as a control, representing the wild type phenotype. All other strains in this study were engineered 
from these three starting strains that contain a growth-reporter gene (Table  1, S1) as presented in the next 
coming sections below.
AL T1-deletion to reduce intrinsic competition for amine-donor
Y east possesses its own native alanine transaminase ALT1 that catalyzes the reversible conversion of alanine 
to pyruvate. ALT1 has previously been shown to be responsible for alanine catabolism and biosynthesis and 
is highly expressed in yeast under respiratory conditions 16,19. α-ketoglutarate  (α-KG) is the amine-acceptor, 
and glutamate is the corresponding co-product in this reaction (Fig.  2). Since ALT1 in the alanine-pyruvate 
metabolic node could potentially compete with ATA for the amine-donor, and since it is reported as a non-
essential gene in yeast we decided to knock it out to improve MPPA production.
We also wanted to investigate the possibility to improve the production strain further by increasing the 
ATA gene copy number. To accomplish this, we designed a step-wise CrispR-cas9 approach to replace ALT1 
with additional copies of ATA. The first step involves replacement of the ALT1 ORF with a knock-out cassette, 
flanked by two gRNA recognition sites, by homologous recombination. The knock-out cassette contain the gene 
for nourceothricin resistance (NatMX) that enable positive selection for ALT1 knock-out strains. In the second 
step, a duplex gRNA plasmid (TMBAHp100) was transformed together with donor-DNA, and a Cas9 plasmid20 
pCFB2312 to introduce double-strand breaks in the genomic DNA. The donor-DNA, which contain the ATA 
gene can bridge the double-strand breaks and act as a template for the repair and replacement of the knock-out 
cassette (Fig.  3). All characterized strains with ALT1 deleted, and ALT1 replaced with a copy of ATA can be 
found in Table 1.
Physiological characterization of engineered strains for MPPA production
Engineered production strains and their references, with and without ALT1 deleted, and with extra copy 
numbers of ATA were characterized under fully controlled conditions in bioreactors for any changes in MPPA 
production (Fig. 4, Supplementary Table S3). Aerobic conditions were maintained throughout the experiments 
and cells were cultivated in synthetic minimal media 21 supplemented with 2% glucose, 250 mM alanine, and 5 
mM BA. All experiments were done under uniform condition unless stated otherwise.
As expected, MPPA could not be detected in any of the reference strains that lack ATA (TMBAH19 and 
TMBAH58). The production strain (TMBAH62) with seven copies (7x) of ATA gave highest MPPA yield, 
followed by the production strain (TMBAH25) with six copies (6x) of ATA. Deleting the native ALT1 gene and 
replacing it with an additional copy of ATA resulted in approximately 2.6-fold increase in MPPA yield, from 
0.22 to 0.58 mol/mol (p-value = 6.3E−2). We also included a production strain (TMBAH59) with 6x ATA that 
had ALT1 deleted. This strain appears to be intermediate between the 7x and 6x strains, with a 1.8-fold increase 
in MPPA yield, from 0.22 to 0.40 mol/mol, but additional experiments would be required to determine the 
significance level. Our result suggests that both events, deletion of the native ALT1 and an additional copy of 
ATA, contributed to the 2.6-fold increase in MPPA yield, and that further increase in ATA copy number could 
Fig. 2. Alanine-pyruvate metabolic node in yeast.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:16972 4| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01182-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
result in even greater MPPA yields. We could also detect MPPA production in the cen.pk113-7D background 
strain (TMBAH60), which had ALT1 replaced by one copy of ATA. Even if this strain has only one copy of ATA, 
it still performs similar to a strain with 6 copies of ATA in the cen.pk2-1 C background. These results suggest 
that the cen.pk113-7D background strain provide a better platform for the production of chiral amines with 
transaminases. We can only speculate on the underlying mechanism, but it could for instance be related to lower 
inhibiting intracellular concentration of pyruvate, better uptake of extracellular alanine or higher intracellular 
concentration of the amino acid pool, or higher levels of co-factor PLP in the cen.pk113-7D background.
We also evaluated the intrinsic capacity of yeast to provide its own intracellular pool of amine donor for the 
production of MPPA. The production strain with 6 copies of ATA (TMBAH25) and its reference with 0 copies 
of ATA (TMBAH19) were included in the test (Supplementary Fig. S1), but without the addition of external 
supply of alanine. MPPA could be detected in the production strain, but not in the reference strain. These results 
suggest that yeast cells provide high enough intracellular amino-acid pool for MPPA production, but apparently 
not enough to reach the same yield as with external supply of alanine.
AL T1 mediated growth defect on ethanol prevents MPPA production
We could not detect any MPPA production in strain TMBAH61, with ALT1 replaced by a copy of ATA, which 
belong to the cen.pk2-1 C background (Fig.  4). Growth defect of ALT1 deletion strain on ethanol has been 
observed previously13. We believe this phenomenon to be related to a growth defect on ethanol as a result of 
deleting ALT1. Alt1 is responsible for alanine catabolism and the joint conversion of α-KG to glutamate under 
respiratory conditions. Decreased glutamate would affect the intracellular proteinogenic amino acid pool and 
growth negatively due to Alt1 deletion, and pyruvate inhibition on the conversion of α-KG to glutamate during 
respiratory growth. We can speculate that the overall reduced growth affects the redox balance, and the recycling 
of NAD(P)+, which would affect dehydrogenases and inhibit growth on ethanol at i.e. alcohol dehydrogenase 
2 (ADH2) or acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (ALD2). When comparing the growth-profiles of all characterized 
strains they can be divided into three groups (Fig.  5a; Table 1). Group I displays the wild-type growth-profile 
and consist of yeast strains with a native ALT1 that do not express ATA. These yeasts grow on glucose, and after 
diauxic-shift, they enter a second growth-phase on ethanol. They do not produce any MPPA. Group II consists 
of strains that belong to the 2–1 C background with ALT1 deleted, and with ALT1 replaced with a copy of ATA. 
These yeasts grow on glucose, but fail to grow on ethanol as a result of ALT1 deletion. Similar to group I, they 
also do not produce any MPPA. Group III consists of all the remaining strains, with six and seven copies of 
ATA that belong to the 2–1 C background. The control strain, cen.pk113-7D with ALT1 replaced by ATA also 
displays the third growth profile. These yeasts grow well on glucose, and they manage to grow on ethanol and 
produce MPPA with the onset coinciding with the diauxic shift. From our previous work, we know that Cv-ATA 
Fig. 3. Overview of the universal two-step crispr-cas9 approach. This figure illustrates targeting the ALT1 
gene in yeast. In the first step ALT1 is replaced by a nourseothricin resistance encoding gene NatMX, through 
homologous recombination. In the second step, NatMX that is flanked with gRNA sites is targeted by CrispR-
cas9, and subsequently replaced by the ATA donor DNA in the presence of a gRNA- and Cas9-plasmid.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:16972 5| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01182-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
is expressed at high levels in yeast during growth on both glucose and ethanol6. The onset of MPPA production 
is therefore not related to differences in expression level.
Apparently, MPPA production is inhibited during growth on the fermentable carbon-source glucose, but 
inhibition is released after the diauxic shift, during growth on the non-fermentable carbon-source ethanol. This 
phenomenon can be observed in group III yeast with up to 7 copies of ATA. Furthermore, failure to initiate 
growth after diauxic shift prevents yeast from producing MPPA, as observed in group II yeast. One plausible 
explanation of this phenomenon could be the well-known glucose repression, but despite the similarities, this 
explanation is unlikely since ATA is under constitutive regulation. Furthermore, the two phenomena: (1) growth 
defect in group II yeast, and (2) onset of MPPA production in group III yeast are most likely related, since they 
both occur with the onset of diauxic-shift.
High concentrations of pyruvate can inhibit MPPA production before and after Diauxic shift
It is known that yeast rapidly ferment sugars like glucose through overflow metabolism, what results in production 
of overflow metabolites like pyruvate15. Since MPPA is only detected after diauxic-shift in the production strains 
belonging to group III, we hypothesize that the intracellular pyruvate concentrations could be high enough to 
efficiently inhibit alanine transaminase during growth on glucose. When glucose is depleted, yeast rapidly initiate 
a second growth phase that uses up primary and secondary overflow metabolites like ethanol and pyruvate as 
carbon and energy-sources15,22. Y east that fail to initiate growth after diauxic-shift could in theory continue to 
maintain a high intracellular pyruvate concentration, which could inhibit a transaminase like ATA and prevent 
formation of MPPA. Thus, we hypothesized that the observed growth defect on ethanol in ALT1 deletion strains 
belonging to group II is the cause of, and not the result of, elevated intracellular pyruvate that continue to inhibit 
formation of MPPA, even after diauxic-shift.
When we measured the extracellular pyruvate that was produced during growth on glucose, the concentration 
in the culture media was high enough to be detected by HPLC for the majority of cultivations (Fig.  5b). For 
type II strains that did not produce MPPA, the pyruvate levels were ca. 0.13–0.20 g/L (or 1.7–2.3 mM), while 
for Type III strains, which produced MPPA, the post-diauxic levels were below or close to detection limit. The 
intracellular concentration can be calculated from the extracellular concentration based on the assumption that 
pyruvate accumulates inside the cell due to the pH gradient across the plasma membrane 23. The distribution 
can be determined using the equation pHin = pKa + (log10{[(Ain/Aout)(1 + 10pHout−pKa)] − 1}), where Ain and Aout 
are the concentrations of the anion inside and outside the cell, respectively. The pKa for pyruvate is 2.5, and the 
intracellular pH is ca. 6 for glucose-starved yeast cells and ca. 7 during glucose growth24, while the extracellular 
pH is controlled at 5 in the bioreactor. This results in an accumulation factor of pyruvate in/pyruvateout of 10–
100. Consequently, the intracellular concentration for Type II strains that do not produce MPPA is calculated 
Fig. 4. MPPA production in bioreactors. Production strains with six (6x) and seven (7x) copies of ATA, 
and their references with zero (0x) or one (1x) copy of ATA were tested for MPPA production. Error bars 
corresponds to one standard deviation of two biological replicates.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:16972 6| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01182-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
to be approximately 12–20 mM, which is sufficient to significantly inhibit Cv-ATA. These concentrations are 
in the same order of magnitude as previously observed intracellular pyruvate concentrations during respiro-
fermentative growth25.
Inhibition of ATAs by pyruvate has been reported for the purified enzyme in several studies and seems to 
be a universal trait of alanine: pyruvate transaminases of different origin. At low concentrations of pyruvate, 
the reaction rate increases with apparent Michaelis-Menten kinetics, and above a threshold, pyruvate results in 
significant inhibition. The reported inhibitory concentration differs for the different enzymes (e.g., ω-Amino 
Acid: Pyruvate Transaminase from Alcaligenes denitrificans Y2k-2 26, ω-Transaminase from Vibrio fluvialis 
JS1727, and (R)-Selective ω-Transaminase from Mycobacterium vanbaalenii28 between 8 and 80 mM, which is in 
range of the calculated intracellular pyruvate concentration. Reaction kinetics for Cv-ATA analyzed over a range 
of pyruvate concentrations have, to the best of our knowledge, not been reported previously.
Among all investigated strains, the ALT1 deletion strains TMBAH58 and TMBAH61 that belong to group 
II yeasts, with zero or one copy of ATA, maintain the highest pyruvate concentrations, even after diauxic shift  
(p-value = 1.4E−2) (Table S4). No significant differences in pyruvate concentrations could be detected among the 
same group of strains during growth on glucose (p-value = 3.5E−1). Furthermore, the same strains TMBAH58 
and TMBAH61, which do not grow on ethanol, also display an overall reduced growth on glucose, what has 
resulted in a significant lower biomass yield as compared to all other strains (p-value = 1.2E−2) (Fig. 5b). Similar 
observations can be seen when comparing green fluorescence from the growth-reporter gene between group II 
yeasts and all other yeasts, during growth on glucose (p-value = 4.8E−2) (Supplementary Fig. S2a). These results 
are congruent with our hypothesis on inhibition of alanine transaminase by overflow metabolism.
Alternative routes for benzylacetone metabolism
The yeast genome encodes 300 ORFs annotated as oxidoreductases, including 18 alcohol dehydrogenases 
(Saccharomyces genome database) that could potentially catalyze the reduction of BA to the corresponding 
alcohol 4-Phenylbutan-2-ol (OH). If any of the oxidoreductases has an activity towards benzylacetone, we 
Fig. 5. Y east can be divided in three groups based on their growth-profile. (A) The first group grow on glucose 
and ethanol, without MPPA production. This includes the reference strain cen.pk2-1 C (TMBAH19) and the 
wild type strain cen.pk113-7D (TMBAH1). The second group grow on glucose, but not on ethanol, and they 
do not produce any MPPA. The second group includes all tested cen.pk2-1 C strains with ALT1 deleted and 
replaced by up to 1 copy of ATA (TMBAH58 and TMBAH61). The third group grow on glucose and ethanol, 
and they produce MPPA. This group includes all tested cen.pk2-1 C strains with ALT1 deleted and replaced 
by 6 to 7 copies of ATA (TMBAH25, TMBAH59, TMBAH62). The third group also include a cen.pk113-7D 
strain with ALT1 replaced by 1 copy of ATA. (B) Pyruvate in the culture media was quantified during growth 
on glucose prior to diauxic shift (green), and by the end of the experiment (orange). Extracellular pyruvate 
was readily detected in most cultures during growth on glucose and prior to diauxic shift, but predominantly 
only in ALT1 deletion strains after the diauxic shift. Biomass was determined by dry-weight during growth on 
glucose (grey). (C) Glycerol yield for different yeasts were determined under fully controlled conditions. The 
yields were normalized against dry weight (DW) during growth on glucose.
 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:16972 7| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01182-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
would be able to detect OH in the culture media. The presence of OH seen in supplementary figure S3 indicates 
benzylacetone reductase activity in at least one of the oxidoreductases in yeast.
Interestingly OH could not be detected for any of the ALT1 deleted strains. Furthermore, there is a continuous 
basal consumption of BA throughout the cultivation for all strains, which is not related to growth and MPPA 
production (Supplementary Fig. S4). For instance, BA is continuously consumed even after diauxic-shift by 
yeasts belonging to group II, which do not grow on ethanol. BA is also continuously consumed even before the 
diauxic-shift and the onset of MPPA production in the production strains belonging to group III. In addition, 
BA is continuously consumed by the wildtype and reference strains that have an intact ALT1 and do not express 
ATA.
Since the activity of oxidoreductases are dependent on NADH and/or NADPH, we can speculate that loss 
of ALT1 and its role in anabolic reactions can affect growth and the redox state in cells. Reduced NADH/
NAD+ ratio in ALT1 deletion strains could in theory inhibit the activity of a NADH dependent benzylacetone 
reductase and the formation of OH. The limited growth on glucose for ALT1 deletion strains belonging to 
group II, as indicated by the biomass yield (p-value = 1.2E−2), the expression of the GFP growth reporter gene 
(p-value = 4.8E−2), and the complete lack of growth on ethanol as seen on the GFP growth reporter gene (p-value 
= 1.2E−2), could be explained by this hypothesis (Table S4). Furthermore, the redox state of yeast is known to 
be regulated by glycerol production by the action of glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 29. During catabolic 
reactions, intermediate metabolites, NADH and NADPH are produced. The cell uses NADH to drive the electron 
transport chain for ATP production. The intermediate metabolites act as building blocks in anabolic reactions 
that are fueled by ATP and NADPH. During normal growth conditions, the redox state in a cell is balanced, but 
if more NADH/NADPH needs to be recycled due to poor growth, yeast could in theory compensate for that by 
increasing glycerol production. When comparing the glycerol yield among strains grown on glucose, a highly 
significant increase (p-value = 1.2E−2) can be detected among all slow growing yeasts belonging to group II 
(Fig. 5c, Supplementary Table S4).
It is important to note that yeast has been reported to produce glycerol under two additional conditions 
related to stress. These are (I) at pH 7 and above, and (II) under high osmotic stress 29,30. It is however unlikely 
that the remarkable differences in glycerol yield would be caused by these two stresses, since the cultivations 
were conducted under fully controlled, uniform and optimum growth conditions in bioreactors.
While the activity of ATA and MPPA formation is exclusively restricted to ethanol growth-phase in group 
III yeasts, the concentration of BA is continuously reduced in the culture media throughout the experiment 
(Supplementary Fig. S4). Since BA is an oily substance with a tendency to stick to various surfaces, and its 
continuous reduction in the culture media could be correlated to biomass formation, we decided to investigate 
this further. Indeed, when we tested a high biomass concentration (OD 25), we could detect the effect of BA 
bound to biomass (Supplementary Fig. S5). This effect could be as high as 10% of the observed loss of BA in 
all fermentations. However, since the unexplained loss of BA could be as high as 80% among MPPA producing 
strains (Supplementary Fig. S6), the absorption of BA to biomass can only partly explain the continuous 
reduction of BA throughout all fermentations.
Our results suggest that yeast converts BA to additional compounds other than MPPA and OH, and there 
must be other competing reactions for BA, and possibly alanine. To investigate this further, we decided to 
identify any unknown product by NMR using 15N labelled alanine as amine donor, and 13C labelled glucose as 
the only carbon source.
We first scaled down the 250 ml bioreactor experiments to 25 ml in baffled Erlenmeyer flasks, and finally to 
1,5 ml in mini-vials. Two strains representative of group II, and group III yeasts were included in the experiment. 
These two strains were the reference strain (TMBAH61) with one copy of ATA, and the production strain 
(TMBAH62) with 7 copies of ATA. No changes in growth-profile could be detected for any strain during the 
down-scaling process (Supplementary Fig. S7, Fig. S8). In other words, the reference strain displayed the growth-
profile typical of group II yeasts, and the production strain followed the growth-profile of group III yeasts, at all 
three culture volumes tested. Three time-points were taken for NMR measurements, as can be seen in figures S7 
and S8. The first time-point was taken during glucose growth for both experiments after 23 h (TMBAH61) and 
30 h (TMBAH62). The second time-point was taken after 45 h (TMBAH61) when glucose was depleted, and 
after 50 h (TMBAH62) during ethanol growth. The third time-point was taken after 68 h (TMBAH61), and after 
75 h (TMBAH62) after ethanol was depleted.
The 15N spectra revealed three major peaks of which two were known, alanine and MPPA (Supplementary 
Fig. S9). The third unknown peak was successfully identified as ethylamine (C 2H7N). Alanine and ethylamine 
could also be detected in the 13C spectra, along with pyruvate. Alanine was detected in all three time points, both 
intracellularly and in the culture media for both strains (Fig.  6). Our results also demonstrate that alanine was 
not depleted during the experiments, since it was detected in high abundance, in all three time points. MPPA 
is only visible in 15N spectra, which confirm that BA added to the culture media is the only source for MPPA 
production.
Unfortunately, pyruvate could not be detected in any of the intracellular samples, which means that more cells 
were needed for the extraction, or that a more efficient extraction method for this central carbon- metabolite is 
required (Fig. 6). The pyruvate concentration in the culture media was however high enough to be detected by 
NMR. Pyruvate could be detected at the first time-point, during glucose growth phase for both strains, but only 
in the last two time-points for the reference strain. This result is congruent with our HPLC data (Fig.  5b) and 
further confirms our hypothesis on inhibition of alanine transaminase by overflow metabolism. Ethylamine was 
detected intracellularly only in the production strain (TMBAH62) at the two last time-points, which suggested 
that ethylamine was produced from acetaldehyde by ATA. To shed more light on whether Cv-ATA could indeed 
have produced ethylamine, we analyzed the activity of the purified enzyme using an alanine transaminase 
activity assay with ethylamine or MPPA as amine donor. While MPPA was readily accepted as substrate by 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:16972 8| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01182-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
the purified enzyme, we could not detect any activity with ethylamine as amine donor (Supplementary Figure 
S10). Furthermore, no significant transaminase activity towards ethylamine or MPPA was detected in cell-free 
extract from the cen.pk background strain. These findings suggest that ethylamine production is likely due to 
native yeast enzyme activity. Future studies could focus on identifying and characterizing these native enzymes 
to better understand their contributions to the overall metabolic network.
Conclusions
In conclusion, our study demonstrates that metabolically engineered baker’s yeast is an effective catalyst for 
producing chiral amines from prochiral ketones. We found that using ethanol as a co-substrate, rather than 
glucose, significantly enhances amine production, likely due to lower intracellular pyruvate levels. Furthermore, 
replacing the native alanine aminotransferase (ALT1) with omega transaminase from Chromobacterium 
violaceum (cv-ATA) markedly improved production by reducing competition for alanine utilization. Under 
optimal conditions, the bioconversion of benzylacetone to ( S)−1-methyl-3-phenylpropylamine achieved high 
yield. These findings underscore the potential of engineered yeast and optimized metabolic pathways to advance 
the efficient production of valuable chiral amines.
Methods
General molecular work
All PCR reactions were done using phusion (Thermo Scientific) unless stated otherwise, and synthetized DNA 
oligos were ordered from Eurofins Genomics. All PCR purifications were done with GeneJET PCR purification 
kit (Thermo Scientific) and all gel-extractions were done with low melt agarose (Bio-Rad) and GeneJET gel 
extraction kit (Thermo Scientific). All plasmid purifications were done using GeneJET plasmid miniprep kit 
(Thermo Scientific). All ligations were done with NEBuilder (New England Biolabs), and all yeast transformations 
were done using Li-Acetate heat-shot protocol31.
Strain development – reporter strains
Reporter strains were constructed to monitor growth during process optimization for conversion of ketone BA 
to chiral amine MPPA. A recombinant growth reporter gene consisting of mEGFP and the CYC1 terminator 
under the control of a RPL22 A promoter was assembled and sub-cloned in the pCfB3034 plasmid. The reporter 
Fig. 6. Detection of 15N labelled alanine and ethylamine, and 13C labelled pyruvate in the reference strain with 
one copy of ATA (TMBAH61), and the production strain with 7 copies of ATA (TMBAH62). Compounds were 
detected in extracellular supernatant (A and B), as well as intracellular samples (C and D).
 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:16972 9| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01182-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
gene was subsequently introduced in the X-3 locus of yeast strains TMB4375 that already contain 6 copies of 
ATA6, the reference TMB4131, and a wild type strain cen.pk.113-7D (Table  1, S1) using the CrispR-cas9 easy 
clone approach20. We upgraded a previously developed growth reporter system 18 by using a monoclonal yeast 
enhanced version of GFP (mEGFP) that contains the monomerizing A206 K mutation for improved signal and 
reduced chance of protein aggregation, due to overexpression32,33. The RPL22a promoter fragment was amplified 
with primer pairs 5’X-3_RPL22a Fw and 5’mEGFP_RPL22a Rv using genomic cen.pk113-7D as template DNA. 
The mEGFP ORF was amplified with primer pairs mEGFP Fw and mEGFP Rv using plasmid mEGFP-FKBP(M)
x4 as template DNA. The plasmid was a gift from Benjamin Glick (Addgene plasmid #85004;  h t t p : / / n 2 t . n e t / a 
d d g e n e : 8 5 0 0 4     ; RRID: Addgene_85004). A CYC1 terminator was also amplified from that same plasmid with 
primer pairs 5’mEGFP_CYC1 Fw and 3’X-3_CYC1 Rv. Prior to assembling the recombinant growth reporter 
gene and cloning it, a plasmid backbone was prepared by digesting pCfB3034 with restriction enzymes SbfI-HF 
and BstAPI (New England Biolabs) following the manufacturers recommendations. The digested plasmid was 
gel-purified from low melt agarose. An initial attempt to assemble all fragments in an equimolar fraction using 
NEBuilder with 100ng of SbfI and BstAPI double-digested plasmid backbone resulted in no positives. This was 
resolved by first assembling all growth reporter gene fragments (RPL22A, mEGFP , and CYC1) in an equimolar 
ratio using NEBuilder. The assembled construct was then amplified with PCR using the flanking primer pairs 
5’X-3_RPL22a Fw and 3’X-3_CYC1 Rv. The NEBuilder reaction mixture was diluted 100 times and used as a 
source for template DNA. The fragment of correct size was gel-purified from low melt agarose, and cloned in 
a final step with SbfI and BstAPI double-digested pCfB3034 plasmid backbone using NEBuilder, following the 
manufacturers recommendations. Positive transformants were screened for in a first step by double digestion 
using SwaI and FspI (New England Biolabs) and finally sequence verified (Eurofins Genomics).
Donor DNA for CrispR-cas9 transformation was prepared from one positive transformant, cultured 
overnight in a shaking incubator at 37 oC in 10 ml LB supplemented with ampicillin. Plasmid was extracted 
and donor DNA was excised with SmiI (New England Biolabs). After PCR purification, 1 ug of donor DNA 
was added together with 250 ng of gRNA (pCfB3041) and used to transform yeast that already contain the 
Cas9 plasmid pCFB231220. Transformants expressing both gRNA and Cas9 were selected for on YPD 2% agar 
supplemented with nourseothricin (100 ug/ml) and geneticin (200 ug/ml). Positive transformants were verified 
by fluorescence and full length insert by PCR using primer pairs X-3 ver-Fw and X-3 ver-Rv. Three positives of 
each strain were kept as −80 oC glycerol stock.
Amine (MPPA) production strains (ATA 1x, 6x, 7x)
CrispR-cas9 constructs were designed for replacement of yeast native ALT1 allele with an additional copy of 
ATA in three growth reporter strains. These were (I) the cen.pk113-7D reference strain TMBAH13, (II) the cen.
pk2-1 C reference strain TMBAH19, and (III) the cen.pk2-1 C production strain TMBAH25 that already contain 
6 copies of ATA (Table 1, S1). In the first step, the native ALT1 allele was replaced by a nourseothricin resistance 
encoding gene (NatMX) through homologous recombination. In the second step, the NatMX-knockout cassette, 
which is flanked with gRNA sites was targeted by Crispr-cas9, and subsequently replaced with the ATA gene 
(illustrated in Fig. 3).
The NatMX-knockout cassette was constructed by PCR, using primer pairs 5’ ALT1_NAT Fw and 3’ ALT1_
NAT Rv (Table S5), and plasmid pCfB3041 as template DNA. Correct PCR product was verified for its integrity 
with 1% agarose gel-electrophoresis, and subsequently PCR purified. Y east were transformed with 0.5 ug of 
purified PCR product, and knock-out transformants were selected for on YPD 2% agar plates supplemented with 
nourseothricin (100 ug/ml).
A duplex gRNA plasmid that can be selected for on hygromycin, and that target both flanks of the NatMX-
knockout cassette was constructed. First a plasmid back-bone without the existing nourseothricin resistance 
encoding gene was prepared from digesting pCfB3043 with SphI-HF and NcoI-HF (New England Biolabs) 
followed by gel-purification. A hygromycin resistance encoding ORF (HPH) was amplified with primer pairs 
HPH-Fw and HPH-Rv using pRS305H 34 as template DNA, and subsequently PCR purified. Both fragments 
were ligated in a 2:1 ratio with 50 ng of digested plasmid backbone using NEBuilder. Positive clones were 
verified by PCR, using primer pairs pCfB3043-Fw and pCfB3043-Rv, followed by PCR purification and integrity 
check on low melt agarose gel. A universal gRNA cloning site, used for inserting gRNA either as singlets or for 
multiplexing, was designed and subsequently ordered from Eurofins Genomics and delivered as a plasmid (Table 
S5). The sub-cloned fragment was amplified with PCR using primer pairs cloningsite-Fw and cloningsite-Rv. 
The reaction was PCR purified, verified by gel-electrophoresis and subsequently ligated in a 2:1 ratio with 50 ng 
of PCR amplified plasmid backbone using NEBuilder. Positive transformants were sequence verified (Eurofins 
Genomics) with primer pairs gRNA_seq-Fw and gRNA_seq-Rv. One positive plasmid was digested with 
XmajI and XhoI (Thermo Scientific) followed by gel-extraction. A duplex gRNA fragment was designed and 
subsequently ordered from Eurofins Genomics, and delivered as a plasmid (Table S5). The sub-cloned fragment 
was amplified with PCR, using primer pairs gRNA-Fw and gRNA-Rv. The reaction was PCR purified and ligated 
in a 2:1 ratio with 50 ng of the double-digested plasmid backbone. Positive transformants were sequence verified 
(Eurofins Genomics) with primer pairs gRNA_seq-Fw and gRNA_seq-Rv and two positive clones were stored 
in glycerol stock at −80 oC.
The donor DNA, which consist of the ATA gene flanked with 50 bp long sequences that are homologous to 
the upstream and downstream sequences of genomic ALT1, was constructed by PCR using pNW126 as template. 
The primer pairs were 5’ ALT1_cvATA-Fw and 3’ ALT1_cvATA-Rv. PCR product was verified with 1% agarose gel 
electrophoresis, followed by PCR purification and later used as donor DNA.
Y east strains that had their native alanine transaminase (ALT1) replaced by a NatMX-knockout cassette 
were transformed with 700 ng of Cas9 plasmid pCFB2312, 500 ng duplex gRNA and 500 ng of donor DNA. 
Transformants containing both plasmids were selected for on YPD 2% agar plates supplemented with geneticin 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:16972 10| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01182-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
(200 ug/ml) and hygromycin (300 ug/ml). Positive transformants that had lost the NatMX-gene and gained one 
extra copy of ATA, were verified by colony PCR using Q5 polymerase and GC-enhancer (New England Biolabs) 
and primer pairs ALT1-Fw and ALT1-Rv.
Amino acid screening
Different amino acids were tested for how well they function as amine-donors for ATA expressed in yeast. 
Amino acids were screened at three concentrations, 250 mM, 500 mM, and 1 M. A total of ten amino acids can 
be dissolved at 250 mM and they were all included in this study (Fig.  1b). Out of these ten amino acids, eight 
could be dissolved at 500 mM, and five out of these could be dissolved at the highest concentration 1 M. The 
only buffer was YP , and the start and end pH was determined at the highest amino acid concentration. Single 
colonies of yeast from agar plates were used to inoculate 3 ml of YP 2% glucose broth in 15 ml Falcon tubes. The 
cultures were incubated overnight at 30 oC, and at 250 rpm. The overnight cultures were diluted approximately 
500 times in 50 ml of YP 5% glucose broth, in baffled 250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks, equipped with cotton plugs to 
ensure aerobic condition. The cultures were then incubated at 30 oC in a shake-incubator at 250 rpm overnight, 
for approximately 16 h, until reaching the post-exponential phase of OD600 between 16 and 18. Optical density 
was measured and the volume needed, to dissolve in 10 ml of OD 25, were transferred to a 50 ml falcon tube 
and stored on ice. Cells were concentrated by centrifugation at 3000 g, and the pellets were resuspended to a 
final volume of 10 ml ice-cold YP 5% glucose broth, supplemented with 5 mM benzylacetone (BA) and the 
amino acid. Cell-suspensions were transferred to 50 ml serum flasks equipped with a 20 mm magnetic stirrer, 
and rubber-lids. The lids were perforated with a syringe needle, closed with a cotton plug, to ensure aerobic 
conditions. The serum flasks were incubated at 30 oC in a water bath equipped with magnetic stirrers set to 250 
rpm. 800 ul samples for HPLC were taken at the start, and at the end of each experiment after 6 days. Samples 
were transferred to 1,5 ml microcentrifuge tubes that were kept on ice until centrifugation at 9000 g for 3 min. 
Supernatant were filtered through 0,2 micron PTFE filters, and stored at −20 oC until further analysis with 
HPLC.
Characterization in bioreactors
Y easts were characterized for MPPA production in minifors bioreactors (INFORS HT) with a working volume 
of 250 ml. All cultivations were done at 30 oC and in duplicates, unless stated otherwise. The stirrer speed 
was set automatically varying from 200 to 1000 rpm to maintain aerobic condition, by keeping the dissolved 
oxygen concentration above 30% throughout the whole experiment. Dissolved oxygen was monitored with an 
InPro 6800 S sensor (Mettler Toledo). pH was maintained at 5 (± 0.5 units) by KOH (1 M) and H2SO4 (0.5 M), 
monitored with a 405-DPAS-SC-K8S/225 (Mettler Toledo) sensor. CO2 and O2 levels were determined in the gas 
outflow with gas analyzers BC-CO2 and BCP-O2 (BlueSens). All cultivations were done in synthetic minimal 
media21 using 2% glucose as the sole carbon source. Overnight cultures were done in YP 2% glucose broth, and 
all pre-inoculums were washed in synthetic media once and diluted approximately 250 times when inoculating 
a bioreactor. This resulted in approximately 250 times higher biomass by the end of each fermentation. Samples 
were taken at different time points for HPLC measurements, and growth was followed by OD600 and dry-weight 
measurement as previously described22. Growth was also monitored on single-cell level with flow cytometry by 
detecting green fluorescence in live cells, which was expressed by a growth-reporter gene.
BA absorption to biomass
Overnight culture of the wild type cen.pk113-7D strain was washed in ice-cold water, and concentrated to OD600 
25 in 2 ml minimal media21 supplemented with 5 mM BA. The sample was thoroughly mixed using a pipette, and 
1 ml was serial diluted three times to a final OD600 of 3 in 2 ml microcentrifuge tubes. The serial diluted samples 
were then centrifuged 3 min at maximum speed and stored on ice. Supernatant were filtered through 0,2 micron 
PTFE filters and kept on ice until HPLC measurements.
Cultures for NMR
Experiments were downscaled from 250 ml in bioreactors, to 25 ml in a 100 ml baffled Erlenmeyer flasks, 
and finally to 1,5 ml in a 5 ml mini-vials equipped with a 10 mm magnetic stirrer. All cultures were grown in 
same synthetic media with same concentrations of supplements as in the bioreactor experiments, apart from 
alanine and glucose for NMR measurements 15N alanine, and 13C glucose were used for cultivations in mini-
vials. The starting cultures for Erlenmeyer flasks and mini-vial experiments were prepared similarly to those 
for the bioreactor. Y east pre-cultures were grown overnight in YP 2% glucose, washed in synthetic media, and 
diluted 250 times in either Erlenmeyer flasks or to OD 0,2 in mini-vials. Erlenmeyer flask were closed with 
cotton-stoppers, and the cultures were incubated at 30 oC in a shake incubator, set to 250 rpm to ensure aerobic 
conditions. Mini-vials were closed with cotton stoppers and cultures were incubated in a 30 oC water bath, 
equipped with magnetic stirrers that were set to 250 rpm to ensure aerobic conditions. Sampling for OD, DW 
and HPLC measurements from Erlenmeyer flask cultures were done in the same way as for the bioreactors. 
Samples from mini-vials were taken at three time-points, for each strain and experiment. Three replicates were 
run in parallel for each strain. At each time-point, 3 × 300 ul were taken from one replicate and separated into 
three 1,5 ml microcentrifuge tubes kept on ice, and immediately centrifuged at 10 000 g for 1  min at 4 oC. 
Supernatant were pooled and filtered through a 0,2 micron PTFE filter. 500 ul of the filtered supernatant was 
added to a 1,5 ml microcentrifuge tube, and the remainder to another microcentrifuge tube that was kept at −20 
oC for HPLC measurements. The 500 ul supernatant sample was snap frozen in dry-ice mixed with ethanol, and 
stored long-term at −80 oC until NMR measurements. Cell- pellets were first washed in 500 ul ice-cold minimal 
media, and then snap frozen in dry-ice and ethanol, and stored long-term at −80 oC.
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:16972 11| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01182-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Cell extracts were prepared for NMR by dissolving frozen pellets in 600 ul of ice-cold 80% methanol 35. 
Samples were kept on ice for 30 min, then filtered through a 0,2 micron PTFE filter, and purged with N2 for 30 
min on ice, and finally lyophilized for 4 h. Frozen 500 ul filtered supernatant samples were directly lyophilized 
for 4 h. All samples were kept at −80 oC prior to NMR measurements.
Flow cytometry
Green fluorescence was measured with a BD Accuri C6 flow cytometer equipped with a 510/15 nm detection 
filter (BD Biosciences). Culture samples were diluted in phosphate buffered saline solution to an OD 600 of 
approximately 0,5. For each sample, 5 ul propidium iodide (250 mg/l) was added to stain dead cells. Samples 
were incubated in room temperature, protected from light for 10 min before measurement with the flow 
cytometer. Cells were detected at a flowrate of 35 µl/min, and events above a threshold of 80 000 were measured 
with forward scatter height (FSC—H). A total of 10 000 events were registered for each sample for further data-
analysis using a script compiled in Matlab for this study. The script is available for downloading the following 
GitHub repository: https://github.com/MicrobialEngineeringGroupTMB/.
This script applies combinations of four different filters on the data-set, one static, one dynamic and two that 
are user-specified. The first static filter retains non-zero events that are considered as cells in the green (FL1-H) 
and the red (FL3-H) channels. The second filter separates single-cells from the rest by applying a user-defined 
cut-off value on the width-channel. Under uniform conditions in a bioreactor, this filter is usually optimized 
once for each strain. The third filter is used to define green-fluorescent sub-populations by applying a user-
defined cut-off value on the FL1-H channel. Under uniform conditions in bioreactors, this filter is usually set 
once for the specific biosensor used. The fourth filter automatically separates live cells from the rest of the data-
set by modeling the sub-population consisting of live-cells in the FL3-H channel, with the k-density function in 
Matlab. The rationale behind using an automated sorting algorithm for this parameter is because it is the only 
one expected to vary, even within uniform culture conditions and the same strain. This parameter is for example 
dependent on the incubation time of PI, or in other words, when exactly the sample is run in the flow cytometer 
after addition of PI. The time might vary depending on the sample size at a specific time-point. By applying the 
defined gates in different combinations for each time-series, we could define subsets of relevant subpopulations 
that might not be detected otherwise by other statistical or visualization methods. For example, subpopulations 
of (I) Live cells (II) Live Single cells (III) Live Single GFP positive cells and (IV) Live Single GFP negative cells, 
and their corresponding counterparts were followed for each cultivation.
HPLC
Glucose, pyruvate, succinate, glycerol, acetate, and ethanol were quantified by high-performance liquid 
chromatography binary pump 1525 (Waters) equipped with a refractive index detector 10 A (Shimadzu) and a 
300*7.8 mm aminex HPX-87 H column (Bio-Rad). The mobile phase was 5 mM H2SO4 with a constant flow rate 
of 0.60 ml/min through a column temperature of 60 oC.
4-Phenylbutan-2-one (BA), 4-Phenylbutan-2-amine (MPPA) and 4-Phenylbutan-2-ol (OH) were quantified 
by high-performance liquid chromatography (Dionex 3000 RS with UV 260 nm detection) and an Evo C18 2.6 
µ 50 × 2.1 mm column (Phenomenex). The mobile phase was 80% water containing NaOH pH 11.3 and 20% 
acetonitrile, with a constant rate of 0.5 ml/min through a column temperature of 30 oC.
NMR
Lyophilized samples were dissolved in 80% v/v of 100 mM acetate buffer, pH 4 and 20% v/v acetone d 6
35. In 
order to identify compounds, four reference samples were prepared that contained MPPA, BA, pyruvate and 
ethylamine. All NMR experiments were performed on a 600 MHz Agilent VNMRS DirectDrive spectrometer. 
Heteronuclear single-quantum correlation (HSQC) experiments36 were performed at temperatures of 298 K and 
268 K for 13C and 15N nuclei, respectively. In the 15N-HSQC, the spectral widths were 13 ppm covered by 1024 
data points for 1 H, and 30 ppm covered by 256 data points for 15N. In the 13C-HSQC, the spectral widths were 
9.5 ppm covered by 1024 points for 1 H, and 140 ppm covered by 256 points for 13C. All spectra were processed 
using NMRPipe37, employing solvent filtering, squared cosine apodization, and zero filling to twice the number 
of data points. All spectra were analyzed in the CCPNmr program suite 38. Peak volumes were integrated using 
PINT39,40.
Transaminase enzyme assay
Pure Cv-ATA (kindly provided by Dr. Isabela Mendes Bonfim) and cell-free yeast extract from Cen.PK 113-7D 
grown on ethanol was evaluated for transaminase activity with ethylamine, and MPPA as substrate. The reaction 
was performed at 30 degrees in HEPES-buffer at pH 7, containing 2 mg/L Cv-ATA, 1 mM PLP , 500 µM pyruvate, 
and 5 mM MPPA or ethylamine. The reaction ran for 30 min and was quenched by boiling the sample for 10 min 
in a heat block. The concentration of alanine was measured with an Alanine Kit (Cell Biolabs) according to the 
instructions from the manufacturer.
Statistical analysis
Statistical tests were done with R (version 4.3.0). Several growth parameters and central carbon metabolites were 
investigated for significant differences among groups with Mann-Whitney U test. The investigated parameters 
and the test results are summarized in Table S4. Even if equal variance cannot be assumed for any of the 
investigated parameters, as a result from failed Bartlett and Levene test, similar conclusions are still supported 
by Welch-test. MPPA yield comparison among strains were tested for normal distribution (QQ-plot) and equal 
variance (F-test). Only when passing both tests, a one-sided and two-sample T-test was calculated to test for 
significance.
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:16972 12| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01182-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
Data availability
DNA sequences in this study are available in the Supplementary Information. Other relevant datasets used and/
or analyzed during the study can be made available upon reasonable request to the corresponding author.
Code availability
The custom made Matlab script that was used to analyze all flowcytometry data in this study can be download-
ed from the following GitHub repository: https://github.com/MicrobialEngineeringGroupTMB/.
Received: 28 December 2024; Accepted: 5 May 2025
References
 1. Romero-Suarez, D., Keasling, J. D. & Jensen, M. K. Supplying plant natural products by yeast cell factories. Curr. Opin. Green. 
Sustainable Chem. 33, 100567. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogsc.2021.100567 (2022).
 2. Liu, Z., Wang, J. & Nielsen, J. Y east synthetic biology advances biofuel production. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 65, 33–39.  h t t p s : / / d o i . o r 
g / 1 0 . 1 0 1 6 / j . m i b . 2 0 2 1 . 1 0 . 0 1 0     (2022).
 3. Froidevaux, V ., Negrell, C., Caillol, S., Pascault, J. P . & Boutevin, B. Biobased amines: from synthesis to polymers; present and 
future. Chem. Rev. 116, 14181–14224. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00486 (2016).
 4. Roose, P ., Henkes, E. K. & Rossbacher, E. R., Höke H. in Ullmann’s Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry (2015).
 5. Tufvesson, P ., Lima-Ramos, J., Nordblad, M. & Woodley, J. M. Guidelines and cost analysis for catalyst production in biocatalytic 
processes. Org. Process Res. Dev. 15, 266–274. https://doi.org/10.1021/op1002165 (2011).
 6. Weber, N., Gorwa-Grauslund, M. & Carlquist, M. Improvement of whole-cell transamination with Saccharomyces cerevisiae using 
metabolic engineering and cell pre-adaptation. Microb. Cell. Fact. 16 https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-016-0615-3 (2017).
 7. Knudsen, J. D., Hägglöf, C., Weber, N. & Gorwa-Grauslund, M. Increased availability of NADH in metabolically engineered 
Baker’s yeast improves transaminase-oxidoreductase coupled asymmetric whole-cell bioconversion. Microb. Cell. Fact. 5, 37.  h t t p 
s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 1 8 6 / s 1 2 9 3 4 - 0 1 6 - 0 4 3 0 - x     (2016).
 8. Weber, N., Gorwa-Grauslund, M. & Carlquist, M. Exploiting cell metabolism for biocatalytic whole-cell transamination by 
Recombinant Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 98, 4615–4624. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00253-014-5576-z 
(2014).
 9. Weber, N., Gorwa-Grauslund, M. & Carlquist, M. Engineered Baker’s yeast as whole-cell biocatalyst for one-pot stereo-selective 
conversion of amines to alcohols. Microb. Cell. Fact. 13, 118. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12934-014-0118-z (2014).
 10. Tufvesson, P . et al. Process considerations for the asymmetric synthesis of chiral amines using transaminases. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 
108, 1479–1493. https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.23154 (2011).
 11. Muratovska, N. & Carlquist, M. Recombinant yeast for production of the pain receptor modulator nonivamide from Vanillin. 
Front. Chem. Eng. 4 https://doi.org/10.3389/fceng.2022.1097215 (2023).
 12. Muratovska, N. et al. Towards engineered yeast as production platform for capsaicinoids. Biotechnol. Adv. 59, 107989.  h t t p s : / / d o i . 
o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 1 6 / j . b i o t e c h a d v . 2 0 2 2 . 1 0 7 9 8 9     (2022).
 13. Braun-Galleani, S., Henríquez, M. J. & Nesbeth, D. N. Whole cell biosynthesis of 1-methyl-3-phenylpropylamine and 2-amino-1,3,4-
butanetriol using Komagataella phaffii (Pichia pastoris) strain BG-10 engineered with a transgene encoding Chromobacterium 
violaceum ω-transaminase. Heliyon 5, e02338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e02338 (2019).
 14. Flikweert, M. T. et al. Pyruvate decarboxylase: an indispensable enzyme for growth of Saccharomyces cerevisiae on glucose. Yeast 
12, 247–257. https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-0061(19960315)12:3<247::AID-YEA911>3.0.CO;2-I (1996)
 15. Hagman, A. & Piškur, J. A study on the fundamental mechanism and the evolutionary driving forces behind aerobic fermentation 
in yeast. PLOS ONE. 10, e0116942. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0116942 (2015).
 16. García-Campusano, F . et al. ALT1-encoded Alanine aminotransferase plays a central role in the metabolism of Alanine in 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Can. J. Microbiol. 55, 368–374. https://doi.org/10.1139/W08-150 (2009).
 17. Kaulmann, U., Smithies, K., Smith, M. E. B., Hailes, H. C. & Ward, J. M. Substrate spectrum of [omega]-transaminase from 
Chromobacterium violaceum DSM30191 and its potential for biocatalysis. Enzym. Microb. Technol. 41, 628–637.  h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 
0 . 1 0 1 6 / j . e n z m i c t e c . 2 0 0 7 . 0 5 . 0 1 1     (2007).
 18. Carlquist, M. et al. Physiological heterogeneities in microbial populations and implications for physical stress tolerance. Microbial 
Cell Factories 11, https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-2859-11-94 (2012).
 19. Usaite, R., Patil, K. R., Grotkjær, T., Nielsen, J. & Regenberg, B. Global transcriptional and physiological responses of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae to ammonium, l-Alanine, or l-Glutamine limitation. Appl. Environ. Microb. 72, 6194–6203.  h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 1 2 8 / A E 
M . 0 0 5 4 8 - 0 6     (2006).
 20. Jessop-Fabre, M. M. et al. EasyClone-MarkerFree: A vector toolkit for marker-less integration of genes into Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae via CRISPR-Cas9. Biotechnol. J. 11, 1110–1117. https://doi.org/10.1002/biot.201600147 (2016).
 21. Verduyn, C., Postma, E., Scheffers, W . A. & Van Dijken, J. P . Effect of benzoic acid on metabolic fluxes in yeasts: a continuous-
culture study on the regulation of respiration and alcoholic fermentation. Yeast 8, 501–517. https://doi.org/10.1002/yea.320080703 
(1992).
 22. Hagman, A., Säll, T., Compagno, C. & Piskur, J. Y east Make-Accumulate-Consume life strategy evolved as a Multi-Step process that 
predates the whole genome duplication. PLOS ONE. 8, e68734. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0068734 (2013).
 23. Postma, E., Verduyn, C., Scheffers, W . A. & Dijken, J. P . V . Enzymic analysis of the Crabtree effect in glucose-limited Chemostat 
cultures of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Appl. Environ. Microb. 55, 468–477. https://doi.org/10.1128/aem.55.2.468-477.1989 (1989).
 24. Valkonen, M., Mojzita, D., Penttila, M. & Bencina, M. Noninvasive high-throughput single-cell analysis of the intracellular pH of 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae by ratiometric flow cytometry. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 79, 7179–7187.  h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 1 2 8 / A E M . 0 
2 5 1 5 - 1 3     (2013).
 25. Albers, E., Bakker, B. M. & Gustafsson, L. Modeling response of Glycolysis in S. Cerevisiae cells harvested at Diauxic shift. Mol. 
Biol. Rep. 29, 119–123. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1020349023158 (2002).
 26. Yun, H., Lim, S., Cho, B. K. & Kim, B. G. ω-Amino acid:pyruvate transaminase from Alcaligenes denitrificans Y2k-2: a new catalyst 
for kinetic resolution of β-Amino acids and amines. Appl. Environ. Microb. 70, 2529–2534.  h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 1 2 8 / A E M . 7 0 . 4 . 2 5 2 
9 - 2 5 3 4 . 2 0 0 4     (2004).
 27. Bea, H. S., Lee, S. H. & Yun, H. Asymmetric synthesis of (R)-3-fluoroalanine from 3-fluoropyruvate using omega-transaminase. 
Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng. 16, 291–296. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12257-010-0282-x (2011).
 28. Shin, G., Mathew, S. & Yun, H. Kinetic resolution of amines by (R)-selective omega-transaminase from Mycobacterium vanbaalenii. 
J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 23, 128–133. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2014.08.003 (2015).
 29. Ansell, R., Granath, K., Hohmann, S., Thevelein, J. M. & Adler, L. The two isoenzymes for yeast NAD+-dependent glycerol 
3-phosphate dehydrogenase encoded by GPD1 and GPD2 have distinct roles in osmoadaptation and redox regulation. EMBO J. 
16, 2179–2187. https://doi.org/10.1093/emboj/16.9.2179 (1997).
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:16972 13| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01182-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/
 30. Albertyn, J., Hohmann, S., Thevelein, J. M. & Prior, B. A. GPD1, which encodes glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, is essential 
for growth under osmotic stress in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and its expression is regulated by the high-osmolarity glycerol 
response pathway. Mol. Cell. Biol. 14, 4135–4144. https://doi.org/10.1128/mcb.14.6.4135-4144.1994 (1994).
 31. Gietz, R. D. & Schiestl, R. H. High-efficiency yeast transformation using the LiAc/SS carrier DNA/PEG method. Nat. Protoc. 2, 
31–34. https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2007.13 (2007).
 32. Barrero, J. J., Papanikou, E., Casler, J. C., Day, K. J. & Glick, B. S. An improved reversibly dimerizing mutant of the FK506-binding 
protein FKBP . Cell. Logistics. 6, e1204848. https://doi.org/10.1080/21592799.2016.1204848 (2016).
 33. Zacharias, D. A., Violin, J. D., Newton, A. C. & Tsien, R. Y . Partitioning of Lipid-Modified monomeric GFPs into membrane 
microdomains of live cells. Science 296, 913–916. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1068539 (2002).
 34. Taxis, C. & Knop, M. System of centromeric, episomal, and integrative vectors based on drug resistance markers for SacCharomyces 
Cerevisiae. BioTechniques 40, 73–78. https://doi.org/10.2144/000112040 (2006).
 35. Ramirez, B., Durst, M. A., Lavie, A. & Caffrey, M. NMR-based metabolite studies with (15)N amino acids. Sci. Rep. 9, 12798. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-49208-8 (2019).
 36. Bodenhausen, G. & Ruben, D. J. Natural abundance nitrogen-15 NMR by enhanced heteronuclear spectroscopy. Chem. Phys. Lett. 
69, 185–189. https://doi.org/10.1016/0009-2614(80)80041-8 (1980).
 37. Delaglio, F . et al. NMRPipe: a multidimensional spectral processing system based on UNIX pipes. J. Biomol. NMR. 6, 277–293. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00197809 (1995).
 38. Vranken, W . F . et al. The CCPN data model for NMR spectroscopy: development of a software pipeline. Proteins 59, 687–696. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/prot.20449 (2005).
 39. Niklasson, M. et al. Comprehensive analysis of NMR data using advanced line shape fitting. J. Biomol. NMR. 69, 93–99.  h t t p s : / / d o 
i . o r g / 1 0 . 1 0 0 7 / s 1 0 8 5 8 - 0 1 7 - 0 1 4 1 - 6     (2017).
 40. Ahlner, A., Carlsson, M., Jonsson, B. H. & Lundstrom, P . PINT: a software for integration of peak volumes and extraction of 
relaxation rates. J. Biomol. NMR. 56, 191–202. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10858-013-9737-7 (2013).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants from FORMAS, The Royal Physiographic Society in Lund, and Magnus Berg-
valls foundation. Elke Monika Lohmeier-Vogel is acknowledged for helpful discussion on sample preparation 
for NMR, and Anna Karlsson for assistance in evaluating different amine donors.
Author contributions
A.H.; research design, molecular work, data analysis, manuscript draft. M.C.; research design, data analysis, 
manuscript revision and editing, and funding. C.G.; research design, data analysis, manuscript revision, and 
funding. O.S., G.C., M.A.: NMR analysis. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript.
Funding
Open access funding provided by Lund University.
Declarations
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Supplementary Information The online version contains supplementary material available at  h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g / 1 
0 . 1 0 3 8 / s 4 1 5 9 8 - 0 2 5 - 0 1 1 8 2 - 0     .  
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A.H. or M.C.
Reprints and permissions information is available at www.nature.com/reprints.
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which 
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give 
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and 
indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s 
Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included 
in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or 
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy 
of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025 
Scientific Reports |        (2025) 15:16972 14| https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-025-01182-0
www.nature.com/scientificreports/