Editorial: Advances and trends in
microbial production of
biopolymers and their building
blocks
Xinjun Feng1*, Xinglin Jiang2 and Guang Zhao3
1CAS Key Laboratory of Biobased Materials, Qingdao Institute of Bioenergy and Bioprocess
Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, China,2The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center
for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Kongens Lyngby, Denmark,3State Key
Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong University, Jinan, China
KEYWORDS
biopolymer, polyhydroxyalkanoates, polysaccharide, poly (lactic acid), succinic acid,
3-hydroxypropionic acid, microbial technology, carbon emission
Editorial on the Research Topic
Advances and trends in microbial production of biopolymers and their
building blocks
Petroleum-based polymers have played an important role in human daily life, but
they also cause serious environmental pollution due to their low biodegradability. In
contrast, biopolymers have attracted unprecedented attentions with advantage of life
cycle carbon emission reduction under the global achievement of“carbon peak” and
“carbon neutrality”. However, some shortcomings of biopolymes remain and restrict
their popular application, such as high cost, low productivity, and poor material
properties.
This special issue consists of six original papers, one brief research report, two
specialized review papers and one mini review article covering workhorse strains, cheap
raw materials utilization, enzyme screening, monomer biosynthesis and bio-process
optimization, which showcase current progress on biopolymers and aim to provide
possible solutions to the existing problems.
Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are one of the most popular biopolymers that exhibit
similar mechanical properties to petrochemical-derived polymers with the added beneﬁt
of biodegradability and biocompatibility (Rekhi et al., 2022). To date, over 150 types of
PHAs have been produced in the form of homopolymers, random and block copolymers,
thus supporting a wide range of applications.Gao et al., systematically reviewed the recent
advances in microbial synthesis of PHAs, including chassis engineering, substrate
utilization, PHA synthase modiﬁcation, and scale-up biomanufacturing, which will be
of special interest to the researchers in theﬁeld of PHA biosynthesis.
The microbial hosts are crucial to desired biopolymer production. More than
70 genera of microbes have been identiﬁed and/or engineered for PHAs production
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED AND REVIEWED BY
Georg M. Guebitz,
University of Natural Resources and Life
Sciences, Austria
*CORRESPONDENCE
Xinjun Feng,
fengxj@qibebt.ac.cn
SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to Industrial
Biotechnology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Bioengineering and
Biotechnology
RECEIVED 23 August 2022
ACCEPTED 09 September 2022
PUBLISHED 27 September 2022
CITATION
Feng X, Jiang X and Zhao G (2022),
Editorial: Advances and trends in
microbial production of biopolymers
and their building blocks.
Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol.10:1025797.
doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2022.1025797
COPYRIGHT
© 2022 Feng, Jiang and Zhao. This is an
open-access article distributed under
the terms of theCreative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does
not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology frontiersin.org01
TYPE Editorial
PUBLISHED 27 September 2022
DOI 10.3389/fbioe.2022.1025797
(Alcântara et al., 2020 ), such as Ralstonia eutropha ,
Pseudomonas, Escherichia coli , etc. The choice of
microbiological strains directly impacts the chemical
composition, structure and properties of theﬁnal polymers, as
well as the substrate used. In recent years, some bacteria with
particular characteristics have been proved to be economical and
effective hosts.Halomonas bluephagenesis, a halophilic bacteria,
can accumulate poly-3-hydroxybutyrate (PHB) up to more than
80% of the cell dry weight in an open unsterile process (Tan et al.,
2011). Rhodopseudomonas palustris, a photosynthetic bacteria,
has the ability to convert various carbon sources, especially CO2,
into valuable chemicals and biopolymers. A review byLi et al.
provided a comprehensive overview of the advantages, the
challenges and possible solutions ofR. palustris as a powerful
microbial cell factory, speciﬁcally discussed its applications in
production of PHAs, polysaccharides and isoprenoids
monomers.
PHA synthases polymerize various hydroxyacyl-CoAs into
different PHA polymers. However, PHA synthases prefer 3-
hydroxyacyl-CoAs rather than 2-hydroxyacyl-CoAs, which
makes it very dif ﬁcult to synthesize polylactic acid (PLA)
directly in microbial cells. To screen robust PHA synthase
for PLA homopolymer biosynthesis, Shi et al. evaluated the
class I PHA synthase from Chromobacterium sp. USM2 in
engineered E. coli using glucose as carbon source, and
demonstrated that it is feasible to catalyze the
polymerization of lactyl-CoA with better performance in
PLA production than that of the evolved class II PHA
synthase PhaC1
Ps6-19. This work proved that class I PHA
synthase has catalytic ability to 2-hydroxyacyl-CoAs.
As the cost of the substrate can account for up to 50% of the
overall production cost (Urtuvia et al., 2014), various renewable
and inexpensive carbon sources including lignocellulosic
biomass hydrolysates, sugarcane molasses, crude glycerol, have
been evaluated for PHAs production.Szacherska et al.explores to
use short- and medium-chain fatty acids (SMCFAs) as raw
materials for PHA production in three individual
Pseudomonas strains. This study demonstrated that high PHA
productivity can be obtained inPseudomonas sp. Gl06 cultivation
under nitrogen limitation conditions with cheap SMCFA-rich
stream from a cheese production line, and the extracted polymers
possess better properties with lower melting point and
degradation temperature.
Moreover, many bio-monomers can be utilized for polyesters
production directly through chemical polymerization. Succinic
acid is one of building blocks of the commercial polyester poly
(butylene succinate) (PBS) with wide temperature window for
thermoplastic processing. Liu et al. summarized different
succinic acid biosynthetic pathways, concentrating on the key
enzymes and metabolic engineering approaches, and future
perspectives were also proposed. 3-Hydroxypropionic acid (3-
HP) is a versatile platform compound which can be polymerized
into polymers.Liu et al.engineered a 3HP biosynthetic pathway
from glucose with glycerol as intermediate in Klebsiella
pneumoniae, and improved 3-HP production by CRISPR
interference. 2- ﬂuoro-3-hydroxypropionic acid was ﬁrstly
biosynthesized by Liu et al. , which is expected to obtain
ﬂuorine-containing materials such as poly (2- ﬂuoro-3-
hydroxypropionic acid) with better properties. Liu et al.
investigated the biosynthesis of lactate in E. coli and proved
that lysine acetylation of lactate dehydrogenase can regulate
lactate synthesis effectively. In another study, Zhang et al.
improved the bioconversion of phenylpyruvate to
L-phenyllactate, whose homopolymer exhibits high-ultraviolet-
absorbing properties, by introducing a NADH-dependent
L-lactate dehydrogenase mutant into Pichia pastoris coupling
with a NADH regeneration system.
As an important natural biopolymer, polysaccharides have
been widely used in the food, pharmacy, cosmetics, and chemical
industries, and microbial polysaccharides in particular offer
many advantages compared to plant-derived polysaccharides
(Chaabouni et al., 2014). Xu et al., presented the systematic
optimization of fermentation process of exopolysaccharide using
Candida glabrata mutant, resulting in signiﬁcantly improved
production of exopolysaccharide that shows great industrial
application potential.
Finally, we sincerely thank all the submitting authors for
considering to share their updated research outcomes and
opinions in this special issue, the reviewers for their time and
constructive comments to improve the manuscripts, also the
editors Dr. Xiao-Jun Ji and Dr. Ka Yu Cheng for their kind
support. We hope that readersﬁnd these articles in this special
issue interesting and useful for their own research.
Author contributions
XF and GZ conceived the manuscript; XF wrote the
manuscript; XF, XJ, and GZ reviewed and edited the manuscript.
Funding
XF is supported by the Youth Innovation Promotion
Association of Chinese Academy of Sciences (2020214),
National Natural Science Foundation of China (31800081),
and Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province
(ZR2019QB015). GZ is supported by the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (32170085, 31961133014).
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial orﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology frontiersin.org02
Feng et al. 10.3389/fbioe.2022.1025797
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their afﬁliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
References
A l c â n t a r a ,J .M .G . ,D i s t a n t e ,F . ,S t o r t i ,G . ,M o s c a t e l l i ,D . ,M o r b i d e l l i ,M . ,a n dS p o n c h i o n i ,
M. (2020). Current trends in the production of biodegradable bioplastics: The case of
polyhydroxyalkanoates.Biotechnol. Adv.42, 107582. doi:10.1016/j.biotechadv.2020.107582
Chaabouni, E., Gassara, F., and Brar, S. K. (2014).“Biopolymers synthesis and
application,” in Biotransformation of waste biomass into high value biochemicals.
Editors S. K. Brar, G. S. Dhillon, and C. R. Soccol (New York: Springer Press), 415–443.
Rekhi, P., Goswami, M., Ramakrishna, S., and Debnath, M. (2022).
Polyhydroxyalkanoates biopolymers toward decarbonizing economy and
sustainable future. Crit. Rev. Biotechnol. 42 (5), 668–692. doi:10.1080/07388551.
2021.1960265
Tan, D., Xue, Y. S., Aibaidula, G., and Chen, G. Q. (2011). Unsterile and
continuous production of polyhydroxybutyrate by Halomonas TD01.Bioresour.
Technol. 102, 8130–8136. doi:10.1016/j.biortech.2011.05.068
Urtuvia, V., Villegas, P., González, M., and Seeger, M. (2014). Bacterial
production of the biodegradable plastics polyhydroxyalkanoates. Int. J. Biol.
Macromol. 70, 208–213. doi:10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2014.06.001
Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology frontiersin.org03
Feng et al. 10.3389/fbioe.2022.1025797