Citation: Wang, X.; Cui, Z.; Sun, X.;
Wang, Z.; Chen, T. Production of
3-Hydroxypropionic Acid from
Renewable Substrates by
Metabolically Engineered
Microorganisms: A Review. Molecules
2023, 28, 1888. https://doi.org/
10.3390/molecules28041888
Academic Editor: Dimitrios Bikiaris
Received: 13 December 2022
Revised: 8 February 2023
Accepted: 14 February 2023
Published: 16 February 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
molecules
Review
Production of 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid from Renewable
Substrates by Metabolically Engineered
Microorganisms: A Review
Xiaodi Wang 1,2 , Zhenzhen Cui 1,2 , Xi Sun 1,2 , Zhiwen Wang 1,2 and Tao Chen 1,2, *
1 Department of Biochemical Engineering, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University,
Tianjin 300350, China
2 Frontier Science Center for Synthetic Biology and Key Laboratory of Systems Bioengineering (MOE),
School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, China
* Correspondence: chentao@tju.edu.cn; Tel.: +86-22-85356617
Abstract: 3-Hydroxypropionic acid (3-HP) is a platform chemical with a wide range of existing and
potential applications, including the production of poly(3-hydroxypropionate) (P-3HP), a biodegrad-
able plastic. The microbial synthesis of 3-HP has attracted signiﬁcant attention in recent years due
to its green and sustainable properties. In this paper, we provide an overview of the microbial
synthesis of 3-HP from four major aspects, including the main 3-HP biosynthesis pathways and
chassis strains used for the construction of microbial cell factories, the major carbon sources used
for 3-HP production, and fermentation processes. Recent advances in the biosynthesis of 3-HP and
related metabolic engineering strategies are also summarized. Finally, this article provides insights
into the future direction of 3-HP biosynthesis.
Keywords: 3-hydroxypropionic acid; carbon sources; metabolic engineering; synthetic biology
1. Introduction
3-Hydroxypropionic acid (3-HP) is an important bulk chemical with a wide range of
applications in chemical synthesis. Since it contains two reactive groups—hydroxyl and
carboxyl—one of the important applications of 3-HP is its polymerization to yield poly(3-
hydroxypropionate) (P-3HP). Due to its biodegradability and biocompatibility, P-3HP is one
of the widely studied substitutes for petrochemical plastics, with great application value and
development prospects [1]. In addition, 3-HP can undergo redox reactions to produce 1,3-
propanediol (1,3-PDO), acrylic acid, malonic acid, acrylamide, acrylonitrile, etc. [2], which
are widely used in the production of adhesives, plastic packaging, ﬁbers, and cleaning
agents. In particular, acrylic acid occupies the highest market, with a value of USD 12 billion
in 2020, which is projected to be around USD 19.2 billion by 2030 [3,4]. Due to the signiﬁcant
commercial application potential of 3-HP , the market value and size are estimated to be
more than USD 10 billion/year and 3.6 million tons/year, respectively [3].Currently, 3-HP
production is mainly based on chemical synthesis from fossil feedstocks, but chemical
production is costly and environmentally unsafe. 3-HP was listed as one of the most
promising bulk chemicals that can be obtained from renewable materials by the U.S.
Department of Energy [ 5,6], which can be achieved using engineered microorganisms.
In the past few years, several industrial parties, such as OPX Biotechnologies, Cargill,
Novozymes, and BASF, have developed pilot plants for the bio-based production of 3-HP
and its chemical conversion to AA [4,7–9]. A series of genetically engineered microbial cell
factories to convert renewable substances into 3-HP have been constructed via different
biosynthetic pathways [3,10,11]. However, microbial 3-HP synthesis processes still has a
certain distance to travel meet the market demand.
The most important strategy for developing microbial 3-HP synthesis processes is the
selection of suitable microbial chassis strains, effective metabolic pathways and economical
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888. https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules28041888 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/molecules
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 2 of 22
substrate, but the effects of fermentation processes on overall process economics should
also not be ignored. In this paper, we give a brief overview of the main 3-HP biosynthesis
pathways that have been used for the development of microbial cell factories. Notably, we
summarize the excellent cases of microbial 3-HP production from both chassis and substrate
aspects. In this way, readers will have a clearer understanding of the current status of
3-HP production, i.e., what are the 3-HP production pathways, chassis and substrates,
and researchers who want to establish 3-HP microbial cell factories will be able to better
select and combine them. In terms of chassis, we summarize the excellent chassis used for
3-HP production and introduce their characteristics in the production process. In terms of
substrates, we not only summarize the excellent cases of common carbon sources (glycerol
and glucose) in 3-HP production, but also outline the cases of other emerging carbon
sources, such as xylose, acetate, fatty acids, ethanol, and CO2.
2. Main 3-HP Biosynthesis Pathways for the Construction of Microbial Cell Factories
Many 3-HP synthesis pathways have been identiﬁed, and these have been described
in detail in excellent reviews by Kumar [12] and de Fouchécour [11]. The main pathways
that have been used for the construction of 3-HP cell factories are shown in Figure 1. Based
on the key intermediate metabolites, they are termed the glycerol pathway (including
the coenzyme A-dependent pathway and coenzyme A-independent pathway), malonyl
coenzyme A pathway, β-alanine pathway, and 1,3-PDO pathway. Microbial cell factories
for the production of 3-HP via these pathways have all been developed over the years.
Notably, the glycerol and 1,3-PDO pathways have a shorter conversion path from substrate
to product, which gives them signiﬁcant advantages in 3-HP production compared to the
longer malonyl-CoA and β-alanine pathways.
2.1. Glycerol Pathway
2.1.1. Glycerol Oxidation via the Coenzyme A-Dependent Pathway
The coenzyme A-dependent pathway was discovered in Lactobacilli spp., which can
naturally metabolize glycerol to synthesize 3-HP [ 13]. In Lactobacillus reuteri, glycerol is
converted into 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde (3-HPA) by coenzyme B12-dependent glycerol
dehydratase (PduCDE), after which propionaldehyde dehydrogenase (PduP) catalyzes the
ligation of 3-HPA to coenzyme A, yielding 3-HP-CoA. The ﬁnal conversion of 3-HP-CoA to
3-HP is catalyzed by phosphotransferase (PduL) and propionic acid kinase (PduW), and
the whole production process is accompanied by the generation of one molecule of ATP
and one molecule of NADH [14–16].
2.1.2. Glycerol Oxidation via the Coenzyme A-Independent Pathway
The coenzyme A-independent pathway requires only two reactions to produce 3-HP
from glycerol. Similar to the coenzyme A-dependent pathway, glycerol is dehydrated by
coenzyme B12-dependent glycerol dehydratase (GDHt) to produce 3-HPA, but then it is
oxidized into 3-HP by only one enzyme, aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH), instead of
three enzymes. Due to the short production pathway and few metabolic intermediates, this
is the most widely studied pathway for the microbial production of 3-HP from glycerol.
However, the low enzyme activity of natural ALDH, together with the imbalance of
expression between ALDH and GDHt, are the main limiting factors of the coenzyme
A-independent pathway.
2.2. Malonyl-CoA Pathway
The 3-hydroxypropionic acid cycle was discovered in Chloroﬂexus aurantiacus as an
autotrophic carbon ﬁxation pathway [17]. In subsequent studies, researchers used a part of
the reactions from the 3-hydroxypropionic acid cycle (from acetyl-CoA to 3-HP) for 3-HP
production and named it the malonyl-CoA pathway [18]. In the malonyl-CoA pathway,
acetyl-CoA is converted into malonyl-CoA by acetyl-CoA carboxylase (ACC), which ﬁxes
one molecule of CO2 at the expense of one molecule of ATP , after which the malonyl-CoA is
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 3 of 22
converted into 3-HP by a two-step reaction catalyzed by NADPH-dependent malonyl-CoA
reductase (MCR). The MCR consists of two different functional domains: MCR-C catalyzes
the reduction of malonyl-CoA to malonyl semialdehyde (MSA) and MCR-N catalyzes the
reduction of MSA to 3-HP , and the overall reaction consumes a total of two molecules of
NADPH. In addition to glucose, it is also possible to use ethanol, fatty acids, acetic acid,
and other less common carbon sources to produce 3-HP via the malonyl-CoA pathway,
since acetyl-CoA is a common metabolic intermediate.
Molecules 2023, 28, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 24 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Main pathways and key enzymes for 3-HP bios ynthesis from renewable substrates. Blue 
module: assimilation pathways of different renewable substrates; orange module: various 3-HP bi-
osynthesis pathways. 1,3-PDO, 1,3-propanediol; 3-HPA, 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde; 3-HP-P, 3-hy-
droxypropionyl-phosphate; ACC, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; ACKA, acetate kinase; ACS, acetyl-CoA 
synthase; ADH, alcohol dehydrogenase; ALDH, al dehyde dehydrogenase; AraE, major facilitator 
superfamily transporter; AspA, aspartate ammo nia-lyase; AspC, aspartate aminotransferase; 
BAPAT, β-alanine pyruvate transaminase; DHAP, di hydroxyacetone phosphate; DhaT, 1,3-pro-
panediol dehydrogenase; FadD, long-chain acyl -CoA synthetase; FadL, long-chain fatty acid 
transport protein; GDHt, glycerol dehydratase; GlpD, glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; GlpF, 
glycerol uptake facilitator protein; GlpK, glycerol kinase; HPDH, 3-hydroxypropanoic acid dehy-
drogenase; MCR, malonyl-CoA reductase; MdlC, benzoylformate decarboxylase; MmsB, 3-hydrox-
yisobutyrate dehydrogenase; PanD, aspartate-α-decarboxylase; PCx, pyruvate carboxylase; PDHC, 
pyruvate dehydrogenase; PduL , phosphotransferase; PduP, pr opionaldehyde dehydrogenase; 
PduW, propionic acid kinase; PTA,  phosphate acetyltransferase; PT S, phosphotransferase system; 
XylA, xylose isomerase ; XylB, xylulokinase. 
2.1. Glycerol Pathway 
2.1.1. Glycerol Oxidation via the Coenzyme A-dependent Pathway 
The coenzyme A-dependent pathway was discovered in Lactobacilli spp., which can 
naturally metabolize glycerol to synthesize 3-HP [13]. In Lactobacillus reuteri, glycerol is 
converted into 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde (3-HPA) by coenzyme B12-dependent glycerol 
dehydratase (PduCDE), after which propionaldehyde dehydrogenase (PduP) catalyzes 
the ligation of 3-HPA to coenzyme A, yieldi ng 3-HP-CoA. The final conversion of 3-HP-
CoA to 3-HP is catalyzed by phosphotrans ferase (PduL) and propionic acid kinase 
(PduW), and the whole production process is accompanied by the generation of one mol-
ecule of ATP and one molecule of NADH [14–16]. 
2.1.2. Glycerol Oxidation via the Coenzyme A-Independent Pathway 
Figure 1. Main pathways and key enzymes for 3-HP biosynthesis from renewable substrates. Blue
module: assimilation pathways of different renewable substrates; orange module: various 3-HP
biosynthesis pathways. 1,3-PDO, 1,3-propanediol; 3-HPA, 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde; 3-HP-P , 3-
hydroxypropionyl-phosphate; ACC, acetyl-CoA carboxylase; ACKA, acetate kinase; ACS, acetyl-CoA
synthase; ADH, alcohol dehydrogenase; ALDH, aldehyde dehydrogenase; AraE, major facilitator
superfamily transporter; AspA, aspartate ammonia-lyase; AspC, aspartate aminotransferase; BAPAT,
β-alanine pyruvate transaminase; DHAP , dihydroxyacetone phosphate; DhaT, 1,3-propanediol de-
hydrogenase; FadD, long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase; FadL, long-chain fatty acid transport protein;
GDHt, glycerol dehydratase; GlpD, glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; GlpF, glycerol uptake
facilitator protein; GlpK, glycerol kinase; HPDH, 3-hydroxypropanoic acid dehydrogenase; MCR,
malonyl-CoA reductase; MdlC, benzoylformate decarboxylase; MmsB, 3-hydroxyisobutyrate dehy-
drogenase; PanD, aspartate-α-decarboxylase; PCx, pyruvate carboxylase; PDHC, pyruvate dehydro-
genase; PduL, phosphotransferase; PduP , propionaldehyde dehydrogenase; PduW, propionic acid
kinase; PTA, phosphate acetyltransferase; PTS, phosphotransferase system; XylA, xylose isomerase ;
XylB, xylulokinase.
2.3. β-Alanine Pathway
β-alanine can be formed by the transamination or decarboxylation of various amino
acids, such as arginine, lysine, and aspartic acid, which are widely available metabolites in
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 4 of 22
microorganisms [19]. At present, β-alanine is usually synthesized from aspartic acid using
aspartate decarboxylase (PanD), while aspartic acid can be synthesized from fumarate or
oxaloacetate by transamination, which is used for 3-HP synthesis via theβ-alanine pathway.
The β-alanine pathway was ﬁrst constructed in E. coli by Cargill [20]. In this pathway,
β-alanine is converted into MSA by β-alanine pyruvate transaminase (BAPAT), after which
MSA is reduced to 3-HP by NADPH-dependent 3-hydroxypropanoic acid dehydrogenase
(HPDH) [21]. In subsequent studies, γ-aminobutyric acid transaminase (GABT) was also
used for the conversion of β-alanine to MSA [22].
2.4. 1,3-Propanediol Pathway
In Acetobacter, alcohols are selectively oxidized to the corresponding aldehydes and
ketones by alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), and the aldehydes are further oxidized to the
corresponding carboxylic acids by aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) [23]. Gluconobacter
oxydans has a native capacity to convert 1,3-PDO to 3-HP . Further, a recent study revealed
the relevant enzymes catalyzing this process by UV mutagenesis and transcriptome analysis
techniques in G. oxydans [24]. In this pathway, 1,3-PDO is converted to 3-HPA by ADH, after
which 3-HPA is converted to 3-HP by ALDH. It was reported that ALDH is the rate-limiting
enzyme of this production process [ 24], so balancing the activity of both enzymes is an
effective strategy to increase the titer of 3-HP .
2.5. Other Pathways
The lactate pathway and the oxaloacetate pathway have also been successfully con-
structed to biosynthesis 3-HP . It was found that D-lactate and 3-HP are hydroxyl position
isomers by a chemical structural formula analysis, and the synthesis of 3-HP from D-lactate
can be achieved by a hydroxyl shift reaction. However, the lactate pathway is thermody-
namically infeasible because the overall standard Gibbs free energy change is positive [12].
Wang et al. [25] introduced the lactate pathway into a lactate-producing E. coli chassis, but
less than 5% of lactate could be converted to 3-HP , and the titer of the engineeredE. coli
was about 2.0 g/L in fed-batch fermentation. In addition, the similar chemical structure
of lactate and 3-HP contributed to the difﬁculty of downstream isolation. Therefore, the
lactate pathway is an unwelcome option in 3-HP biosynthesis.
Due to the long β-alanine pathway, the oxaloacetate pathway was recently constructed
as a simpler alternative. In the oxaloacetate pathway, benzoylformate decarboxylase
(MdlC) catalyzes the direct conversion of oxaloacetate to MSA, avoiding the three-step
reaction found in the original β-alanine pathway [26]. Notably, the oxaloacetate pathway
(∆G◦= −34.7 kJ/mol) demonstrated to be thermodynamically more favorable and feasible
than the malonyl-CoA pathway ( ∆G◦ = −14.5 kJ/mol) [ 26]. Therefore, this simpliﬁed
pathway provides an attractive alternative to the existing 3-HP synthesis routes. At present,
the oxaloacetate pathway has only been constructed in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and the
genetically engineered S. cerevisiae showed good potential for 3-HP production, reaching a
titer of 18.1 g/L. Further, it is still necessary to conduct additional studies on the systematic
comparison of key enzymes from different sources and the construction of the oxaloacetate
pathway in other chassis.
3. Chassis Strains for 3-HP Production
The chassis cells that have been engineered for the biosynthesis of 3-HP include
Klebsiella pneumoniae, Escherichia coli, Corynebacterium glutamicum, Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
Halomonas bluephagenesis, and Pseudomonas denitriﬁcans. Among them, Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Halomonas bluephagenesis, and Pseudomonas denitriﬁcans exhibited the most promising poten-
tial for 3-HP production. Representative studies on the modiﬁcation of different chassis
strains for the synthesis of 3-HP are summarized in Table 1.
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 5 of 22
Table 1. Representative studies on biotechnological 3-HP production using different chassis strains
from various carbon sources.
Microorganisms Carbon Source Pathway Engineering Strategy Titer
(g/L)
Productivity
(g/(L·h))
Yield
(g/g) Ref.
K. pneumoniae Glycerol
Glycerol oxidation
via the coenzyme
A-independent
pathway
Expression of puuC, using
tandem repeat
tac promoter
102.6 1.07 0.86 [27]
K. pneumoniae Glycerol
Glycerol oxidation
via the coenzyme
A-independent
pathway
Development of a
CRISPRi system to switch
glycerol oxidation and
reduction pathways
88.8 0.98 - [28]
K. pneumoniae Glycerol
Glycerol oxidation
via the coenzyme
A-independent
pathway
Expression of puuC, using
tac promoter and
deletion of pta, ldhA
83.8 1.16 0.59 [29]
K. pneumoniae
and G. oxydans Glycerol
Glycerol oxidation
via the coenzyme
A-independent
pathway
Development of a
two-step process 60.5 1.12 0.50 * [30]
E. coli Glycerol or
Crude glycerol
Glycerol oxidation
via the coenzyme
A-independent
pathway
Expression of dhaB1234,
gdrAB, ydcW; control of
the dissolved oxygen
(DO) level
76.2 or 61 1.89 or 2.28 0.45 or 0.594 [31]
E. coli Glucose and
glycerol
Glycerol oxidation
via the coenzyme
A-independent
pathway
Expression of gabD4;
knocking out of
ackA-pta, yqhD
71.9 1.80 - ** [32]
E. coli Glycerol
Glycerol oxidation
via the coenzyme
A-independent
pathway
Adaptive laboratory
evolution resulted in a
highly 3-HP-tolerant
strain
63.05 - - [33]
E. coli Glucose Malonyl-CoA
pathway
Expression of mcr,
accABCD, pntAB; deletion
of ldhA, pﬂB, poxB, pta,
ackA, mgsA, fabI
49.04 0.71 - [9]
E. coli Acetate Malonyl-CoA
pathway
Expression of acc, mcr,
ack-pta; dynamic
regulation of the
expression of sdh;
deletion of fadR
15.8 0.39 0.71 * [34]
E. coli Ethanol Malonyl-CoA
pathway
Expression of mcr, adhE,
icd, and pntAB; deletion
of gcl and fadR
13.1 0.14 0.57 * [35]
E. coli Fatty acids Malonyl-CoA
pathway
Expression of atoSC, fadD,
fadL, and PntAB;
optimized expression of
mcr; deletion of fadR
52 1.13 1.56 ** [36]
E. coli Malonate Malonyl-CoA
pathway
Expression of matB, mcr,
pntAB, and yfjB 1.2 - - ** [37]
E. coli Glucose β-alanine pathway
Expression of pa0132,
ydfG, panD, aspA, ppc;
deletion of fumAC,
fumB, iclR
31.1 0.63 0.423 [38]
L. reuteri and
E. coli Glycerol
Glycerol oxidation
via the coenzyme
A-dependent
Expression of gabD4 and
pduQ; concurrent
production
125.93 2.47 0.95 * [39]
P . pastoris Glycerol Malonyl-CoA
pathway
Expression of mcr, acc,
and cPOS5 24.75 0.54 0.13 [40]
P . pastoris Glycerol Malonyl-CoA
pathway
Expression of mcr, acc1,
acs, ald6, pdc1; deletion
of ArDH
37.05 0.71 0.18 [41]
S. pombe Cellobiose Malonyl-CoA
pathway
Expression of mcr, acc,
BGL, acs, and atd1;
deletion of adh
11.4 0.14 0.11 [42]
D. hansenii Glucose and
propionic acid -
Screening from orchard
soil and human
excrement as
raw material
62.42 1.30 - [43]
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 6 of 22
Table 1. Cont.
Microorganisms Carbon Source Pathway Engineering Strategy Titer
(g/L)
Productivity
(g/(L·h))
Yield
(g/g) Ref.
S. cerevisiae Glucose Malonyl-CoA
pathway
Expression of mcr, ALD6,
pdc1, acc1, acs, GAPDH 9.8 0.09 0.06 [44]
S. cerevisiae Glucose β-alanine pathway
Expression of pyc1, pyc2,
ATT2, panD, Bapat, and
ydfG; optimization of
culture conditions
about 25 - 0.25 [45]
S. cerevisiae Glucose Oxaloacetate
pathway
Expression of pyc, mdlC,
mmsB, glc7, ptc7 18.1 0.17 0.125 [26]
C. glutamicum
Glucose or
(Glucose and
xylose)
Glycerol oxidation
via the coenzyme
A-independent
pathway
Expression of gpd and
gpp, pduCDEGH, araE and
xylAB; deletion of ldhA,
pta-ackA, poxB, glpK
62.6 or 54.8 0.86 or 0.76 0.51 or 0.49 ** [46]
C. glutamicum Acetate Malonyl-CoA
pathway
Optimization of mcr and
attenuation of gltA 17.1 0.14 0.10 [47]
H. bluephagenesis 1,3-Propanediol 1,3-Propanediol
pathway
Expression of dhaT
and aldD 154 2.4 0.93 ** [48]
G. oxydans Glucose and
1,3-Propanediol
1,3-Propanediol
pathway
Expression of ADH
and ALDH 45.8 1.86 1.14 * [24]
B. subtilis Glycerol
Glycerol oxidation
via the coenzyme
A-independent
pathway
Expression of dhaB and
puuC; deletion of glpK 10 - 0.79 [49]
P . denitriﬁcans Glycerol or
Crude glycerol
Glycerol oxidation
via the coenzyme
A-independent
pathway
Expression of dhaB,
gdrAB and kgsadh;
deletion of 3hpdh, 3hibdh;
replacement of coenzyme
B12 pathway
102 or 65 2.5 or - - [50]
P . asiatica Glucose and
glycerol
Glycerol oxidation
via the coenzyme
A-independent
pathway
Expression of dhaB,
gdrAB and kgsA; deletion
of glpR, glpK and crc
63 2.15 0.96 ** [51]
Synechocystis sp.
PCC 6803 CO2
Malonyl-CoA
pathway
Expression of mcr,
accBCAD, birA, pndAB,
rbc; deletion of pta, phaB
0.83 - - [52]
type II
methanotroph CH4
Malonyl-CoA
pathway
Expression of mcr, acc,
BPL, ME, and mmc 0.60 - 0.02 [53]
* Indicates that 3-HP was produced through whole-cell catalysis, ** indicates that the study used different carbon
sources during the growth and production stages, and the yield was mainly for the production stage. Genes:
3hibdh: 3-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase; 3hpdh: 3-hydroxypropionate dehydrogenase; AAT2: aspartate
aminotransferase; acc1/accABCD/acc: acetyl-CoA carboxylase; ackA: acetate kinase; acs: acetyl-CoA synthase;
ADH/adhE: alcohol dehydrogenase; ald6/aldD/ALDH: aldehyde dehydrogenase; aspA: aspartase; araE: arabinose
transporter; ArDH: D-arabitol dehydrogenase; bapat: aminotransferase; BGL: displaying β-glucosidase; birA:
biotinilase; BPL: biotin protein ligase; cPOS5: cytosolic NADH kinase; crc: the global regulatory protein; dhaB:
glycerol dehydratase; dhaT: 1,3-propanediol dehydrogenase; fabI: enoyl-acyl carrier protein; fadR: fatty acid
degradation inhibitor; fumAC: fumarase A and C; fumB: fumarase B; gabD4: aldehyde dehydrogenase; GAPDH:
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase; gcl: tartronate-semialdehyde synthase; gdrAB: glycerol dehydratase
reactivase; glc7: protein phosphatase regulator GIP1; glpK: glycerol kinase; glpR: glycerol catabolic pathway
repressor; gltA: citrate synthase; gpd: glycerol 3-phosphate dehydrogenase; gpp: glycerol 3-phosphate phosphatase;
Icd: isocitrate dehydrogenase; kgsA: 16S rRNA (adenine1518-N6/adenine1519-N6)-dimethyltransferase; kgsadh:
α-ketoglutaric semialdehyde dehydrogenase; ldhA: lactate dehydrogenase; mcr: malonyl-CoA reductase; mdlC:
benzoylformate decarboxylase; ME: NADP-dependent malic enzyme; mmc: methylmalonyl-CoA carboxyltrans-
ferase; mgsA: methylglyoxal synthase; mmsB:3-hydroxyisobutyrate dehydrogenase; pa0132: β-alanine pyruvate
transaminase; panD: aspartate 1-decarboxylase; pdc1: pyruvate decarboxylase; pduCDEGH: diol dehydrogenase;
pduQ: 1,3-propanediol oxidoreductase; pﬂB: pyruvate formate-lyase; phaB: acetoacetyl-CoA reductase; pntAB:
pyridine nucleotide transhydrogenase subunits α and β; poxB: pyruvate oxidase; ppc: phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxylase; ptc7: type 2C serine/threonine protein phosphatase; pyc1/pyc2/pyc: pyruvate carboxylases; pta:
phosphate acetyltransferase; puuC: aldehyde dehydrogenase; rbc: ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase oxyge-
nase (Rubisco); sdh/sdhC: succinate:quinone oxidoreductase; xylA: xylose isomerase; xylB: xylulokinase; xylR:
DNA-binding transcriptional dual regulator; ydcW: γ-aminobutyraldehyde dehydrogenase; ydfG: 3-hydroxy acid
dehydrogenase; yqhD: NADPH-dependent aldehyde reductase.
3.1. Klebsiella pneumoniae
K. pneumoniae is able to grow rapidly with glycerol as the only carbon source un-
der both aerobic and anerobic conditions. Two groups’ regulons involved in glycerol
metabolism have been identiﬁed in K. pneumoniae. Under aerobic conditions, the glp reg-
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 7 of 22
ulon (encodes a series of enzymes required for the conversion of glycerol to DHAP via
sn-glycerol-3-phosphate) acts to oxidize and catabolize glycerol, mainly via the Embden–
Meyerhof–Parnas (EMP) pathway. Under anaerobic conditions, instead of the glp regulon,
the dha regulon (encodes a series of enzymes needed for the anaerobic growth on glyc-
erol in the absence of exogenous electron acceptors) acts to oxidize glycerol via the EMP
pathway, as well as to dehydrate glycerol to 3-HPA via GDHt (encoded bydhaB), which
can be converted to 3-HP [54]. Moreover, it possesses native genes associated with both
the coenzyme A-dependent and coenzyme A-independent 3-HP biosynthetic pathways.
However, the studies on 3-HP production inK. pneumoniae were mainly focused on glycerol
oxidation via the coenzyme A-independent pathway. Coenzyme B12, which is an expensive
but important co-factor for the dehydration of glycerol to produce 3-HPA, is naturally
produced by K. pneumoniae under anoxic conditions. Interestingly, the synthesis of coen-
zyme B12 and the transcription of dhaB showed a decreasing trend with increasing aeration,
while the regeneration of NAD + (a co-factor of ALDH) through the electron transport
chain required oxygen [55]. Therefore, the degree of aeration has a signiﬁcant effect on
the production of 3-HP in K. pneumoniae. Ashok et al. [56] investigated the production of
3-HP by engineered K. pneumoniae at different aeration levels. Under high aeration and
anaerobic conditions, only a small amount of 3-HP was produced from glycerol. High titers
of 3-HP were only produced under microaerophilic conditions with constant dissolved
oxygen (DO) at 5%. At present, the highest 3-HP titer in K. pneumoniae, which reached
102.61 g/L, was achieved by overexpressing PuuC through three tandem repeats of the tac
promoter [27]. Furthermore, this study stressed the importance of maintaining active cell
growth, which drives lactate back to pyruvate in the late stages of fermentation without
blocking the lactate synthesis pathway, and the yield of 3-HP was further increased to
0.86 g/g [27]. However, K. pneumoniae is a pathogenic bacterium that can cause multiple
infections, leading to biosafety issues when using it on an industrial scale [57]. Recently,
Klebsiella spp. AA405 was identiﬁed as a novel strain with low levels of virulence factors
and half the endotoxin of E. coli, and it is expected to become an emerging 3-HP producing
chassis in the future [58].
3.2. Escherichia coli
E. coli is a model organism with the advantages of a clear genetic background, easy
modiﬁcation, broad substrate spectrum, simple growth conditions, and mature means
of genetic manipulation, which have made it the most widely used host organism in
biotechnology. However, E. coli is less tolerant to 3-HP than other microorganism, growing
normally only in neutral basic salt media with less than 18 g/L 3-HP , and failing to grow at
all when the 3-HP concentration is higher than 45 g/L [33]. A highly 3-HP-tolerant strain of
E. coli was developed through adaptive laboratory evolution (ALE), and after the reversion
of mutation in glycerol kinase GlpK, the strain produced a signiﬁcantly higher 3-HP titer
(63.05 g/L) than the parental strain (49.09 g/L) in bioreactor culture. Further genomic
analysis revealed that mutations in theyieP gene confer 3-HP tolerance inE. coli [33]. To date,
three 3-HP synthesis pathways have been successfully constructed in E. coli. There is no
endogenous pathway in E. coli that catalyzes the conversion of glycerol to 3-HPA, andE. coli
cannot naturally produce coenzyme B12. Therefore, the production of 3-HP via the glycerol
pathway in E. coli requires the introduction of heterologous GDHt and the exogenous
addition of expensive coenzyme B 12, which undoubtedly affects the economics of the
production process. By contrast, the production of 3-HP via the malonyl-CoA pathway and
the β-alanine pathway does not require the involvement of coenzyme B12, which provides
a promising alternative for the production of 3-HP when usingE. coli as the chassis cell [57].
Nevertheless, the highest 3-HP titers reported in engineered E. coli via the β-alanine
pathway (31.1 g/L) [38] and the malonyl-CoA pathway (52 g/L) [36] were much lower than
that obtained via the glycerol pathway (76.2 g/L) [31]. In the future, the factors limiting
3-HP production in E. coli via the remaining two pathways, such as the imbalance or low
activity of key enzymes in the production pathway and a tightly regulated accumulation
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 8 of 22
of metabolic intermediates, need to be further addressed. In addition, the study that
obtained a titer of 76.2 g/L clearly showed that the titer, yield, and productivity were
signiﬁcantly dependent on the culture conditions, including dissolved oxygen levels and
feeding strategies [31]. It is an important task in metabolic engineering for the fermentation
condition to be optimized for each engineered strain, as the optimal condition for the
selected strain is not guaranteed to be the best for another engineered strain.
3.3. Yeasts
Yeasts have become popular chassis strains because they are highly acid tolerant,
which abrogates the need for the exogenous addition of an alkaline titrant in the production
of 3-HP . As a consequence, the downstream recovery process is simpliﬁed, with the end
product being 3-HP instead of 3-hydroxypropionate when using yeast as the chassis.
However, yeasts are eukaryotic organisms whose metabolic network is more complex than
that of bacteria, and the 3-HP titers obtained in yeast to date remain low. In recent studies,
the malonyl-CoA pathway and the β-alanine pathway have been successfully constructed
in different yeasts.
3.3.1. Saccharomyces cerevisiae
A report showed that S. cerevisiae could grow in the presence of 25 g/L of 3-HP with
half of its µmax. In another study, an S. cerevisiae strain, which could tolerate 50 g/L of
3-HP at pH 3.5, was obtained by ALE. Further, a genome-wide analysis indicated that high
concentrations of 3-HP are converted to 3-HPA via aldehyde dehydrogenase, which in turn
leads to cytotoxicity. To compensate for this, S. cerevisiae used a glutathione-dependent
formaldehyde detoxiﬁcation mechanism to achieve higher tolerance to 3-HP [ 59]. Boro-
dina’s team reported an engineered S. cerevisiae with an introduced β-alanine pathway,
which produced a 3-HP titer of 13.7 g/L with a 0.14 Cmol/Cmol yield from glucose in
controlled fed-batch fermentation [60]. Subsequently, another team examined the effect
of changing the culture parameters on the microbial production performance based on
the strains mentioned above, and the highest 3-HP titer reached 25 g/L with a yield of
25.6% Cmol/Cmol under P-limited conditions [45]. In addition, the oxaloacetate pathway
for 3-HP biosynthesis was also developed in S. cerevisiae, and a dephosphorylation regula-
tion strategy was developed to increase the ATP supply. As a result, the engineered strain
produced 18.1 g/L of 3-HP in a 5 L bioreactor [26]. Currently, the production advantages
exhibited by S. cerevisiae are not obvious compared to other 3-HP producing strains.
3.3.2. Pichia pastoris
An interesting trait of P . pastorisis that it is a Crabtree-negative yeast and can grow
well on glycerol, but it does not synthesize coenzyme B12. A new hotspot is the construction
of P . pastoriscell factory for 3-HP production from glycerol via the malonyl-CoA pathway.
Among yeasts using glycerol as a substrate, an engineered strain of P . pastorisachieved the
highest 3-HP titer and productivity reported so far, reaching 37.05 g/L and 0.71 g/(L·h),
respectively [40]. This demonstrates that glycerol may be a potential substrate for the
malonyl-CoA pathway.
3.3.3. Other Yeast Species
Compared with S. cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces pombe showed better 3-HP tolerance,
as its µmax only decreased from 0.3 h−1 to 0.25 h−1 in the presence of 50 g/L of 3-HP , which
makes it a useful host for 3-HP production [61]. Recently, a strain of Debaryomyces hansenii
that can naturally convert propionic acid to 3-HP was screened from orchard soil, and it
was found to be able to tolerate high concentrations of propionic acid. Moreover, this strain
produced 62.42 g/L of 3-HP in rich medium containing 30 g/L of glucose and 10 g/L of
propionic acid, indicating that it has promising application potential in the biosynthesis
of 3-HP [43].
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 9 of 22
3.4. Corynebacterium glutamicum
Corynebacterium glutamicum is known for its ability to produce high titers of amino
acids, and it is considered a highly promising strain for 3-HP production due to its broad
substrate spectrum and high organic acid production capacity. Both the glycerol pathway
and the malonyl-CoA pathway have been successfully constructed in C. glutamicum. The
highest titer of 3-HP in C. glutamicum was obtained through the glycerol pathway, which
reached 62.6 g/L using sugar as the substrate, and the maximum yield from glucose reached
0.51 g/g by enhancing the ﬂux towards 3-HP [46]. Recently, it was reported that 166.6 g/L
of β-alanine was produced in fed-batch fermentation using engineered C. glutamicum [62].
As it is the direct precursor in the β-alanine pathway for 3-HP biosynthesis, there is great
potential for 3-HP production in C. glutamicum via the β-alanine pathway.
3.5. Halomonas bluephagenesis
The extremophilic Halomonas spp. are noted for glowing well at alkaline pH and high
salt concentrations [63]. These unique growing conditions offer several advantages, en-
abling production under open non-sterile conditions and providing strain tolerance to high
concentrations of 3-hydroxypropionate. However, the genetic background of Halomonas
spp. is not as clear as that of typical model organisms, which makes it inconvenient to opti-
mize the metabolic network when constructing microbial cell factories. Another problem
is the higher cost of 3-HP separation from the fermentation broth when using Halomonas
spp. as the production chassis, as the product is accumulated in the form of its salt and
not the free acid. Currently, only the 1,3-PDO pathway has been constructed in Halomonas
bluephagenesis. A two-stage production process with glucose as the growth stage substrate
and 1,3-PDO as the production stage substrate was reported, in which the engineered H.
bluephagenesis could accumulate a 3-HP titer of up to 154 g/L, with a high yield of 0.93 g
of 3-HP/g 1,3-PDO, which is the highest titer of 3-HP obtained by biological methods
to date [48].
3.6. Pseudomonas denitriﬁcans
Pseudomonas denitriﬁcans is considered an ideal host for the production of 3-HP from
glycerol under aerobic conditions, since coenzyme B 12 is naturally synthesized under
aerobic rather than anoxic conditions in this chassis and there is no need to worry about
the conﬂict between coenzyme B 12 synthesis and NADH regeneration [ 64]. However,
researchers found that the amount of coenzyme B12 produced by P . denitriﬁcanscell factories
was not sufﬁcient enough to synthesize 3-HP with high titers from glycerol. According
to research reported by the Park team, the 3-HP production of recombinant P . denitriﬁcans
was dramatically increased from 20.8 g/L to ~100 g/L by enhancing the synthesis of
coenzyme B12, and the team ultimately achieved a 3-HP titer of 102 g/L and a productivity
of 2.5 g/(L ·h) [50,65]. Signiﬁcantly, the productivity of recombinant P . denitriﬁcanshas
already met the minimum needs of industrial production in fed-batch fermentation. The
malonyl-CoA pathway was also constructed in P . denitriﬁcans, but only mg levels of 3-
HP were produced [66]. Unfortunately, P . denitriﬁcanscontain natural 3-HP degradation
pathways, which can grow on 3-HP or degrade 3-HP under non-growth conditions. There
is a need to further identify and remove the 3-HP assimilation pathway to develop more
efﬁcient P . denitriﬁcansbioreﬁneries.
3.7. Other Chassis Strains
In recent studies, Bacillus subtilis and Pseudomonas asiatica have also been used as
chassis strains for the synthesis of 3-HP . AlthoughB. subtilis demonstrated the ability to
rapidly take up glycerol and grow well on glycerol as the substrate, it is limited by its
inability to synthesize coenzyme B12. The engineered B. subtilis, with an introduced glycerol
synthesis pathway and modulated expression of glycerol assimilation genes, produced
10 g/L of 3-HP in shake ﬂask fermentation using glycerol as the substrate [ 49]. Similar
to P . denitriﬁcans, P . asiaticaC1 also naturally synthesizes coenzyme B 12 under aerobic
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 10 of 22
conditions. P . asiaticaC1 was engineered for 3-HP production by overexpressing genes
related to the coenzyme A-independent synthesis pathway, disrupting genes responsible
for 3-HP degradation, and promoting glycerol assimilation, which resulted in a 3-HP titer
of 63 g/L and a yield of 0.99 mol/mol of glycerol in fed-batch fermentation [51].
With the development of third-generation microbial reﬁneries, photosynthetic mi-
croorganisms such as cyanobacteria are being engineered for the production of chemicals
directly from CO2. However, a pathway for synthesizing glycerol and converting it into
3-HP is not available in cyanobacteria. At present, only the malonyl-CoA pathway and the
β-alanine pathway have been reported in cyanobacteria. Zhang et al. [52] constructed an
optimized malonyl-CoA pathway in Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 and produced 837.18 mg/L
of 3-HP . Another excellent production strategy was to construct a microbial consortium
consisting of cyanobacteria and E. coli, in which engineered Synechococcus elongatus was
responsible for the synthesis of sucrose from CO2 and engineered E. coli further synthesized
3-HP from sucrose. Unfortunately, the 3-HP titers obtained using cyanobacteria remain
very poor.
4. Renewable Carbon Sources for the Biosynthesis of 3-HP
A wide range of renewable feedstocks have been investigated as substrates for the
microbial production of 3-HP . While glycerol and glucose were studied in the most detail,
emerging carbon sources, such as xylose, acetic acid, fatty acids (FAs), ethanol, and even
CO2, have also been used for 3-HP production due to their environmental friendliness and
higher theoretical conversion rates. Representative studies using engineered strains for
3-HP production from various carbon sources are summarized in Table 1.
4.1. Microbial Production of 3-HP from Glucose or Xylose
Most commercially available glucose is produced by hydrolyzing corn starch, which
makes it a cheap and abundant resource. Most microorganisms can utilize glucose for the
growth and production of various fermentation products, and the conversion pathway from
glucose to 3-HP is redox neutral [11]. Therefore, the production of 3-HP from glucose as a
common carbon source has been widely studied. In recent years, to avoid competition with
humans for food, researchers have developed microbial cell factories that use lignocellulosic
biomass (LCB) derivatives. The fermentable sugars formed by the hydrolysis of LCB are
mainly glucose and xylose [ 67], so it is necessary to construct microbial cell factories
for the synthesis of 3-HP that use xylose as the substrate. In contrast to glucose, many
microorganisms are unable to use xylose naturally, which requires the introduction of
heterologous xylose metabolic pathways. Moreover, recombinant strains tend not to grow
well on xylose, which makes it more attractive to produce 3-HP using both glucose and
xylose as mixed substrates.
4.1.1. Biosynthesis of 3-HP via the Glycerol Pathway
Seo’s team developed a production strategy for 3-HP synthesis via the glycerol path-
way by co-utilizing glucose and xylose as mixed carbon sources in E. coli . First, the
conversion of glucose and xylose to glycerol was enhanced by an overexpression of S.
cerevisiae-derived glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GPD1) and glycerol 3-phosphatase
(GPP2). Then, the catabolite repression effect was relieved by knocking down the glucose-
speciﬁc transporter protein (encoded by ptsG), after which xylose utilization was enhanced
by overexpression of the transcriptional enhancer xylR. Finally, the engineered E. coli with
an introduced glycerol pathway could efﬁciently and synergistically utilize xylose and glu-
cose to produce 29.4 g/L of 3-HP and 95 g/L of glycerol in fed-batch fermentation [68]. To
address the problem of glycerol accumulation, the team proposed two strategies that atten-
uate glycerol production and enhance glycerol utilization. The strategy of downregulating
glycerol production through the modulation of the glycerol synthesis pathway enhanced
3-HP production to 37.6 g/L [ 69]. The same team also enhanced glycerol utilization by
overexpressing endogenous aldehyde dehydrogenase (PuuC), which boosted the 3-HP titer
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 11 of 22
to 53.7 g/L [70]. Similar metabolic engineering strategies were used to construct engineered
C. glutamicum that produced 3-HP via the glycerol pathway from glucose and xylose, which
resulted in a 3-HP titer of 54.8 g/L in fed-batch fermentation [46]. A recent study reported
that K. pneumoniae can produce 3-HP via the glycerol pathway utilizing glucose as substrate,
but it only achieved a low 3-HP titer of 1.77 g/L in fed-batch fermentation [71]. The key to
obtaining high titers of 3-HP from sugar via the glycerol pathway appears to be efﬁcient
sugar transport and reducing glycerol accumulation.
4.1.2. Biosynthesis of 3-HP via the Malonyl-CoA Pathway
The malonyl-CoA pathway is the most extensively studied biosynthetic pathway when
using glucose as a substrate to produce 3-HP , and the highest titer of 3-HP obtained from
glucose via the malonyl-CoA pathway (49.04 g/L) [ 9] was comparable to that obtained
via the glycerol pathway (53.7 g/L) [ 70] in E. coli. By regulating the expression of key
enzymes in the production pathway, enhancing the supply of acetyl-CoA, and inhibiting
the synthesis of fatty acids, the researchers constructed a microbial cell factory that can
efﬁciently produce 3-HP from glucose.
The imbalance between the activity of the two functional domains of MCR, the key
enzyme of the malonyl-CoA pathway, is an important factor that limits the production of 3-
HP . Liu et al. [72] overexpressed directionally evolved MCR-C and reduced the expression
level of MCR-N to bring MCR-N and MCR-C into equilibrium, reaching a 3-HP titer
of 40.6 g/L, corresponding to a yield of 0.19 g/g of glucose in fed-batch fermentation.
Increasing the activity of ACC, another key enzyme of the malonyl-CoA pathway, is
a common strategy to increase the 3-HP titer. Acc1 activity is tightly regulated at the
transcriptional level and the protein level in S. cerevisiae. Manipulation of the phospholipid
synthesis transcriptional regulators to control the transcription level of Acc1 [73] or the use
of the phosphorylation-deﬁcient mutant Acc1 [ 74] are effective strategies for increasing
Acc1 activity. Recently, one strategy for the balanced expression of ACC subunits (AccBC
and DtsR1) from C. glutamicum was developed in E. coli, and the engineered strain achieved
a maximal productivity of 1.03 g/(L·h) with a high yield (0.246 g/g glucose) and titer (up
to 38.13 g/L) through the malonyl-CoA pathway using a cheap carbon source in fed-batch
fermentation [75].
In order to further increase 3-HP titer, it is necessary to direct carbon ﬂux towards
the key precursor acetyl-CoA. Interestingly, an increase in acetyl-CoA ﬂux in yeast was
achieved by enhancing the pathway from pyruvate to acetyl-CoA via acetate, rather than
by the direct production of acetyl-CoA from pyruvate. Borodina et al. [ 44] integrated
multiple copies of mcr from C. aurantiacus and a phosphorylation-deﬁcient acc1 variant
into the genome of S. cerevisiae, after which the supply of acetyl-CoA was optimized
by overexpressing key enzymes (acetyl-CoA synthase (ACS), aldehyde dehydrogenase
(ALD6), and pyruvate decarboxylase (Pdc1)) associated with the transformation of acetate
into acetyl-CoA. As a result, the strain produced 9.8 g/L of 3-HP from glucose in fed-batch
fermentation. Cellobiose was used as a substrate for 3-HP biosynthesis by displaying
β-glucosidase (BGL) on the surface of S. pombe, which hydrolyzes cellobiose to glucose. In
addition, the acetyl-CoA supply was enhanced by the overexpression of endogenous ATD1
(an S. pombe homolog of the S. cerevisiae ALD6) and ACS from E. coli in the engineered strain
with an introduced malonyl-CoA pathway, and the engineered strain produced 11.4 g/L of
3-HP in fed-batch fermentation [42]. It is also possible to enhance the supply of acetyl-CoA
for 3-HP biosynthesis from glucose by the exogenous addition of acetate [61].
Malonyl-CoA is also a precursor of fatty acid synthesis, but preventing malonyl-CoA
spillover by knocking out the fatty acid synthesis pathway is not feasible, as it results in
lethality [76]. Researchers have attempted to inhibit fatty acid synthesis by the exogenous
addition of cerulenin [77,78], but the high cost of cerulenin makes it unsuitable for the mass
production of 3-HP . The genes involved in fatty acid synthesis can be downregulated by
antisense RNA technology [76] or the overexpression of the FadR (fatty acid degradation
inhibitor) strategy [ 34], resulting in an enhanced supply of malonyl-CoA in E. coli. In
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 12 of 22
addition, a temperature-sensitive fatty acid synthesis mutant, in which the fabI gene is
normally expressed at 30 ◦C and is not expressed at 37 to 42 ◦C, was used to increase
the malonyl-CoA precursor pool and, thus, improve the production of 3-HP . The speciﬁc
productivity of 3-HP in the E. coli mutant that overexpressed mcr, pntAB, and accABCD was
2.01 g/gDCW (a 3.8-fold increase) after changing the temperature, and the ﬁnal titer of
3-HP reached 49.04 g/L in fed-batch fermentation [9].
4.1.3. Biosynthesis of 3-HP via the β-alanine Pathway
Researchers have also investigated the production of 3-HP via the β-alanine pathway,
and the process of 3-HP synthesis from glucose or xylose as substrates has been developed
using this strategy. Borodina’s team [60] constructed the biosynthetic pathway from β-
alanine to 3-HP by overexpressing the optimal enzyme combination of BPAT from B.
cereus and HPDH from E. coli, and the engineered strain produced 13.7 g/L of 3-HP from
glucose in fed-batch fermentation. Later, the same team introduced xylose utilization
genes in S. cerevisiae and then tested the ability to produce 3-HP from glucose or xylose
via the β-alanine pathway or the malonyl-CoA pathway. It was shown that the β-alanine
pathway was more advantageous in producing 3-HP from xylose, while the malonyl-CoA
pathway produced a higher 3-HP titer using glucose as substrate [79]. The key precursor
for 3-HP synthesis, β-alanine, can be produced through transamination from oxaloacetate
in the anaplerotic pathway, as well as from succinate in the TCA cycle. Song et al. [ 38]
constructed the β-alanine pathway in a high succinate-producing strain of E. coli via
the overexpression of endogenous aspartate aminotransferase (AspA) and heterologous
L-aspartate-α-decarboxylase (PanD) from C. glutamicum, and the appropriate enzyme
combination to convert β-alanine to 3-HP [80]. The engineered strain produced 31.1 g/L
of 3-HP from glucose in fed-batch fermentation. Compared with other 3-HP biosynthesis
pathways, the β-alanine pathway has a low titer; therefore, it is urgent to develop enzymes
with high catalytic activity which can be used to more efﬁciently produce 3-HP in the
β-alanine pathway.
4.2. Microbial Production of 3-HP from Glycerol
Glycerol is the main by-product of the production of biodiesel, as the production of
1 ton of biodiesel is accompanied by the generation of 100 kg of glycerol [54]. As the global
demand for biodiesel is continuously increasing, it is urgent to ﬁnd ways to deal with
the crude glycerol derived from biodiesel, ideally through its conversion into high-value-
added products. Currently, the research on the production of 3-HP from glycerol is mainly
focused on the coenzyme A-dependent pathway and coenzyme A-independent pathway.
Diverse host strains, including K. pneumoniae [27], E. coli [31], L. reuteri [39], etc., have been
developed as microbial cell factories for 3-HP production via the glycerol pathway and
achieved high titers. Recently, a strategy was proposed to develop a Pichia pastoris cell
factory for 3-HP production from glycerol via the malonyl-CoA pathway.
4.2.1. Biosynthesis of 3-HP via the Coenzyme A-Dependent Pathway
Most studies on 3-HP production via the coenzyme A-dependent pathway were
focused on L. reuteri, which can naturally metabolize glycerol to produce 3-HP . During the
growth of L. reuteri on glucose, 3-HPA, which is produced through glycerol dehydration
reaction, tends to be reduced to 1,3-PDO rather than oxidized to 3-HP , and only under
anaerobic conditions will 3-HPA be converted to equimolar amounts of 3-HP and 1,3-
PDO [81]. It has been shown that the conversion of glycerol to 3-HPA catalyzed by glycerol
dehydration was 10 times faster than the redox conversion of 3-HPA to 1,3-PDO and 3-HP
in L. reuteri [15]. As a result, the 3-HPA could not be completely converted and accumulated
in the fermentation broth. A co-culture system of wild-type L. reuteri and recombinant
E. coli overexpressing aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) was designed to address this
problem. In this system, the 3-HPA produced by L. reuteri was further converted to 3-HP
by the engineered E. coli, and the titers of 3-HP reached 125.93 g/L in modiﬁed fed-batch
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 13 of 22
fermentation, respectively [39]. It was reported that recombinant E. coli overexpressing
PduP , PduL, and PduW fromL. reuteri produced 3-HP at a yield of 0.68 mol/mol of 3-HPA,
without accumulating 1,3-PDO during the production process [ 82]. Recently, L. reuteri
was engineered into a whole-cell catalyst with a frozen cross-linked structure to produce
3-HPA and 3-HP at maximum speciﬁc reaction rates of 281.4 and 62.4 mg/gCDW/h,
respectively [83]. The strategy of immobilized cells reduced production costs and improved
production stability.
4.2.2. Biosynthesis of 3-HP via the Coenzyme A-Independent Pathway
The biosynthesis of 3-HP from glycerol via the coenzyme A-independent pathway
has been extensively studied. However, it is important to note that imbalances in the
activity of key enzymes of the coenzyme A-independent pathway usually lead to the
accumulation of the toxic intermediate 3-HPA. Other factors limiting the production of
3-HP from glycerol include the unbalanced growth–production relationship [84] and the
availability of coenzyme B12. Finally, the conversion of glycerol to 3-HP is accompanied by
a net accumulation of reducing equivalents, and it is essential to achieve intracellular redox
balance for microorganisms to efﬁciently metabolize glycerol for the synthesis of 3-HP [85].
Researchers have attempted to enhance the activity of ALDH and balance the produc-
tion pathway to improve the 3-HP titer obtained by the coenzyme A-independent pathway.
A novel aldehyde dehydrogenase (GabD4) fromCupriavidus necator was found to have high
catalytic activity, and it was modiﬁed by site-saturation mutagenesis based on homology
modeling. Finally, an engineered E. coli expressing a GabD4 mutant with 40% higher
enzyme activity produced 71.9 g/L of 3-HP in fed-batch fermentation [32]. To enhance the
expression of ALDH, the T7 expression system was introduced into K. pneumoniae and the
3-HP yield of the recombinant strain was enhanced by 3.24-fold [86]. Zhao et al. [27] used
the tac promoter with three tandem repeats to initiate the transcription of puuC (encoding
ALDH in K. pneumoniae), and the engineered K. pneumoniae reached a titer of 102.61 g/L in
fed-batch fermentation. However, it is impossible to fully balance the activity of ALDH
and GDHt by increasing ALDH activity alone. Regulatory cassettes containing promoters
of different strength and double ribosome binding sites were used to express ALDH and
GDHt, which showed that 3-HPA accumulation could be completely eliminated when the
expression level of ALDH was approximately eight-fold higher than that of GDHt [87]. In a
different approach, the catalytic activity of GDHt was precisely downregulated by 5’UTRs
engineering, and the yield reached 0.97 g of 3-HP/g glycerol in fed-batch fermentation,
which is the highest yield for the production of 3-HP from glycerol reported to date [88].
The main factors limiting the conversion of glycerol to 3-HP are unsuitable glycerol
assimilation rates together with unbalanced production and growth relationships. K.
pneumoniae possesses a thoroughly investigated glycerol metabolic pathway that can rapidly
metabolize glycerol. The carbon ﬂux from glycerol towards 3-HP production rather than
growth in K. pneumoniae has been achieved by decreasing the rate of glycerol assimilation
through the deletion of glycerol kinase (GlpK) [ 89,90]. A tryptophan operon-assisted
CRISPR interference (CRISPRi) system that switches the glycerol oxidation and reduction
pathways in K. pneumoniae has been reported, and the CRISPRi-engineered strain produced
88.8 g/L of 3-HP in fed-batch fermentation [28]. Compared to K. pneumoniae, glycerol is
utilized less efﬁciently by E. coli. Researchers attempted to knock out glpK in E. coli to
redirect the metabolic ﬂux towards 3-HP production. However, the production of 3-HP did
not improve [91]. Interestingly, a signiﬁcant increase in 3-HP production (from 28.1 g/L
to 40.5 g/L) was achieved by overexpressing GlpK and knocking down GlpR (glycerol
pathway blocker) to promote glycerol assimilation in E. coli [84].
It is necessary to overexpress glycerol dehydratase reactivase (GdrAB) to reactivate
coenzyme B12 for some chassis that cannot synthesize coenzyme B12 naturally or produce
3-HP via the glycerol pathway under aerobic conditions. A report showed that oxygen
can induce the formation of inactivated coenzyme B12, which further causes the inactiva-
tion of GDHt by binding tightly to it, resulting in limited ﬂux from glycerol to 3-HP [54].
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 14 of 22
Lee et al. [31] overexpressed gdrAB in engineered E. coli by introducing the glycerol biosyn-
thesis pathway from K. pneumoniae, and the resulting strain produced 76.2 g/L of 3-HP
from pure glycerol and 61 g/L 3-HP from crude glycerol in fed-batch fermentation under
aerobic conditions. Similarly, the recombinant P . denitriﬁcansalso produced 3-HP under
aerobic conditions; a poor supply of coenzyme B 12 was the main factor limiting a high
3-HP titer. The strategy of overexpressing GdrAB was also applied in P . denitriﬁcans. The
resulting strain produced 102 g/L of 3-HP from pure glycerol and 65 g/L of 3-HP from
crude glycerol in fed-batch fermentation [50].
The biosynthesis of 3-HP from glycerol is accompanied by the net accumulation of
NADH, and, in order to balance the intracellular reducing power, the strains tend to
accumulate large amounts of by-products to consume NADH. The balance of NADH and
NAD+ is important in the conversion of glycerol to 3-HP . The co-production of 1,3-PDO and
3-HP is a way to achieve a cyclic equilibrium of NAD+/NADH, since the reduction of 3-HPA
to 1,3-PDO is accompanied by the consumption of NADH [89]. Bioelectrochemical systems
(BES) provide a new idea for balancing intracellular reducing power. Some microorganisms
can deliver respiratory electrons to solid electrodes under anaerobic conditions. The cellular
redox states can be controlled by microbe–electrode interaction via extracellular electron
transfer in BES [92]. It has been shown that the use of BES to activate anaerobic respiration
to regulate the NADH/NAD+ ratio increased 3-HP production by 70% when recombinant
K. pneumoniae was exposed to an electric ﬁeld [ 92]. Niu et al. [ 93] proposed a strategy
for the production of 3-HP from glucose and glycerol as mixed substrates, whereby the
metabolism of glucose can consume NADH produced from the metabolism of glycerol.
4.2.3. Biosynthesis of 3-HP via the Malonyl-CoA Pathway
Recently, the potential of P . pastoristo produce 3-HP via the malonyl-CoA pathway
from glycerol has been reported. Fina et al. [ 40] increased the expression of mcr by a
strong constitutive promoter in P . pastoris, and then further increased the availability
of NADPH and malonyl-CoA. The engineered P . pastorisproduced 24.75 g/L of 3-HP
from glycerol in fed-batch fermentation. Based on this study, the same team further
modiﬁed the engineered P . pastoristo obtain a higher titer of 3-HP by adding a second
copy of mcr-c, overexpressing Acc1 together with enzymes of the endogenous acetyl-CoA
synthesis pathway and deleting genes for by-product formation. This resulted in a 3-
HP titer of 37.05 g/L, which is the second highest value achieved in yeast cell factories
to date [41]. Therefore, the construction of a malonyl-CoA pathway in strains that can
efﬁciently metabolize glycerol is very promising.
4.3. Microbial Production of 3-HP from Acetic Acid, Ethanol, and Fatty Acids
Fatty acids, acetic acid, and ethanol are converted to acetyl-CoA, which is further
metabolized for cell growth and product synthesis. Acetyl-CoA is an important precursor
for the synthesis of 3-HP , and all three substances are high-quality carbon sources for the
production of 3-HP via the malonyl-CoA pathway.
At present, several methods have been developed to convert lignocellulosic biomass
and C1 gas into acetate [ 94]. Recently, acetate has been considered as a potential fer-
mentation substrate, and many studies have attempted to convert acetate into biofuels.
However, acetate is less efﬁciently assimilated by microorganisms than glucose. In a study
by Lee et al. [ 77], acetate consumption was increased by upregulating genes related to
acetate assimilation and activating the glyoxalate cycle, and metabolic spillover was pre-
vented by inhibiting the expression of genes related to fatty acid synthesis. Finally, the
engineered E. coli introducing the malonyl-CoA pathway produced 3 g/L of 3-HP in shake
ﬂasks. Similarly, Lai et al. [34] synthesized 15.8 g/L of 3-HP with the yield of 0.71 g/g from
acetate, using engineered E. coli via the malonyl-CoA pathway. Subsequently, the titer of
3-HP reached 11.2 g/L with the yield of 0.55 g/g when syngas-derived acetic acid was used
as a substrate instead of pure acetic acid. Due to the inefﬁcient growth of microorganisms
on acetate, a two-stage strategy was developed for the synthesis of 3-HP in engineered E.
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 15 of 22
coli that used glucose for cell growth and acetate for 3-HP formation. Finally, the strain pro-
duced 7.3 g/L of 3-HP in the two-stage bioreactor [95]. Notably, it is important to balance
the TCA cycle and the pathway for 3-HP production, since the whole process from acetate
to 3-HP requires the provision of additional reducing power and energy. Chang et al. [47]
achieved a balance between the TCA cycle and 3-HP synthesis by regulating the expression
of citrate synthase, and the engineered C. glutamicum produced the highest titer of 3-HP
from acetate reported to date, reaching 17.1 g/L.
Ethanol can be efﬁciently synthesized from starch, sugar, lignocellulosic biomass,
and C1 gas. Compared to acetate, there are several advantages to utilizing ethanol as a
substrate. Instead of consuming one mole of ATP , two moles of NADH are produced when
ethanol is assimilated to acetyl-CoA. In addition, the pH of the fermentation broth does
not change when ethanol is consumed as a substrate. Recently, it has been demonstrated
that E. coli has the potential to utilize ethanol to produce 3-HP . Lu et al. [ 35] increased
the titer of 3-HP by optimizing the expression levels of genes in the ethanol utilization
pathway and the malonyl-CoA pathway, and explored the effect of deleting or modifying
key genes associated with the oxidative branch of the TCA cycle and the gluconeogenesis
pathway on 3-HP production. The engineered E. coli reached a titer and yield of 13.17 g/L
and 0.57 g/g in the whole-cell catalytic system. The low titers of 3-HP from ethanol or
acetate as substrates are probably attributed to the fact that these substrates tend to be
accumulated as electron acceptors during microbial fermentation, rather than assimilated
by microorganisms.
Fatty acids (FAs) are a cheap by-product of the palm oil industry that can effectively
provide acetyl-CoA for 3-HP production. Reducing equivalents and ATP are produced
during the assimilation of FAs via the β-oxidation pathway. It is worth noting that the
theoretical yield of 3-HP from glucose or glycerol was 1 g/g, while from 16-carbon FAs
it was 2.49 g/g, which was much higher than from other substrates. To date, the highest
3-HP titer achieved in the malonyl-CoA pathway is 52 g/L, which was produced by
an engineered E. coli that can efﬁciently utilize FAs [ 36]. FAs are a promising substrate
for the production of 3-HP via the malonyl-CoA pathway, and the further development
of microbial chassis strains that can efﬁciently utilize FAs is necessary to fully harness
this potential.
4.4. Microbial Production of 3-HP from 1,3-PDO
In microbial cell factories without knockdown of the 1,3-PDO production pathway
(such as engineered K. pneumoniae [30,89] and L. reuteri [39]), the production of 3-HP via
the glycerol pathway is often accompanied by a massive production of 1,3-PDO, exceeding
20 g/L. However, up to four oxidoreductases are involved in the synthesis of 1,3-PDO
in K. pneumoniae, and it is challenging to completely block the production of 1,3-PDO
by gene knockout [ 96]. Some researchers have even tried to coproduce 1,3-PDO and
3-HP to balance the reducing power [ 89]. Therefore, it is attractive to further convert
1,3-PDO from fermentation broth into 3-HP . Furthermore, pure 1,3-PDO obtained from
the microbial process has a market price of only USD 1/kg [ 48], which makes 1,3-PDO
an economic substrate for 3-HP production. Wild-type G. oxydans can naturally catalyze
the conversion of 1,3-PDO to 3-HP . Zhao et al. [14] balanced the enzymatic activities of
aldehyde dehydrogenase and alcohol dehydrogenase in the 1,3-PDO production pathway
by mixing two mutants of G. oxydans in a 1:2 ratio, and the resulting artiﬁcial consortium
converted 40 g/L of 1,3-PDO into 45.8 g/L of 3-HP by whole-cell catalysis. Similarly,
endogenous enzymes that convert 1,3-PDO to 3-HP were also identiﬁed inH. bluephagenesis.
An enhanced 1,3-PDO synthesis pathway was constructed by optimizing the expression of
endogenous aldehyde dehydrogenase (Aldhb) and endogenous alcohol dehydrogenase
(AdhP). The resulting engineered H. bluephagenesis produced 154 g/L of 3-HP at the rate of
2.4 g/(L·h) in fed-batch fermentation [27], which was very close to the industrial production
requirement. The biosynthesis of 3-HP from 1,3-PDO is a promising strategy but has been
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 16 of 22
less studied, and the construction of a 1,3-PDO pathway in common hosts will likely be an
effective way to increase the 3-HP titer.
4.5. Microbial Production of 3-HP from Other Carbon Sources
Malonyl-CoA can be produced directly from malonic acid by malonyl-CoA synthase
(MatB); subsequently, malonyl-CoA is converted to 3-HP by MCR. The biosynthetic path-
way from malonyl acid to 3-HP is shorter compared to other carbon sources [37]. However,
the engineered E. coli produced only 1.20 g/L of 3-HP from malonic acid in shake ﬂasks [37].
In addition, 3-hydroxypropionitrile has also been developed as a substrate for the produc-
tion of 3-HP . It was reported thatMeyerozyma guilliermondii containing nitrile hydrolase
completely hydrolyzed 3-HPN into 3 HP with a titer of 19.48 g/L [97]. To mitigate global
warming, third-generation (3G) bioreﬁneries aim to produce high-value chemicals and
biofuels from greenhouse gases or CO 2-derived syngas. Lee et al. [ 53] designed a type
II methanotrophic cell factory based on Methylosinus trichosporium OB3b to produce 3-
HP from CO2 and CH4 via the malonyl-CoA pathway, but the 3-HP titer reached only
60.59 mg/L in a bioreactor. The feasibility of using microalgae to convert CO 2 to 3-HP
was demonstrated by constructing engineered Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942 with a
malonyl-CoA pathway and β-alanine pathway. The strain produced 665 mg/L of 3-HP
via the malonyl-CoA pathway and 186 mg/L of 3-HP via the β-alanine pathway [ 98].
The ability of microorganisms to produce high-value-added chemicals from one-carbon
substrates is limited by factors such as carbon ﬁxation efﬁciency and metabolic properties,
and the production capacity of 3G bioreﬁneries for synthesizing 3-HP remains low.
5. Fermentation Processes
5.1. Fed-Batch Fermentation
The microbial synthesis of 3-HP was mainly developed in laboratory-scale bioreactors
using fed-batch fermentation. In these processes, the concentration of substrate is usually
kept low, which prevents high substrate concentrations from inducing the production of
by-products and inhibiting microbial growth [ 99]. Among the key enzymes commonly
selected for the construction of the glycerol pathway in engineered strains, the activity of
GDHt is higher than that of ALDH, and the accumulation of toxic intermediate 3-HPA
can be prevented by limiting the glycerol concentration. K. pneumoniae was found to be
subject to signiﬁcant substrate inhibition when the glycerol concentration was increased
to above 40 g/L under anaerobic conditions [100]. Acetate must be maintained at a low
concentration when used as substrate for 3-HP synthesis because a high concentration of
acetate is toxic to cells. According to Chang et al. [47], the initial concentration of acetate
was only 1.4 g/L in fed-batch fermentation for the synthesis of 3-HP from acetate by
engineered E. coli. A sugar-limited fed-batch fermentation that maintains basal levels of
glucose and xylose in the medium was designed for 3-HP synthesis by engineered E. coli
via the glycerol pathway, because high concentrations of glucose and xylose would prevent
the efﬁcient conversion of glycerol to 3-HP [69].
In addition to feeding strategies based on the substrate concentration, researchers
have also developed alternative feeding strategies for 3-HP production. Lee et al. [ 31]
selected the pH-stat feeding strategy guided by pH in the production of 3-HP , which
employs automated feeding when the pH rises above 7.02. To mitigate the metabolic stress
response, a recirculating feeding method was developed for 3-HP production, in which the
fermentation broth was centrifuged, mixed with fresh medium, and ﬁnally, returned to the
original bioreactor [28].
5.2. Two-Stage Culture Process
Two-stage culture processes have been developed to better balance growth and pro-
duction. This is generally achieved either by using different carbon sources or by setting
different parameters during the fermentation process. In studies on 3-HP production from
1,3-PDO using H. bluephagenesis, glucose was used as the carbon source during the growth
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 17 of 22
phase, while during the production phase, the concentration of glucose was maintained at
5 to 10 g/L for cell growth, and 1,3-PDO was added to produce 3-HP [48]. The recombinant
E. coli with weakened GlpK, which synthesized 3-HP from glycerol, could not perform well
for growth. Therefore, 20 g/L of glucose was initially added for well-grown cells; then,
57–60 g/L of glycerol was added for 3-HP production during the fermentation process [101].
Acetate is a high-quality substrate for the synthesis of 3-HP via the malonyl-CoA pathway,
yet it is not a good substrate for cells growth in some strains. Lama et al. [95] constructed
an engineered E. coli to ﬁrst rapidly assimilate glucose for cell growth at a high aeration
rate of 2 vvm, and then to use acetate as a carbon source for 3-HP production at a low
aeration rate of 0.5 vvm. Since the optimal 3-HP production condition for K. pneumoniae
was microaerobic condition, there was a study on the 3-HP production from glycerol by
engineered K. pneumoniae employing a two-stage aeration strategy, in which cell growth
was performed under high aeration conditions and 3-HP production was performed under
aeration rates reduced by half [102].
5.3. Modular Processes
The modular process strategy has been successfully applied to improve the yield of
3-HP by splitting the 3-HP biosynthetic pathway into several simple modules, and then
assigning speciﬁc modules to suitable strains, ﬁnally, integrating the individual modules to
produce 3-HP . According to Sabet-Azad et al. [82], L. reuteri was able to efﬁciently convert
glycerol to 3-HPA and some 3-HP in fed-batch fermentation. Then, 3-HPA was recovered
from the fermentation broth by complexation with bisulﬁte, and E. coli was introduced
into the production module to catalyze the conversion of 3-HPA to 3-HP at a yield of
1 mol/mol in the whole-cell catalytic system. In contrast to the previous process that used
two modules in separate stages, a study attempted to co-culture L. reuteri and recombinant
E. coli at appropriate ratios, and the system produced 125.93 g/L of 3-HP and 88.46 g/L
of 1,3-PDO through whole-cell catalysis [39]. Another modular production strategy was
developed by Zhao et al. [30]: glycerol was converted to 1,3-PDO by K. pneumoniae in fed-
batch fermentation, after which G. oxydans DSM2003 converted 1,3-PDO to 3-HP through
whole-cell biocatalysis. Eventually, this microbial system produced 242 g of 3-HP from 480 g
of glycerol in a 7.0 L bioreactor with a yield and titer of 0.5 g/g and 60.5 g/L, respectively.
This modular production strategy effectively utilized the advantages of different strains
in 3-HP synthesis, which improved the yield of 3-HP but increased the production cost
due to the complexity of the 3-HP production process. At present, the reported 3-HP
module process involves the collection and washing of biomass from a second module or
two modules.
6. Conclusions and Future Prospects
In recent years, a large number of studies have achieved the efﬁcient conversion of
renewable substrates into 3-HP using engineered microorganisms. As outlined in this
paper, the design of microbial cell factories that can efﬁciently produce 3-HP is determined
by selecting an appropriate biosynthetic pathway, production chassis, and high-quality
carbon source. With continuing research on the microbial synthesis of 3-HP , the range
of substrates that can be used by microbial cell factories has been gradually increased.
Initially, most studies used glycerol and glucose as substrates, after which lignocellulose,
acetate, ethanol, fatty acids, and other alternative substrates were also used for 3-HP
synthesis. Researchers are increasingly using renewable feedstocks that are cheaper, easier
to obtain, and more environmentally friendly. Combining all reports on the microbial
production of 3-HP , a conclusion was drawn that the fewer catalytic reactions required
to move from substrate to product, the easier it seems to be to obtain high titers of 3-HP .
For each 3-HP production pathway that has been developed, there should be one or more
suitable carbon sources (inexpensive, converts to 3-HP by fewer reactions, and can be
rapidly assimilated) corresponding to it. There is no doubt that glycerol is the most suitable
carbon source for the glycerol pathway, and high 3-HP titers have been achieved in K.
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 18 of 22
pneumoniae and P . denitriﬁcansthat are able to naturally and rapidly metabolize glycerol. In
particular, the 3-HP productivity of the P . denitriﬁerscell factory was excellent, reaching
2.5 g/(L·h) (which is the minimum requirement for the microbial 3-HP production to
be economically competitive) [ 50]. Reports on the 3-HP production by recombinant P .
denitriﬁers are scarce, and the production process needs to be further explored. For the
malonyl-CoA pathway, it is more appropriate to use substrates that can be efﬁciently
converted to acetyl-CoA, such as acetate and fatty acids. The synthesis of 3-HP from the
above substrates is mainly performed in E. coli due to its broad substrate spectrum and
clear genetic background. The assimilation of acetate or fatty acids by E. coli still needs to
be further strengthened. The β-alanine pathway seems to be less competitive compared
to the two pathways mentioned above because of the longer reaction route. A simpliﬁed
pathway, the oxaloacetate pathway, was recently explored inS. cerevisiae, which showed
excellent 3-HP production ability. It is worth testing the effects of the oxaloacetate pathway
in other chassis. Finding an inexpensive carbon source that can be efﬁciently converted to
oxaloacetate in a few steps is also essential in the future. In addition, engineered strains
need to be matched with appropriate fermentation processes to avoid the accumulation
of by-products and to balance production and growth. Dynamic regulation devices have
also been developed to address these issues, and good 3-HP titers were achieved in each
study [9,28]. Designing or modifying dynamic conditioning devices is an effective strategy
to improve the efﬁciency of engineered strains in the future.
Third-generation microbial reﬁneries that synthesize 3-HP directly from CO 2 have
been successfully constructed, but the titers are currently at the mg/L level. Further
modiﬁcation of the third-generation microbial reﬁneries for the synthesis of 3-HP to achieve
high titers is necessary to unlock the future prospects of environmentally friendly and
sustainable production. The efﬁciency of photosynthesis plays a decisive role in the
productivity of cell factories based on cyanobacteria. In the future, it will become possible
to optimize the components and pathways of the cyanobacterial photosynthetic system to
enhance carbon uptake, sequester carbon, and reduce carbon loss [103].
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, T.C.; Writing—Original Draft Preparation, X.W.;
Writing—Review and Editing, T.C., Z.C., X.S. and Z.W.; Supervision, T.C. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of
China (2021YFC2100700) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC-21776208).
Data Availability Statement: No new data created.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.
References
1. Chen, G. Recent progress in application of microbial polyhydroxyalkanoates. Mater. China 2012, 31, 7–15.
2. Zhao, P .; Tian, P . Biosynthesis pathways and strategies for improving 3-hydroxypropionic acid production in bacteria.World J.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2021, 37, 1–16. [CrossRef]
3. Zabed, H.M.; Akter, S.; Rupani, P .F.; Akor, J.; Zhang, Y.; Zhao, M.; Zhang, C.; Ragauskas, A.J.; Qi, X. Biocatalytic gateway to
convert glycerol into 3-hydroxypropionic acid in waste-based bioreﬁneries: Fundamentals, limitations, and potential research
strategies. Biotechnol. Adv. 2023, 62, 108075. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Rodrigues, J.L. Heterologous production of acrylic acid: Current challenges and perspectives. SynBio 2022, 1, 3–32. [CrossRef]
5. Werpy, T.; Petersen, G.; Aden, A.; Bozell, J.; Holladay, J.Top Value Added Chemicals from Biomass: I. Results of Screening for Potential
Candidates from Sugars and Synthesis Gas; Department of Energy: Washington, DC, USA, 2004.
6. Bozell, J.J.; Petersen, G.R. Technology development for the production of biobased products from bioreﬁnery carbohydrates—The
us department of energy′s “top 10” revisited. Green Chem. 2010, 12, 539–554. [CrossRef]
7. Barnhart, M.; Negrete-Raymond, A.; Frias, J.; Barbier, G.; Catlett, M.; Barnhardt, M. New Recombinant Yeast Cell Useful in
Composition, and as Biocatalysts in Industrial Fermentations Comprising Heterologous Polynucleotide Encoding Aspartate
1-Decarboxylase of Class e.g. Insecta, Bivalvia, and Branchiopoda. U.S. Patent 1,490,8730, 29 January 2016.
8. Frias, J.; Barbier, G. Recombinant Yeast Cell for Producing 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid and Derivatives of 3-Hydroxypropionic
Acid Such as Acrylic Acid, Comprises an Active 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid Pathway and Endogenous Gene That Encodes a
Pyruvate. Reductase. Patent WO 2016/138303-A1, 25 February 2016.
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 19 of 22
9. Lynch, M.D.; Gill, R.T.; Lipscomb, T.E.W. Method for Producing 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid and Other Products. U.S. Patent
9,428,778, 12 June 2013.
10. Liang, B.; Sun, G.; Zhang, X.; Nie, Q.; Zhao, Y.; Yang, J. Recent advances, challenges and metabolic engineering strategies in the
biosynthesis of 3-hydroxypropionic acid. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2022, 119, 2639–2668. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
11. de Fouchécour, F.; Sánchez-Castañeda, A.; Saulou-Bérion, C.; Spinnler, H.É. Process engineering for microbial production of
3-hydroxypropionic acid. Biotechnol. Adv. 2018, 36, 1207–1222. [CrossRef]
12. Kumar, V .; Ashok, S.; Park, S. Recent advances in biological production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid.Biotechnol. Adv. 2013, 31,
945–961. [CrossRef]
13. Talarico Tl, A.L.N.J. Utilization of glycerol as a hydrogen acceptor byLactobacillus reuteri: Puriﬁcation of 1,3-propanediol:nad+
oxidoreductaset. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 1990, 56, 943–948. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Sriramulu, D.D.; Liang, M.; Hernandez-Romero, D.; Raux-Deery, E.; Lünsdorf, H.; Parsons, J.B.; Warren, M.J.; Prentice, M.B.Lacto-
bacillus reuteri dsm 20016 produces cobalamin-dependent diol dehydratase in metabolosomes and metabolizes 1,2-propanediol
by disproportionation. J. Bacteriol. 2008, 190, 4559–4567. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Dishisha T, P .L.P .S. Flux analysis of theLactobacillus reuteri propanediol-utilization pathway for production of 3-hydroxypropional-
dehyde, 3-hydroxypropionic acid and 1,3-propanediol from glycerol. Microb. Cell Fact. 2014, 13, 76. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Amin, H.M.; Hashem, A.M.; Ashour, M.S.; Hatti-Kaul, R. 1,2 propanediol utilization by Lactobacillus reuteri dsm 20016, role in
bioconversion of glycerol to 1,3 propanediol, 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde and 3-hydroxypropionic acid. J. Genet. Eng. Biotechnol.
2013, 11, 53–59. [CrossRef]
17. Eisenreich, W.; Strauss, G.; Werz, U.; Fuchs, G.; Bacher, A. Retrobiosynthetic analysis of carbon ﬁxation in the phototrophic
eubacterium chloroﬂexus aurantiacus. Eur. J. Biochem. 1993, 215, 619–632. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Hongjie, W.; Jun, N.; Yi, Z.; Ling, Z.; Yueyong, X. The progress of studies on a unique carbon dioxide ﬁxation pathway:
3-hydroxypropionate cycle. Microbiol. China 2013, 40, 304–315.
19. Xinlei, Y.; Yufeng, M.; Xiaoxia, Z.; Lingxue, L.; Zhiwen, W.; Tao, C. Recent progress in microbial production of 3-hydroxypropionic
acid. Chem. Ind. Eng. Prog. 2018, 37, 4427–4436.
20. Liao, H.H.; Gokarn, R.R.; Gort, S.J.; Jessen, H.J.; Selifonova, O.V .; Liao, H.; Gokarn, R.; Gort, S.; Jessen, H.; Selifonova, O. Novel
Transformed Cell Comprising Beta-Alanine/Pyruvate Aminotransferase Activity, Useful for Producing 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid
3-hp from Beta-Alanine, and for Producing Ester of 3-hp, 1,3-Propanediol and Polymerized 3-hp. Pantent WO 2005/118719-A2,
06 December 2004.
21. Liao, H.H.; Gokarn, R.R.; Gort, S.J.; Jessen, H.J.; Selifonova, O.V . Production of 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid Using Beta-
Alanine/Pyruvate Aminotransferase. U.S. Patent 12,826,401, 29 June 2010.
22. Novozymes, I. Compositions and Methods for 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid Production. J.P . Patent 2009545717, 11 January 2008.
23. Dishisha, T.; Pyo, S.; Hatti-Kaul, R. Bio-based 3-hydroxypropionic- and acrylic acid production from biodiesel glycerol via
integrated microbial and chemical catalysis. Microb. Cell Fact. 2015, 14, 200. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Zhu, J.; Xie, J.; Wei, L.; Lin, J.; Zhao, L.; Wei, D. Identiﬁcation of the enzymes responsible for 3-hydroxypropionic acid formation
and their use in improving 3-hydroxypropionic acid production in Gluconobacter oxydans dsm 2003. Bioresour. Technol. 2018, 265,
328–333. [CrossRef]
25. Wang, B.Metabolic Engineering of Escherichia coli Cell Factory for the Production of d-Lactate and Derivatives; Tianjin University: Tianjin,
China, 2020.
26. Tong, T.; Tao, Z.; Chen, X.; Gao, C.; Liu, H.; Wang, X.; Liu, G.; Liu, L. A biosynthesis pathway for 3-hydroxypropionic acid
production in genetically engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Green Chem. 2021, 23, 4502–4509. [CrossRef]
27. Zhao, P .; Ma, C.; Xu, L.; Tian, P . Exploiting tandem repetitive promoters for high-level production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid.
Appl. Microbiol. Biot. 2019, 103, 4017–4031. [CrossRef]
28. Zhao, P .; Li, Q.; Tian, P .; Tan, T. Switching metabolic ﬂux by engineering tryptophan operon-assisted crispr interference system in
Klebsiella pneumoniae. Metab. Eng. 2021, 65, 30–41. [CrossRef]
29. Li, Y.; Wang, X.; Ge, X.; Tian, P . High production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid inKlebsiella pneumoniae by systematic optimization of
glycerol metabolism. Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 1–10. [CrossRef]
30. Zhao, L.; Lin, J.; Wang, H.; Xie, J.; Wei, D. Development of a two-step process for production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from
glycerol using Klebsiella pneumoniae and Gluconobacter oxydans. Bioproc. Biosyst. Eng. 2015, 38, 2487–2495. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
31. Jw, K.; Ys, K.; Tu, C.; Sy, L. High-level production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol as a sole carbon source using
metabolically engineered Escherichia coli. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2020, 117, 2139–2152.
32. Chu, H.S.; Kim, Y.S.; Lee, C.M.; Lee, J.H.; Jung, W.S.; Ahn, J.; Song, S.H.; Choi, I.S.; Cho, K.M. Metabolic engineering of
3-hydroxypropionic acid biosynthesis in Escherichia coli. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2015, 112, 356–364. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Nguyen-Vo, T.P .; Liang, Y.; Sankaranarayanan, M.; Seol, E.; Chun, A.Y.; Ashok, S.; Chauhan, A.S.; Kim, J.R.; Park, S. Development
of 3-hydroxypropionic-acid-tolerant strain of Escherichia coli W and role of minor global regulator yieP. Metab. Eng. 2019, 53,
48–58. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Lai, N.; Luo, Y.; Fei, P .; Hu, P .; Wu, H. One stone two birds: Biosynthesis of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from CO2 and syngas-derived
acetic acid in Escherichia coli. Synth. Syst. Biotechnol. 2021, 6, 144–152. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Lu, J.; Wang, Y.; Xu, M.; Fei, Q.; Gu, Y.; Luo, Y.; Wu, H. Efﬁcient biosynthesis of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from ethanol in
metabolically engineered Escherichia coli. Bioresour. Technol. 2022, 363, 127907. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 20 of 22
36. Liu, B.; Xiang, S.; Zhao, G.; Wang, B.; Ma, Y.; Liu, W.; Tao, Y. Efﬁcient production of 3-hydroxypropionate from fatty acids
feedstock in Escherichia coli. Metab. Eng. 2019, 51, 121–130. [CrossRef]
37. Liang, B.; Sun, G.; Wang, Z.; Xiao, J.; Yang, J. Production of 3-hydroxypropionate using a novel malonyl-CoA-mediated
biosynthetic pathway in genetically engineered E. coli strain. Green Chem. Int. J. Green Chem. Resour. GC 2019, 21, 6103–6115.
38. Song, C.W.; Kim, J.W.; Cho, I.J.; Lee, S.Y. Metabolic engineering ofEscherichia coli for the production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid
and malonic acid through β-alanine route. ACS Synth. Biol. 2016, 5, 1256–1263. [CrossRef]
39. Zhang, Y.; Zabed, H.M.; Yun, J.; Zhang, G.; Wang, Y.; Qi, X. Notable improvement of 3-hydroxypropionic acid and 1,3-propanediol
coproduction using modular coculture engineering and pathway rebalancing. ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 2021, 9, 4625–4637.
[CrossRef]
40. Fina, A.; Brêda, G.C.; Pérez Trujillo, M.; Freire, D.M.G.; Almeida, R.V .; Albiol, J.; Ferrer, P . Benchmarking recombinantPichiapastoris
for 3-hydroxypropionic acid production from glycerol. Microb. Biotechnol. 2021, 14, 1671–1682. [CrossRef]
41. Fina, A.; Heux, S.; Albiol, J.; Ferrer, P . Combining metabolic engineering and multiplexed screening methods for 3-
hydroxypropionic acid production in Pichia pastoris. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2022, 10, 942304. [CrossRef]
42. Takayama, S.; Ozaki, A.; Konishi, R.; Otomo, C.; Kishida, M.; Hirata, Y.; Matsumoto, T.; Tanaka, T.; Kondo, A. Enhancing
3-hydroxypropionic acid production in combination with sugar supply engineering by cell surface-display and metabolic
engineering of Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Microb. Cell Fact. 2018, 17, 176. [CrossRef]
43. Li, W.; Wang, T.; Dong, Y.; Li, T. Screening, identiﬁcation, and low-energy ion modiﬁed breeding of a yeast strain producing high
level of 3-hydroxypropionic acid. MicrobiologyOpen 2019, 9, e00956. [CrossRef]
44. Kildegaard, K.R.; Jensen, N.B.; Schneider, K.; Czarnotta, E.; özdemir, E.; Klein, T.; Maury, J.; Ebert, B.E.; Christensen, H.B.; Chen,
Y.; et al. Engineering and systems-level analysis of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid via malonyl-
CoA reductase-dependent pathway. Microb. Cell Fact. 2016, 15, 53. [CrossRef]
45. Lis, A.V .; Schneider, K.; Weber, J.; Keasling, J.D.; Jensen, M.K.; Klein, T. Exploring small-scale chemostats to scale up microbial
processes: 3-hydroxypropionic acid production in S. cerevisiae. Microb. Cell Fact. 2019, 18, 50. [CrossRef]
46. Chen, Z.; Huang, J.; Wu, Y.; Wu, W.; Zhang, Y.; Liu, D. Metabolic engineering ofCorynebacterium glutamicum for the production of
3-hydroxypropionic acid from glucose and xylose. Metab. Eng. 2017, 39, 151–158. [CrossRef]
47. Chang, Z.; Dai, W.; Mao, Y.; Cui, Z.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, Z.; Ma, H.; Chen, T. Enhanced 3-hydroxypropionic acid production from
acetate via the malonyl- CoA pathway in Corynebacterium glutamicum. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2022, 9, 808258. [CrossRef]
48. Jiang, X.; Yan, X.; Yu, L.; Liu, X.; Chen, G. Hyperproduction of 3-hydroxypropionate byHalomonas bluephagenesis. Nat. Commun.
2021, 12, 1513. [CrossRef]
49. Kalantari, A.; Chen, T.; Ji, B.; Stancik, I.A.; Ravikumar, V .; Franjevic, D.; Saulou-Bérion, C.; Goelzer, A.; Mijakovic, I. Conversion of
glycerol to 3-hydroxypropanoic acid by genetically engineered Bacillus subtilis. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 638. [CrossRef]
50. Shim, J.Y.; Park, K.S.; Somasundar, A.; Park, S.H. Production and Separation of 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid. U.S. Patent 16,758,815,
25 October 2018.
51. Thi Nguyen, T.; Lama, S.; Kumar Ainala, S.; Sankaranarayanan, M.; Singh Chauhan, A.; Rae Kim, J.; Park, S. Development of
Pseudomonas asiatica as a host for the production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol. Bioresour. Technol. 2021, 329, 124867.
[CrossRef]
52. Wang, Y.; Sun, T.; Gao, X.; Shi, M.; Wu, L.; Chen, L.; Zhang, W. Biosynthesis of platform chemical 3-hydroxypropionic acid (3-hp)
directly from CO2 in Cyanobacterium synechocystis sp. Pcc 6803. Metab. Eng. 2016, 34, 60–70. [CrossRef]
53. Nguyen, D.T.N.; Lee, O.K.; Lim, C.; Lee, J.; Na, J.; Lee, E.Y. Metabolic engineering of type ii methanotroph, Methylosinus
trichosporium ob3b, for production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from methane via a malonyl- CoA reductase-dependent pathway.
Metab. Eng. 2020, 59, 142–150. [CrossRef]
54. Kumar, V .; Park, S. Potential and limitations ofKlebsiella pneumoniae as a microbial cell factory utilizing glycerol as the carbon
source. Biotechnol. Adv. 2018, 36, 150–167. [CrossRef]
55. Huang, Y.; Li, Z.; Ye, Q. Transcriptional regulation of genes involved in 3-hydroxypropionic acid production in response to
aeration of recombinant Klebsiella pneumoniae. Appl. Biochem. Biotech. 2016, 178, 1129–1140. [CrossRef]
56. Ashok, S.; Sankaranarayanan, M.; Ko, Y.; Jae, K.; Ainala, S.K.; Kumar, V .; Park, S. Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from
glycerol by recombinant Klebsiella pneumoniae δdhaTδyqhD which can produce vitamin B12 naturally. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2013, 110,
511–524. [CrossRef]
57. Matsakas, L.; Hr ˚ uzová, K.; Rova, U.; Christakopoulos, P . Biological production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid: An update on the
current status. Fermentation 2018, 4, 13. [CrossRef]
58. Li, Y.; Ge, X.; Tian, P . Production of 1,3-propanediol from glycerol using a new isolate Klebsiella sp. Aa405 carrying low levels of
virulence factors. Biotechnol. Biotec. Eq. 2017, 31, 725–732.
59. Kildegaard, K.R.; Hallström, B.M.; Blicher, T.H.; Sonnenschein, N.; Jensen, N.B.; Sherstyk, S.; Harrison, S.J.; Maury, J.; Herrgård,
M.J.; Juncker, A.S.; et al. Evolution reveals a glutathione-dependent mechanism of 3-hydroxypropionic acid tolerance. Metab. Eng.
2014, 26, 57–66. [CrossRef]
60. Borodina, I.; Kildegaard, K.R.; Jensen, N.B.; Blicher, T.H.; Maury, J.; Sherstyk, S.; Schneider, K.; Lamosa, P .; Herrgård, M.J.;
Rosenstand, I.; et al. Establishing a synthetic pathway for high-level production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae via β-alanine. Metab. Eng. 2015, 27, 57–64. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 21 of 22
61. Suyama, A.; Higuchi, Y.; Urushihara, M.; Maeda, Y.; Takegawa, K. Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid via the malonyl- CoA
pathway using recombinant ﬁssion yeast strains. J. Biosci. Bioeng. 2017, 124, 392–399. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
62. Ghiffary, M.R.; Prabowo, C.P .S.; Adidjaja, J.J.; Lee, S.Y.; Kim, H.U. Systems metabolic engineering ofCorynebacterium glutamicum
for the efﬁcient production of β-alanine. Metab. Eng. 2022, 74, 121–129. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
63. Tan, D.; Wu, Q.; Chen, J.; Chen, G. Engineering halomonas td01 for the low-cost production of polyhydroxyalkanoates.Metab.
Eng. 2014, 26, 34–47. [CrossRef]
64. Zhou, S.; Catherine, C.; Rathnasingh, C.; Somasundar, A.; Park, S. Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol by
recombinant Pseudomonas denitriﬁcans. Biotechnol. Bioeng. 2013, 110, 3177–3187. [CrossRef]
65. Park, S.; Shengfang, Z.; Ashok, S.; Seol, E.H.; Ainala, S.K. Promoter System inducing Expression by 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid
and Method for Biological Production of 3-Hydroxypropionic Acid Using Same. U.S. Patent 15,735,585, 13 June 2016.
66. Zhou, S.; Lama, S.; Jiang, J.; Sankaranarayanan, M.; Park, S. Use of acetate for the production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid by
metabolically-engineered Pseudomonas denitriﬁcans. Bioresour. Technol. 2020, 307, 123194. [CrossRef]
67. Narisetty, V .; Cox, R.; Bommareddy, R.; Agrawal, D.; Ahmad, E.; Pant, K.K.; Chandel, A.K.; Bhatia, S.K.; Kumar, D.; Binod,
P .; et al. Valorisation of xylose to renewable fuels and chemicals, an essential step in augmenting the commercial viability of
lignocellulosic bioreﬁneries. Sustain. Energy Fuels 2021, 6, 29–65. [CrossRef]
68. Jung, I.; Lee, J.; Min, W.; Park, Y.; Seo, J. Simultaneous conversion of glucose and xylose to 3-hydroxypropionic acid in engineered
Escherichia coli by modulation of sugar transport and glycerol synthesis. Bioresour. Technol. 2015, 198, 709–716. [CrossRef]
69. Heo, W.; Kim, J.H.; Kim, S.; Kim, K.H.; Kim, H.J.; Seo, J. Enhanced production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glucose and xylose
by alleviation of metabolic congestion due to glycerol ﬂux in engineered Escherichia coli. Bioresour. Technol. 2019, 285, 121320.
[CrossRef]
70. Lee, T.; Min, W.; Kim, H.J.; Seo, J. Improved production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid in engineeredEscherichia coli by rebalancing
heterologous and endogenous synthetic pathways. Bioresour. Technol. 2020, 299, 122600. [CrossRef]
71. Liu, H.; Zhao, P .; Tian, P . Engineering glucose-to-glycerol pathway inKlebsiella pneumoniae and boosting 3-hydroxypropionic acid
production through crispr interference. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2022, 10, 908431. [CrossRef]
72. Liu, C.; Ding, Y.; Zhang, R.; Liu, H.; Xian, M.; Zhao, G. Functional balance between enzymes in malonyl-CoA pathway for
3-hydroxypropionate biosynthesis. Metab. Eng. 2016, 34, 104–111. [CrossRef]
73. Chen, X.; Yang, X.; Shen, Y.; Hou, J.; Bao, X. Increasing malonyl-CoA derived product through controlling the transcription
regulators of phospholipid synthesis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. ACS Synth. Biol. 2017, 6, 905–912. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
74. Shi, S.; Chen, Y.; Siewers, V .; Nielsen, J. Improving production of malonyl coenzyme A-derived metabolites by abolishing
snf1-dependent regulation of acc1. mBio 2014, 5, e1114–e1130. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
75. Wang, S.; Jin, X.; Jiang, W.; Wang, Q.; Qi, Q.; Liang, Q. The expression modulation of the key enzyme ACC for highly efﬁcient
3-hydroxypropionic acid production. Front. Microbiol. 2022, 13, 902848. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Yang, Y.; Lin, Y.; Li, L.; Linhardt, R.J.; Yan, Y. Regulating malonyl- CoA metabolism via synthetic antisense RNAs for enhanced
biosynthesis of natural products. Metab. Eng. 2015, 29, 217–226. [CrossRef]
77. Lee, J.; Cha, S.; Kang, C.; Lee, G.; Lim, H.; Jung, G. Efﬁcient conversion of acetate to 3-hydroxypropionic acid by engineered
Escherichia coli. Catalysts 2018, 8, 525. [CrossRef]
78. Chang, Z.; Dai, W.; Mao, Y.; Cui, Z.; Wang, Z.; Chen, T. EngineeringCorynebacterium glutamicum for the efﬁcient production of
3-hydroxypropionic acid from a mixture of glucose and acetate via the malonyl-CoA pathway. Catalysts 2020, 10, 203. [CrossRef]
79. Kildegaard, K.R.; Wang, Z.; Chen, Y.; Nielsen, J.; Borodina, I. Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glucose and xylose by
metabolically engineered Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Metab. Eng. Commun. 2015, 2, 132–136. [CrossRef]
80. Song, C.W.; Lee, J.; Ko, Y.; Lee, S.Y. Metabolic engineering ofEscherichia coli for the production of 3-aminopropionic acid. Metab.
Eng. 2015, 30, 121–129. [CrossRef]
81. Talarico, T.L.; Casas, I.A.; Chung, T.C.; Dobrogosz, W.J. Production and isolation of reuterin, a growth inhibitor produced by
Lactobacillus reuteri. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 1988, 32, 1854–1858. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Sabet-Azad, R.; Sardari, R.R.R.; Linares-Past én, J.A.; Hatti-Kaul, R. Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from 3-
hydroxypropionaldehyde by recombinant Escherichia coli co-expressing Lactobacillus reuteri propanediol utilization enzymes.
Bioresour. Technol. 2015, 180, 214–221. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Zaushitsyna, O.; Dishisha, T.; Hatti-Kaul, R.; Mattiasson, B. Crosslinked, cryostructured Lactobacillus reuteri monoliths for
production of 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde, 3-hydroxypropionic acid and 1,3-propanediol from glycerol. J. Biotechnol. 2017, 241,
22–32. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
84. Jung, W.S.; Kang, J.H.; Chu, H.S.; Choi, I.S.; Cho, K.M. Elevated production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid by metabolic engineering
of the glycerol metabolism in Escherichia coli. Metab. Eng. 2014, 23, 116–122. [CrossRef]
85. Wu, S.; Zhao, P .; Li, Q.; Tian, P . Intensifying niacin-based biosynthesis of NAD+ to enhance 3-hydroxypropionic acid production
in Klebsiella pneumoniae. Biotechnol. Lett. 2021, 43, 223–234. [CrossRef]
86. Zhao, P .; Ren, M.; Ge, X.; Tian, P .; Tan, T. Development of orthogonal T7 expression system inKlebsiella pneumoniae. Biotechnol.
Bioeng. 2020, 117, 2446–2459. [CrossRef]
87. Sankaranarayanan, M.; Somasundar, A.; Seol, E.; Chauhan, A.S.; Kwon, S.; Jung, G.Y.; Park, S. Production of 3-hydroxypropionic
acid by balancing the pathway enzymes using synthetic cassette architecture. J. Biotechnol. 2017, 259, 140–147. [CrossRef]
Molecules 2023, 28, 1888 22 of 22
88. Lim, H.G.; Noh, M.H.; Jeong, J.H.; Park, S.; Jung, G.Y. Optimum rebalancing of the 3-hydroxypropionic acid production pathway
from glycerol in Escherichia coli. ACS Synth. Biol. 2016, 5, 1247–1255. [CrossRef]
89. Ko, Y.; Seol, E.; Sundara Sekar, B.; Kwon, S.; Lee, J.; Park, S. Metabolic engineering ofKlebsiella pneumoniae j2b for co-production of
3-hydroxypropionic acid and 1,3-propanediol from glycerol: Reduction of acetate and other by-products. Bioresour. Technol. 2017,
244, 1096–1103. [CrossRef]
90. Ashok, S.; Mohan Raj, S.; Ko, Y.; Sankaranarayanan, M.; Zhou, S.; Kumar, V .; Park, S. Effect of puuC overexpression and
nitrate addition on glycerol metabolism and anaerobic 3-hydroxypropionic acid production in recombinant Klebsiella pneumoniae
δglpkδdhat. Metab. Eng. 2013, 15, 10–24. [CrossRef]
91. Tsuruno, K.; Honjo, H.; Hanai, T. Enhancement of 3-hydroxypropionic acid production from glycerol by using a metabolic toggle
switch. Microb. Cell Fact. 2015, 14, 155. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
92. Kim, C.; Kim, M.Y.; Michie, I.; Jeon, B.; Premier, G.C.; Park, S.; Kim, J.R. Anodic electro-fermentation of 3-hydroxypropionic acid
from glycerol by recombinant Klebsiella pneumoniae l17 in a bioelectrochemical system. Biotechnol. Biofuels 2017, 10, 199. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
93. Niu, K.; Xiong, T.; Qin, H.; Wu, H.; Liu, Z.; Zheng, Y. 3-hydroxypropionic acid production by recombinant Escherichia coli
zju-3hp01 using glycerol–glucose dual-substrate fermentative strategy. Biotechnol. Appl. Biochem. 2017, 64, 572–578. [CrossRef]
94. Kiefer, D.; Merkel, M.; Lilge, L.; Henkel, M.; Hausmann, R. From acetate to bio-based products: Underexploited potential for
industrial biotechnology. Trends Biotechnol. 2021, 39, 397–411. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
95. Lama, S.; Kim, Y.; Nguyen, D.T.; Im, C.H.; Sankaranarayanan, M.; Park, S. Production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from acetate
using metabolically-engineered and glucose-grown Escherichia coli. Bioresour. Technol. 2021, 320, 124362. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
96. Ko, Y.; Ashok, S.; Seol, E.; Ainala, S.K.; Park, S. Deletion of putative oxidoreductases from Klebsiella pneumoniae j2b could
reduce 1,3-propanediol during the production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol. Biotechnol. Bioproc. E 2015, 20, 834–843.
[CrossRef]
97. Zhang, Q.; Gong, J.; Dong, T.; Liu, T.; Li, H.; Dou, W.; Lu, Z.; Shi, J.; Xu, Z. Nitrile-hydrolyzing enzyme from Meyerozyma
guilliermondii and its potential in biosynthesis of 3-hydroxypropionic acid. Bioproc. Biosyst. Eng. 2017, 40, 901–910. [CrossRef]
98. Lan, E.I.; Chuang, D.S.; Shen, C.R.; Lee, A.M.; Ro, S.Y.; Liao, J.C. Metabolic engineering of cyanobacteria for photosynthetic
3-hydroxypropionic acid production from CO2 using Synechococcus elongatus pcc 7942. Metab. Eng. 2015, 31, 163–170. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
99. Jers, C.; Kalantari, A.; Garg, A.; Mijakovic, I. Production of 3-hydroxypropanoic acid from glycerol by metabolically engineered
bacteria. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2019, 7, 124. [CrossRef]
100. Cheng, K.K.; Liu, H.J.; Liu, D.H. Multiple growth inhibition of Klebsiella pneumoniae in 1,3-propanediol fermentation. Biotechnol.
Lett. 2005, 27, 19–22. [CrossRef]
101. Kim, K.; Kim, S.; Park, Y.; Seo, J. Enhanced production of 3-hydroxypropionic acid from glycerol by modulation of glycerol
metabolism in recombinant Escherichia coli. Bioresour. Technol. 2014, 156, 170–175. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
102. Jiang, J.; Huang, B.; Wu, H.; Li, Z.; Ye, Q. Efﬁcient 3-hydroxypropionic acid production from glycerol by metabolically engineered
Klebsiella pneumoniae. Bioresour. Bioprocess. 2018, 5, 34. [CrossRef]
103. Luan, G.; Zhang, S.; Lu, A.X. Engineering cyanobacteria chassis cells toward more efﬁcient photosynthesis. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.
2020, 62, 1–6. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.