Perspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-60016-9
Standardization guidelines and future trends
for PET hydrolase research
Ren Wei 1 , Peter Westh 2, Gert Weber 3,L a r sM .B l a n k4,5 &
Uwe T. Bornscheuer1
Enzymatic depolymerization of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) towards
monomer recycling offers a green route to a circular plastic economy, with
scale-up currently underway. Yet, inconsistent assessment methods hinder
clear comparisons between various PET hydrolases. This Perspective aims to
identify critical gaps in this dynamic researchﬁeld and outline key principles
for selecting and tailoring novel enzymes, such as using uniform PET samples
and standardizing reaction settings that mimic industrial conditions. Applying
these guidelines will improve enzyme screening efﬁciency, increase data
reproducibility, deepen the understanding of interfacial biocatalysis, and
ultimately accelerate the development of more robustand cost-effective bio-
based PET recycling methods.
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is extensively utilized in beverage
bottles, textiles, and food packaging, making it one of the most pre-
valent plastics in global waste streams. Consequently, its signiﬁcant
contribution to plastic pollution has raised urgent demand for inno-
vative recycling technologies from both scientiﬁc and industrial sec-
tors. In many countries, PET, especially single-use bottles, may
achieve up to 90% recycling rates, making it the most recycled among
all mass-produced fossil-fuel-derived plastics
1,2. PET in bottles and
food packaging is rarely blended with other polymers and typically
lacks or contains only trace amounts of chemical additives
3.T h i sh i g h
purity and homogeneity of its chemical composition render PET the
most broadly studied and preferred target for recycling advance-
ments, encompassing mechanical, chemical, and biological
approaches
4– 6.
PET has a polyester backbone, which is notably susceptible to
hydrolytic cleavage. Since the 1970s, scientists have been inspired to
investigate the broad variety of natural ester hydrolases for their
potential in depolymerizing synthetic polyesters, including PET. In
2005, Müller et al. reported theﬁrst widely recognized enzymatic
depolymerization of amorphized waste PET bottles
7.T h el a s tt w o
decades have witnessed the identiﬁcation, characterization, and
engineering of numerous PET hydrolases6,8, as well as the successful
demonstration of biological recycling of waste PET on an industrial
scale9. This achievement has been recognized as one of the ten
emerging chemical technologies in 2023 by IUPAC10.
Recent techno-economic analysis (TEA)11 and life cycle assessment
(LCA)12 have indicated that although PET bio-recycling holds promise,
substantial challenges persist regarding energy consumption, eco-
nomic feasibility, and overall environmental impact, particularly due
to mechanical processing required to amorphize waste PET and pH
regulation during the depolymerization reaction. While innovations
addressing these process-related bottlenecks are infrequently repor-
ted in recent scientiﬁc literature
13, an increasing number of reports
claiming superior enzymes based on limited experimental evidence
have emerged. Moreover, redundant studies often appear that merely
replicate ﬁndings derived from a set of thoroughly examined bench-
mark enzymes, particularly informed by two seminal studies: the 2016
Science article by Yoshida et al., which identiﬁed IsPETase fromIdeo-
nella sakaiensis
14,a n dt h e2 0 2 0Nature publication by Tournier et al.,
which described several engineered variants of the leaf-branch com-
post cutinase (LCC) allowing for rapid PET waste depolymerization on
an industrial scale
9. By contrast, although researchers in recent years
have discovered numerous novel PET hydrolases from diverse habitats
with potentially distinct characteristics, most are abandoned after
initial publications. Another unfavorable scenario in this research
domain is that many studies used polymer substrates from unknown
Received: 9 December 2024
Accepted: 13 May 2025
Check for updates
1Department of Biotechnology & Enzyme Catalysis, Institute of Biochemistry, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.2Department of Biotechnology
and Biomedicine, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark.3Macromolecular Crystallography, Helmholtz-Zentrum Berlin für Materialien und
Energie, Berlin, Germany.4iAMB - Institute of Applied Microbiology. ABBt - Aachen Biology and Biotechnology, BioSC, RWTH Aachen University,
Aachen, Germany.5WSS Research Centre“catalaix”, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany.e-mail: ren.wei@uni-greifswald.de
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:4684 1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;
origins or performed plastic depolymerization under conditions
unrelated to industrial settings. Consequently, it is imperative to
standardize and disclose a full array of these essential parameters in
future research to prevent overoptimistic assessments of perfor-
mance, erroneous data interpretations and the formulation of non-
reproducible or invalid hypotheses, in alignment with previous expert
viewpoints
5,11,12. A recent publication by Arnal et al.15 has experimentally
highlighted this issue by providing a reliable assessment of four
important PET hydrolases under industry-mimicking recycling condi-
tions. Following the identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant inconsistencies in
depolymerization performance compared to the original studies, the
necessity of establishing standards for future enzyme activity evalua-
tions and enabling cross-study comparisons is increasingly evident.
This Perspective aims to provide a brief overview of the historical
context and current advancements in this research area, focusing on
methodologies for the discovery, screening, and characterization of
novel PET hydrolases, as well as assessing their viability for industrial-
scale plastic recycling, to complement recent expert reviews with a
broader scope
6,8,16,17. For the former research objective, we intend to
emphasize research gaps in method selection and further develop-
ment concerning potentialﬁnal applications of PET hydrolases with
distinct features. To achieve the latter research goal of developing
more effective industrial biocatalysts for plastic recycling, we recom-
mend prioritizing the use of standardized substrates that are most
similar to industrial waste PET feedstocks, as well as selecting reaction
conditions that resemble industrial environments in lab-scale or pilot-
scale reactor experiments. We anticipate the emergence of an
improved multi-pronged future research, including (i) the advance-
ment of scientiﬁc understanding of interfacial biocatalysis and enzy-
matic depolymerization mechanisms, (ii) the validation of screening
assays that can be readily implemented in most laboratories without
the need for specialized equipment, and (iii) the design of novel PET
hydrolases that are less related to a limited number of thoroughly
investigated benchmark enzymes.
Approaches for uncovering the expanding diver-
sity of PET hydrolases
Early efforts to discover polyester hydrolases strongly relied on clas-
sical microbiological techniques, including the isolation, cultivation,
and enrichment of microbial strains capable of hydrolyzing natural
polyesters. This led to the identiﬁcation of fungal and bacterial cuti-
nases, such as those fromFusarium
18 and Thermobiﬁda species19,w h i c h
were later proven to depolymerize synthetic polyesters like PET7,20.
Despite over half a century of research advancements, this method
remains valuable for identifying novel plastic-degrading strains and
enzymes from plastic-contaminated environments. These include the
thoroughly studied PET-metabolizing bacteriumI. sakaiensis,w h i c h
secretes the mesophilicIsPETase
14, and likewise other microorganisms
with similar characteristics isolated from marine sediments21 or
wastewater22.
Metagenomics has emerged as an efﬁcient approach to identify-
ing novel PET hydrolases since 2012. The earliest and most extensively
studied example is LCC, identiﬁed from a plant compost metagenome
using a fosmid library and functional screening against tributyrin, an
esterase model substrate
23. However, functional metagenomics
has contributed minimally to further signi ﬁcant PET hydrolase
discoveries. Instead, most recent PET hydrolases have been identiﬁed
through sequence-based enzyme mining, regardless of whether
metagenomic DNA was physically extracted
24,25 or sourced from online
databases26– 29. These sequence-based methods have become central,
with gene sources extending to annotated yet uncharacterized
sequences found in public repositories like NCBI and UniProt16,29– 31.
However, these bioinformatics-based searches have often been biased
by employing established enzymes such as LCC,IsPETase, and those
from Thermobiﬁda species as templates, limiting exploration to a
narrow phylogeny and sequence space
27. Interestingly, despite their
sequence similarities, many of these newly discovered PET hydrolases
were found to stem from geographically and ecologically distinct
habitats, including extreme environments such as deep-sea hydro-
thermal vents
28, glaciers32, and even human saliva metagenomes33,
calling into question the hypothesis that PET hydrolases evolved
naturally in response to environmental plastic pollution, which has
only been present for less than 70 years. It is not surprising that many
natural carboxylesterases, found in nearly all organisms, are antici-
pated to exhibit at least minimal hydrolytic activity on the ester
bonds in PET.
The restricted structural diversity of reported PET hydrolases,
attributable to their close phylogenetic relationships, creates an“echo
chamber” effect that overrepresents structure-based mechanistic
studies toward particular benchmark enzymes. This is evident in
the Protein Data Bank (PDB), where out of more than 130 PET
hydrolase-associated structures, over one-third representIsPETase
and its variants. Similar redundancy is seen with other benchmark
enzymes
9,24,34– 36, with numerous nearly identical apo structures
deposited. Instead, co-structures complexed with substrates or ana-
logues may yield signiﬁcant insights for semi-rational and artiﬁcial
intelligence (AI)-driven enzyme engineering; nonetheless, they are
limited, with less than 16% of PET hydrolase structures in the PDB
solved in a substrate (analogue)-bound state
16. This highlights the
ongoing challenge of obtaining wet-lab data on substrate interactions,
essential for advancing functional studies and developing more efﬁ-
cient PET hydrolases.
According to the ESTHER database on α/β-hydrolase fold
proteins
37, most PET hydrolases with known structures belong to the
polyesterase-lipase-cutinase (PLC) family sourced from bacteria27,29.
These enzymes can be further classiﬁed into three types (I, IIa, IIb)
based on amino acid adoption at speciﬁcs u r f a c es u b s i t e s38.T y p eI
includes thermophilic enzymes like LCC23 and those fromThermo-
biﬁda species20, while Type IIa is represented by the polyester hydro-
lase (PE-H) fromPseudomonas aestusnigri39 and Type IIb byIsPETase14.
Figure 1 shows that, despite their classiﬁcation, these enzymes have a
highly conserved core fold with only minor variations from the struc-
ture of LCC, such as an extraα-helical turn due to additional residues.
Archaeal PET hydrolase from the feruloyl esterase family has key
structural similarities with bacterial PLC-family PET hydrolases, but
with additionalα-helices ﬂa n k i n gt h ea c t i v es i t e
40. This partially cov-
ered active site, similar to certain lipase family polyester hydrolases41,
is expected to limit its access to polymeric substrates. Eliminating
these lid-like structures has demonstrated an improvement in PET
hydrolyzing ability
41. Fungal cutinase-like PET hydrolases possess the
most unique structures compared to LCC, with the lowest root-mean-
square deviation (RMSD) value
42. Although fungal cutinases were
among theﬁrst recognized effective PET hydrolases43,t h e yr e m a i n e d
largely neglected in this research domain until recently when several
studies with signiﬁcant polymer degradation performance were
published44,45. PET hydrolases with alternative structural folds and
distinct active site geometries but considerably low depolymerizing
activity were recently discovered using bioinformatics and machine-
learning-guided enzyme mining in multiple metagenomic libraries
27.
This study validated the hypothesis that high depolymerization efﬁ-
ciency is likely conﬁned to bacterial PLC-like and fungal cutinase-like
PET hydrolases. A more recent study signiﬁcantly expanded the range
of target PET hydrolase sequences by incorporating various blocks
from the ESTHER database, although it remains conﬁned to enzymes
with an α/β-hydrolase fold. Landscape proﬁling by sampling a
sequence cluster framework revealed a collection of highly active
enzymes, including MiPa-P and KuBu-P, the latter of which can even
catalyze PET glycolysis in the presence of highly concentrated ethylene
glycol (EG)
29. Still, the top-performing enzymes, KuBu-P (PDB code
8YTW) and MiPa-P (PDB code 8YTU), have relatively low RMSD values
Perspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-60016-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:4684 2
of 0.94 Å and 0.98 Å to LCC, respectively. Theseﬁndings are compli-
cating the potential for further engineering of distinct scaffolds for
industrial applications.
Alternatively, emerging AI-driven techniques, such as de novo
enzyme design
46, have the potential to generate unique PET hydro-
lases. In a recent study47,n o v e l ,m o s t l yα-helical hydrolase scaffolds
were obtained using a diffusion model coupled with an ensemble
generation method focused on the active site preorganization. Inter-
estingly, new active serine hydrolase scaffolds have been generated,
even speciﬁcally designed to catalyze PET hydrolysis. However, dis-
closing only kinetic data against an atypical small-molecule substrate is
insufﬁcient to assess its realistic PET depolymerization activity.
Another study generated a terminally truncated PET hydrolase using
LCC as a template, with a similar catalytic efﬁciency but markedly
lower stability than its parental scaffold
46. The next option for creating
novel PET hydrolases is to incorporate the classical hydrolase catalytic
triad into structurally stable, non-catalytic proteins
48. Nonetheless, the
resulting PET depolymerization activity is signiﬁcantly constrained by
the inherent protein architecture, which may hinder effective sub-
strate access necessary for interfacial catalysis
17,49.A l t h o u g ht h e s e
studies demonstrated the feasibility of the computational methodol-
ogy, it is yet to be determined whether AI-assisted design can generate
novel PET hydrolase scaffolds with overwhelming activity that sur-
passes the naturally evolvedα/β hydrolase folds.
Fig. 1 | Naturally occurring PET hydrolases and their variants do not deviate
from theα/β-hydrolase core fold.Illustrated are selected bacterial polyesterase-
lipase-cutinase (PLC)-like27,34,36,136 and fungal cutinase-like PET hydrolases42,137,138,
alongside phylogenetically distinct enzymes from archaea40 and bacteria27,139 with
minimal depolymerization activity but structural uniqueness. These PET hydrolases
are grouped based on their Cα root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) relative to LCC
as a reference. Ribbon plots are colored with a gradient from low RMSD (blue) to
4 Å and higher (white). The catalytic triad (serine, histidine, and asparagine in all
structures) is shown as yellow sticks. PDB codes, RMSD values, and residues
included in the calculations are shown below each structure.
Perspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-60016-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:4684 3
PET properties and industrial bio-recycling
implications
PET is a semi-crystalline thermoplastic composed of crystalline frac-
tions with well-ordered, tightly packed polymer chains and sur-
rounding amorphous fractions with randomly oriented, intertwined
molecules
50. The crystalline microstructures exhibit signiﬁcant resis-
tance to the diffusion of water and enzymes, which are essential
reactants and catalysts for biocatalytic depolymerization,
respectively8,51. In contrast, the amorphous PET fractions are sig-
niﬁcantly more susceptible to enzymatic hydrolysis, particularly when
environmental temperatures reach or exceed the glass transition
temperature (T
g). Shorter segments of amorphous PET undergo con-
formational changes during the glass transition, which is thought to
improve enzyme accessibility and subsequent ester bond hydrolysis
signiﬁcantly
8,50,52.T h eTg of PET under anhydrous conditions has been
determined to range between 65 and 81 °C, depending on the analy-
tical methods used
8,53. PET substrates are completely immersed in
water during biocatalytic depolymerization, and the resulting water
plasticization effect can lower the bulkTg of PET by up to 16 °C8,53.
Considering the enhanced mobility of surface-located polymer
chains
54,t h eTg of the PET surface layer (surfaceTg) may be as low as
~40 °C53, which explains why signiﬁcant hydrolysis of highly amor-
phous PET can be observed with mesophilic bacteria likeI. sakaiensis
under ambient conditions14.
Melt-extrusion-based amorphization9,15,36,55– 59 is commonly used
as theﬁrst step before enzymatic PET decomposition due to the high
crystallinity of over 30% in real-world waste PET streams (Fig.2).
Rapidly quenching the hot polymer extrudates in cold water or other
solvents is required to achieve a low-crystallinity of ideally less than
15%, allowing for rapid biocatalytic depolymerization
50,60,61. Thereafter,
the amorphized PET typically undergoes a mechanical size-reduction
process, either via cryogenic grinding or ambient temperature
crushing
9,15,36,57– 59. The increased surface-to-volume ratios are con-
sidered advantageous for interfacial enzyme accessibility, thereby
improving polymer conversion ef ﬁciency. Nevertheless, this
hypothesis has not consistently held true in several recent studies. The
smallest particles with the highest speciﬁcs u r f a c ea r e a( S S A )e x t r a c t e d
from the same micronization batch of low-crystallinity (or amor-
phized) PET typically exhibited slightly or moderately enhanced initial
hydrolysis rates, particularly at lower enzyme loading, but signiﬁcantly
reduced maximum achievable depolymerization extent compared to
the larger ones with lower SSA
55,62,63. The latter phenomenon has been
ascribed to the increased crystallinity, which typically exhibits an
inverse relationship with particle sizes, caused by strain-induced
crystallization during micronization
36,55,62,64. Larger ground particles
and precursor amorphous PET materials prior to micronization (either
granules from melt-quenching or commercial PETﬁlms) can be enzy-
matically depolymerized to comparably high extents after an adequate
reaction duration. Given the high energy costs and negative environ-
mental effects associated with the micronization process
11,12,t h et r a d e -
offs between fast hydrolysis kinetics using cryomilled plastics and
prolonged depolymerization with non-ground plastics necessitate
reassessment in industrial settings. A patent for PET pre-treatment
aimed at enzymatic recycling suggests that using an underwater pel-
letizer (Fig.2) to produce small pellets under 1 mm could replace the
contentious and energy-intensive grinding process
65.
Polymer chain scission can occur at each stage of the presently
performed thermomechanical pre-treatment of PET waste (Fig.2).
Despite being an undesirable consequence when a similar melt-
extrusion process is used for PET mechanical recycling
66,t h e
decreased molecular weights were found to facilitate the subsequent
enzymatic depolymerization
36,67. Once PET feedstocks have a number-
averaged molecular mass (Mn) of less than 10,000 g mol−1, their rapid
and complete enzymatic depolymerization becomes less dependent
on the bulk crystallinity, even if it surpasses the previously recom-
mended degradable threshold value of 20%
57. By harsher pre-
treatment involving microwaves, PET’sM n can be reduced below the
entanglement length of 3500 g mol−1 and readily hydrolyzed using an
IsPETase variant at ambient temperature67. Within this Mn range, con-
ventional indicators of high crystalline PET, such as the increased ratio
Fig. 2 | Schematic illustration of the optimal waste PET pre-treatment process
required for enzymatic recycling.To improve its economic viability, the cryo-
grinding step is considered optional and omitted here. Theﬁgure also displays key
material-related parameters and reaction conditions that affect depolymerization
performance. The crystallinity, molecular mass, and speciﬁc surface area of a par-
ticular PET sample are crucial interrelated parameters that inﬂuence the achievable
degree of depolymerization. A simpliﬁed schematic surface plot illustrating the
threshold values for optimal depolymerization performance emphasizes the
interdependence of these parameters. Additional parameters inﬂuencing decom-
position performance, such as varyingT
g of the surface layer and interior bulk
polymers, as well as the effect of water plasticization and polymer recrystallization
under biocatalytic conditions, should be considered. Bioreactor parameters for
reaction conditions must be consistently documented and standardized to ensure
comparable high-level depolymerization results.
Perspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-60016-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:4684 4
of trans to gauche conformation, become irrelevant for describing its
enzymatic degradability.
These ﬁndings highlight the importance of comprehensively
documenting all of these polymer properties, including molecular
mass, SSA (or particle size), and bulk crystallinity (preferably also the
crystallinity of the surface polymer layer), throughout the depoly-
merization process in future research. This can assist in unambigu-
ously deﬁning standard PET feedstocks (Table 1) and building a
standardized amorphization technique that balances optimal material
qualities related to degradability and economic viability, reducing the
cost of this most expensive step
11,12. Currently, research groups lacking
comprehensive polymer characterization equipment are advised to
utilize commercially available amorphous PETﬁlm, such as that pro-
vided by Goodfellow Ltd., as a preliminary test material for PET
hydrolases in initial laboratory-scale scienti ﬁcs t u d i e s .S e v e r a l
studies
36,68 have recently published detailed polymer parameters for
this material, ranging beyond mere crystallinity, establishing its opti-
mal utility over waste PET from unknown sources with undeﬁned
properties.
The distinct polymer properties of PET also deﬁne the appropriate
characteristics of the biocatalysts and the reaction conditions neces-
sary for its fast depolymerization (Table1). The ﬂexibility of water-
plasticized amorphous PET polymer chains enhances as reaction
temperatures rise between 40-70 °C, facilitating their accessibility to
enzymatic hydrolysis
69. Higher temperatures, however, lead to faster
polymer recrystallization into non-degradable crystalline micro-
structures than enzymatic depolymerization can occur
9,15,50,60. Conse-
quently, recent studies indicate a preference for reaction temperatures
between 65 and 70 °C and the use of thermotolerant enzymes, such as
LCC-ICCG
9,15,T u r b o P E T a s e57 and PES-H115,24,36,61,70,71,i np i l o t - s c a l ep r o -
cesses that resemble industrial settings9,57,71.A c c o r d i n g l y ,t h e r m o -
stabilization has been implemented as a primary strategy to enhance
the depolymerization capability of mesophilic PET hydrolases,
including Kubu-P
29 and IsPETase14. Nonetheless, regardingIsPETase,
despite substantial research having raised its melting point (Tm)b y
over 37 °C72– 74, the most advanced variants remain inferior to LCC-
ICCG in large-scale PET depolymerization tests15. This raises the
question of whether a highTm (above 85 °C) can serve as the sole
criterion, as commonly employed in previous studies6,8,t od e t e r m i n ei f
as p e c iﬁc enzyme inherently exhibits the necessary long-term stability
and activity over several hours for the rapid PET decomposition at
elevated temperatures. Instead, future research should evaluate the
kinetic stability of an enzyme under operational conditions to provide
a broader assessment of its thermostability.
The continuous release of terephthalate (TPA) monomer as a
result of enzymatic PET hydrolysis lowers the pH value of the reaction
supernatant, which may inﬂuence enzyme activity and stability, as well
as the compositions of the product mixture
15,75. Increased concentra-
tions of unwanted oligomeric ester intermediates can hinder sub-
sequent product puriﬁcation and diminish the yield of pure TPA.
Therefore, recently demonstrated depolymerization processes are
frequently pH-controlled in the range of 7– 8, which is appropriate for
most known PET hydrolases
9,43,57. Nonetheless, low-concentrated
phosphate or Tris buffers are commonly used in lab-scale bior-
eactors with pH control
9,57. This should be avoided in large industrial
settings to reduce costs and ensure reactor durability. pH control is
considered a concern regarding the economic and environmental
impacts of industrial PET recycling
12. For future lab-scale studies, these
impacts can be mitigated by utilizing ammonia in place of NaOH for pH
regulation
12,58 or implementing small-scale bioreactors (<50 mL), such
as the modiﬁed Chi.Bio systems instead of other larger commercial
bioreactors76. Nonetheless, because small reactors can only accom-
modate less than 10% solid loading, it is recommended to validate the
process in medium-sized reactors (in litre scales) that allow standard
agitation with up to 30% solid loading beforeﬁnal industrial imple-
mentation at cubic meter scale (Box1). A more ambitious long-term
vision to address this pH-related issue may involve designing a PET
hydrolase that is less sensitive to pHﬂuctuations or that is optimized
for a low pH range to facilitate rapid accumulation of exclusively
pure TPA.
Alongside the utilization of standardized PET feedstocks, estab-
lishing standardized bioreactor conditions by deﬁning optimal solid
Table 1 | Selected parameters related to polymer properties and pre-treatment necessitating standardization and complete
documentation
Parameter Example value/range/unit* Notes
PET properties related to depolymerization efﬁcacy
Crystallinity Ideal: <15%; acceptable: 0 –20%50,60,126 Usually refers to the averaged value of the bulk polymer measurable
by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC)
Tg 65 °C–81 °C (bulk polymer, anhydrous)53
48.1 °C (surface layer, anhydrous)54
~40 °C (surface layer, water-plasticized)53
Preferably measured using DSC; the plasticization effect of water
can reduce theTg of bulk polymer by≥16 °C
Molecular weight (e.g., number-
averaged, Mn)
PET packaging: 14,000–25,000 g mol-1 (refs. 36,56)
Cryomilled PET particles: 13,000–20,000 g mol-1 (ref. 36)
Goodfellow PETﬁlm: 19,000–25,000 g mol−1 (refs.36,68)
PET NP: <6000 g mol−1 (ref. 36)
Measurable using gel permeation chromatography (GPC)36,56,68 or
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)60
Particle sizes Pellets: <1 mm diameter (depending on the diameter of
the die plate holes)
(Cryo-)milled particles: usually <500 µm used after
sieving
The size of milled particles determined/separated using sieve
analysis
SSA Milled particles: >7.5 mm
2 mg−1 (ref. 55) Related to average particle sizes
Parameters for melt-extrusion, amorphization, and micronization
Melt temperature 230 –280 °C9,55,56 A temperature gradient can be utilized in the extruder
Extrusion screw speed 200 –4000 rpm (refs.55,56) Enhanced degradability resulting from reduced screw speed 56
Quenching temperature −196 °C (liquid nitrogen) to 80 °C9,59; ideally using ice
water (0 °C)59
–
Grinding temperature −196 °C (liquid nitrogen) to room temperature9,59,62 Strain-induced crystallization can be minimized at lower
temperatures
Grinding speed 4500 rpm (ref. 9) Not given in almost all past studies
*For more commonly utilized conditions and value ranges that have been mentioned in over three independent studies, speciﬁc citations are not provided. For speciﬁcv a l u e s ,“ref.”is appended after
the power number of particular units to prevent misinterpretation of the reference numbers.
Perspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-60016-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:4684 5
(substrate) loading, enzyme loading, temperature, pH, agitation, and
other parameters can ensure consistent, ef ﬁcient, and scalable
operations while maximizing monomer yield across diverse scales,
from research laboratories to industrial environments. Nevertheless,
as indicated in Tables1 and 2, substantial discrepancies in speciﬁck e y
parameters reported to date, coupled with the sporadic reporting of
others, highlight the necessity and challenges of conducting further
comprehensive studies for standardization.
Alternative recycling scenarios using thermolabile
PET hydrolases
Numerous recently discovered PET hydrolases are intrinsically ther-
molabile, rendering them less suitable candidates for free enzyme-
based PET recycling without extensive and expensive thermo-
stabilization engineering. Alternatively, they can be recombinantly
expressed in (mostly mesophilic) microbial cell factories that can uti-
lize at least one PET monomer for growth
71,77– 79.T h i sc o n c e p to f
polymer degradation and monomer catabolism by a single microbe
was recently coined PETtrophy80,81, analogous to consolidated bio-
processing in cellulose conversion82.H o w e v e r ,a c h i e v i n gh i g he n z y -
matic plastic depolymerization activities that align with the microbe’s
growth conditions, including pH, temperature, and salt concentration,
is challenging. Molecular engineering tools are frequently absent for
modifying microbial thermophiles
83, leading to the infrequent
demonstration of thermotolerant whole-cell catalysts for PET decom-
position at its optimal temperature. The only example to date is
engineeredClostridium thermocellumexpressing LCC and its variants,
though lacking monomer metabolism capability
63,84.O t h e rP E T -
metabolizing strains are constructed based on trivial microbial chas-
s i st h a tg r o wa tt e m p e r a t u r e sb e l o w4 0° C85. Consequently, mesophilic
PET hydrolases must be expressed at sufﬁciently high levels and tai-
lored to enable the rapid release of growth-essential monomers into
the medium, outpacing their translocation into microbial cells and
subsequent metabolism. The efﬁcacy of PET depolymerization under
these conditions is expected to be signiﬁcantly lower than that at
elevated temperatures exceeding 65 °C. Thus, an upcycling strategy
utilizing these strains to produce value-added chemicals should always
be considered to realize potential economic viability. In addition,
focusing on“easier” substrates that can be depolymerized faster at
ambient temperatures may enhance the utility of these PET-trophic
strains for stakeholders. These include PET oligomers that have been
rigorously pretreated or pre-degraded
67,86, as well as alternative
polyesters with similar chemical compositions, such as the commer-
cially available polybutylene adipate terephthalate (PBAT)
80.T h et i m e
and cost savings from bypassing polymer and monomer separation
may compensate the typically low depolymerization efﬁciency of
whole-cell catalysts, providing signiﬁcant beneﬁts compared to free
enzyme-based depolymerization.
Another extreme example is the in situ remediation of wastewater
contaminated with synthetic microﬁbers, which, according to a cur-
rent study, are primarily oligomeric PET87, for example, in efﬂuents in
textile production regions88 or general communal wastewater treat-
ment plants. PET hydrolases derived from marine environments
exhibiting signiﬁcant salt tolerance
28 can ultimately be utilized to
construct environmentally resistant whole-cell catalysts when inte-
grated into a comparably robust microbial chassis
89,90. Other meso-
philic wild-type enzymes may exhibit insufﬁcient activity and stability
under these harsh conditions, such as high salinity, extreme pH levels,
or the presence of laundry detergents, necessitating further extensive
enzyme optimization efforts
91. Nonetheless, this may spark a heated
debate about releasing genetically modiﬁed microbes (GMM)92,w h i c h
is strictly prohibited in the EU (and other countries). In academic lit-
erature, this is referenced so far as a theoretical alternative in regions
lacking other solutions93. However, as a result of intensive ongoing
research activities, challenges associated with technical implementa-
tions and governmental regulations may be addressed shortly to
maximize the beneﬁts of GMMs in combating plastic pollution while
mitigating risks of environmental release
92.
Screening strategies for customizing superior PET
hydrolases
Numerous high-throughput screening (HTS) assays have been devel-
oped in recent years for the discovery and engineering of PET
hydrolases16,94. However, their speciﬁc limitations in areas such as
technical availability, ease of handling, and reproducibility necessitate
re-evaluation before a standard guideline can be established.
Several assays employ self-synthesized small-molecule surrogate
substrates that resemble PET segments or degradation intermediates,
such as mono- or bis(2-hydroxyethyl) terephthalate (MHET or
BHET)
95– 97. While these proxy substrates offer practical beneﬁts,
including simpliﬁed dosing and the compatibility with established HTS
platforms, they may result in a skewed identiﬁcation of short ester
hydrolyzing activity without PET depolymerization capability98– 100,
particularly in environmental samples or functional metagenomics. On
the other hand, screening of mutant libraries derived from known PET
hydrolases can beneﬁt from this assay category
96,101, as increased
activity on MHET or BHET is frequently linked to the mitigation of their
inhibitory effect, thereby improving overall PET decomposition per-
formance. To minimize false positives, it is still highly advisable to
consistently prioritize the direct use of PET polymers in HTS
BOX 1
Standard guidelines for PET hydrolase characterization and
application
- Test every PET hydrolase (natural or de novo designed) on a uniform
PET substrate with all key parameters described (Table1).
-I fd eﬁned waste PET sample is unavailable, use commercial amor-
phous PETﬁlm (e.g., Goodfellow ES301445) or its cryomilled form.
- For thermotolerant enzymes applicable at≥65 °C, employ PET-
based (amorphous PET or PET NP) HTS assays for enzyme
engineering under industrial-like conditions (Table 2); small-
molecule proxy substrates should be avoided.
- Evaluate top enzyme candidates in small bioreactors (<50 mL), fol-
lowed by a sequential scale-upto 1 L, 100 L, and beyond (Fig.3).
Modify reaction parameters according to Table2 at each step as
required.
- Record pH-stat titration, accumulation of UV-absorbing products
(e.g., TPA, MHET, and BHET, also known as TPA equivalents with the
abbreviation TPAeq.), and polymer mass loss over time.
- Report initial depolymerization rate as mol
TPAeq. h−1 genzyme
−1 or
molTPAeq. h−1 molenzyme
−1.
- Measure all polymer properties outlined in Table1 before and after
reaction— and ideally at intermediate timepoints— to track changes
in crystallinity, molecular weight, surface area, etc.
Perspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-60016-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:4684 6
experimental setups. Optimal PET substrates must demonstrate uni-
form polymer properties, such as low-crystallinity and high speciﬁc
surface area, facilitating rapid decomposition that can be observed
within a constrained reaction volume, such as microplate wells or
microdroplets, and a short timeframe, ideally under one hour. PET
nanoparticles (NP), produced through solvent displacement
processes
102– 104, are a polymeric substrate option characterized by a
uniform size range of 100 ± 50 nm and lower molecular weights com-
pared to their precursor materials (Table1). These material properties
promote their rapid enzymatic decomposition, even at ambient
temperature
36,48,102– 105. PET NP can be used to detect microbial depo-
lymerization activities by clear-zone assay when immobilized in agar
plates. Similarly, the turbidity variations of homogenously suspended
PET NP immobilized in other hydrogels can facilitate the determina-
tion of PET hydrolysis kinetics
36,70,102. However, PET NP tend to
agglomerate in buffered aqueous solutions, complicating their hand-
ling in small reaction volumes such as microplate wells or micro-
droplets. Therefore, when activity is quantiﬁed solely through the
formation and detection of released monomers
104,105,P E TN Ph a v en o
signiﬁcant advantage over other amorphous PET materials, whether
tailored from commercially available products or casted from polymer
solution
106– 108. The casting method for preparing polymeric substrates
can also incorporateﬂuorescent dyes, which can be detected in the
supernatant during PET decomposition, providing an alternative to
quantifying its monomers108. However, the use of toxic PET soluble
organic solvents for HTS setups is considered suboptimal due to
challenges in handling, high costs, environmental concerns, and
laboratory safety issues.
TPA, MHET, and BHET are the main hydrolysis products of PET that
can be detected at 240 nm. Aside from the standard quantiﬁcation
method of high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), the total
amount of their formation can be easily estimated by simply measuring
the total absorbance at 240 nm for HTS purposes
101,106,109.W h e nT P A
needs to be precisely quantiﬁed as aﬁnal monomer, it can be converted
to a hydroxylated form and detected byﬂuorimetric monitoring with a
high detection sensitivity96,104,107,110.T h eq u a n t iﬁcation of the other
monomer, EG, has been overlookedfor a considerable period until
recently. EG can now be accurately monitored by differentﬂuorimetric
assays based on enzymatic conversion111 or a biosensor112.I nc o n j u n c -
tion with other recently develop ed techniques for monitoring
TPA105,113– 115, living-cell based biosensors offer various options for
assessing PET hydrolyzing activity, from precise endpoint determina-
tion of individual monomers to functional screening of metagenomic
libraries. Microﬂuidics-based HTS also involves living cells, facilitating
enzyme expression, biocatalysis, and product detection within a single
microdroplet or microbead
116. These methods may not effectively
identify thermotolerant enzyme variants because the optimal tem-
peratures for cell growth typically do not exceed 40 °C, while apparent
PET depolymerization activity is generally detectable at temperatures
above 50 °C. The same limitation may also pertain to other cell growth-
based screening assays, such as enzyme surface display
117,118.W h i l et h e s e
HTS assays primarily evaluate mesophilic PET hydrolases which typi-
cally necessitate costly and risky thermostabilization engineering prior
to validating their potential for industrial PET recycling, these enzymes
should be better suited to the alternative application scenarios at lower
temperatures discussed above.
Table 2 | Selected parameters related to enzyme characteristics and reaction conditions necessitating standardization and
complete documentation
Parameter Example value/range/unit* Notes
Biochemical characteristics of PET hydrolases
Tm Ideal: >85 °C >10 °C higher than the operational temperature 8
Enzyme lifetime Half lifetime ( t1/2) at operational conditions Not determined in almost all past studies
Turnover rate (kcat)0 . 5 –2s −1 (refs. 119,121)-
invKM 0.02–1 µM (ref.119)
0.2–3 µM (ref.121)
Signiﬁcantly affected by reaction temperatures and substrate crystallinity
Reactive site density (Γ) 0.01 –0.2 µmol g−1 (ref. 119)
1.3–13.4 nmol g−1 (amorphous PET)121
4–40 nmol g−1 (crystalline PET)121
Higher values are associated with crystalline PET, which complicates the intuitive
understanding of this parameter
Ion dependency Up to 20 mM CaCl 2 or MgCl2
34,134 Ca2+ can stabilize/activate certain bacterial PET hydrolases8
Buffer dependency 0.1 –1.0 M phosphate buffer (most bacterial PET
hydrolases)
0.05–0.1 M glycine-NaOH (IsPETase)
<1 M Tris HCl (fungal cutinases)
43
High buffer concentrations can stabilize selected bacterial PET hydrolases; Tris can
inhibit certain bacterial PET hydrolases135
Bioreactor and high-throughput screening (HTS) conditions
Reactor volume Bioreactor: >30 mL (ref. 76)
HTS: usually <200 µL
For HTS: small proxy ester substrates should be avoided
Enzyme loading 0.5 –3m genzyme gPET
−1 To improve accuracy, alternative units based on molenzyme gPET
−1 should be used
Solid loading Bioreactor: 10 –30%
HTS: usually <10%
Deep well microplates may allow for the implementation of high solid loading HTS
Buffer concentration Bioreactor: 0 –100 mM
HTS: 0.1–1M
Buffer-free conditions preferred for larger reactors
pH Usually 7 –9 pH regulation is essential for bioreactors; a buffer is mandatory for HTS assays
Temperature 65 –72 °C -
Agitation/mixing Bioreactor: 200 –800 rpm
HTS: usually <1000 rpm
An often-neglected determinant parameter necessitating thorough examination
Initial rate Unit: μmolTPAeq. h−1 L−1 (refs. 9,15)-
Speciﬁca c t i v i t y U n i t :μmolTPAeq. h–1 mgenzyme
–1 (refs. 9,15)-
Reaction time >90% depolymerization achieved within <12 h
(refs. 9,57)
An extension to 24 h is recommended for enzymes active at <65 °C
*For more commonly utilized conditions and value ranges that have been mentioned in over three independent studies, speciﬁc citations are not provided. For speciﬁcv a l u e s ,“ref.”is appended after
the power number of particular units to prevent misinterpretation of the reference numbers.
Perspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-60016-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:4684 7
Consequently, an automated liquid handling system that incor-
porates: (i) enzyme expression and cell lysis at optimal cell-growth
temperatures, (ii) PET depolymerization at elevated temperatures, and
(iii) endpoint assessment of monomer release under optimal assay
conditions should serve as an ideal standard workﬂow for screening
thermotolerant PET hydrolases needed for industrial PET recycling
(Table 2 and Fig.3). A few recent studies demonstrated variations of
this standard workﬂow, particularly characterized by the simultaneous
detection of hydrolysis products and quanti ﬁcation of soluble
recombinant enzymes in cell lysates through various optical
techniques
101,108. The latter can replace the labor-intensive and costly
high-throughput protein puriﬁcation step while maintaining high data
accuracy of speciﬁc enzyme activities, which is crucial for machine-
learning-guided enzyme engineering. To optimize these assays, proxy
substrates like BHET and its derivatives
96,101 can be replaced with, for
example, cryomilled commercially available amorphous PET with
deﬁned characteristics
62,68, particularly for HTS using microplate
readers. This may enable solid loading of >10% in microplate wells to
more accurately resemble standardized industrial conditions (Table2).
Future methodological advancement to close
knowledge gaps
Currently used endpoint measurements for assessing depolymeriza-
tion efﬁcacy allow for basic comparisons between engineered enzymes
and their references, but they lack time-resolved data throughout the
degradation process. As a result, molecular insights required to
understand the mechanisms underlying interfacial biocatalysis reac-
tions are frequently missing. Computational modeling based on
recently resolved complex structures of various PET hydrolases with
substrate analogues
16 may elucidate the catalytic cycle in atomic detail.
Still, it fails to account for other important aspects such as enzyme
adsorption/desorption behavior and PET physical properties. Much
evidence suggests that these latter aspects, which reﬂect non-covalent
interactions, serve as key bottlenecks for the overall reaction.
Fig. 3 | Schematic workﬂow for discovering, engineering, andﬁnally applying
novel PET hydrolases in industrial-scale waste plastic recycling (for more
details, see Box1). The function-based HTS method is an essential component of
the workﬂow. Given that agar-plate or microﬂuidics-based screening involves living
cells, which prevents the detection of PET hydrolysis at elevated temperatures,
microplate-based HTS (detailed in the lower part) may have the potential to be
prioritized. Colorimetric orﬂuorometric methods, sensitive at different wave-
lengths, are optimal for the distinct quantiﬁcation of functional enzyme con-
centrations in cell lysates and the monomers released from PET depolymerization.
This approach enables rapid screening of large mutant libraries for efﬁcient PET
hydrolases while also producing high-quality data at a high throughput that can be
used for machine-learning-guided enzyme engineering
116.
Perspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-60016-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:4684 8
The most explicit example of this is the resilience of crystalline PET to
enzymatic hydrolysis. However, small, soluble PET fragments, similar
to those used in computational analyses, can be hydrolyzed very
quickly
119, which also implies that the main activation barrier for the
overall process lies outside catalytic bond breakage. The classical way
to single out the importance of different steps in a complex reaction is
comparative kinetics, and this approach has two key requirements.
Firstly, a simple yet realistic microkinetic reaction scheme, which
introduces rate constants for the interconversion of substrate and
intermediates, and secondly experimental methods that provide suf-
ﬁcient data to support kinetic modeling. At the current stage, none of
these areas are well-developed for PET hydrolases, but some progress
has been made. For example, limitations associated with an undeﬁned
concentration of the insoluble substrate have been addressed by
introducing substrate area
60,120, or attack site density119 as proxies for
molar concentration. It has also proven useful to supplement the
conventional conditions of substrate excess for steady-state kinetic
analysis with measurements, where the enzyme is in excess concerning
the substrate
102,121. This latter experimental condition is the opposite of
the conventional kinetic framework, and it has been termed inverse
Michaelis– Menten kinetics
122. A steady-state approximation under
inverse conditions never occurs in homogenous reactions but may be
relevant in two-phase systems as new reaction sites on the surface are
replenished continuously
123. Parameters from inverse kinetic analyses,
particularly the maximal rate at high enzyme load, are of interest
because they reﬂect both catalytic efﬁcacy and the density of reaction
or attack sites on the solid surface. Speciﬁcally, a combination of
data obtained with either enzyme- or substrate-excess provides
information on the maximal turnover (k
cat in s−1), KM (Michaelis
constant in M), and the density of hydrolysable sites on the PET surface
(in mol
sites gPET
−1)122. If experiments are only conducted under condi-
tions of substrate excess,KM values will be in mass-based units, typi-
cally g L−1. This parameter can be useful for comparing different
enzymes acting on the same substrate, but as mass-basedKM values
depend strongly on the SSA of the substrate, it is generally not
meaningful to compare values obtained with different types of PET.
Work along these lines has identiﬁed some general trends in PET
hydrolase kinetics, which are listed in Table2. For a number of the
most proﬁcient enzymes acting on insoluble PET at moderate tem-
perature (30– 50 °C),k
cat was 0.5– 2s −1,a n dt h i sw a s1– 2o r d e r so f
magnitude slower than their hydrolysis of the same bond in soluble
PET fragments
119,121,124. The same enzymes hadKM values in the hun-
dredths of nM range, and taken together, this implies strong substrate
interactions but slow turnover compared to other hydrolases acting on
native, soluble substrates
125. A molecular description of these
characteristics appears to be a promising avenue for further under-
standing of structure-function relationships for PET hydrolases. To
achieve this, we will need better methods to quantify the accumulation
and decay of intermediates; both enzyme-substrate complexes and
PET fragments. Progress curves for these intermediates will elucidate
the complex pathway from insoluble polymer to the monomers TPA
and EG, and it will also provide the necessary experimental input for
further kinetic modeling. Advanced knowledge in this respect
may help to accelerate the late stage of the industrial recycling
process, which is currently thought to be hampered by these hydro-
lysis intermediates. Finally, we encourage more experimental and
computational research into the relationship between polymer con-
formation and enzyme activity. Some reports have pointed out a
strong effect on catalysis of thetrans-gauche isomerism in the PET
chain
52,67, and it has been proposed that constraints on isomerization
may lessen gradually as PET chains are shortened in the enzymatic
process126. Information on this would be important both for the fun-
damental understanding of the interfacial enzyme reaction and as a
guide for enzyme engineering.
Conclusions and outlook
The increasing demand for sustainable plastic recycling solutions,
integral to the bio-based circular economy and climate crisis mitiga-
tion, positions the biotechnological valorization of PET as a dynamic
research ﬁeld in the foreseeable future.
The successful implementation of several extensively customized
PET hydrolases, which allow for nearly complete polymer-to-monomer
conversion in less than 12 h on pilot or larger industrial scales
9,29,57,
suggests that fast kinetics is unlikely to be the primary constraint in
this research domain. However, to maintain competitiveness, PET
hydrolases, similar to other industrial enzymes, must undergo ongoing
performance improvements, including enhanced enzyme kinetics and
long-term stability, tailored pH optima, etc. Consequently, standard
guidelines derived from research endeavors so far are discussed above
and summarized in Box1 and Tables1 and 2. Other related research
avenues, which have received considerably less attention yet appear to
hold signiﬁcant promise, should be explored with greater focus in the
future. For instance, enzyme immobilization may enhance stability and
facilitate multiple applications
127,128. Also, the development of syner-
gistic enzyme cocktails may enable reduced dosages or address mixed
plastic waste
129, a more complex challenge within the plastic pollution
dilemma. For the latter, a moderate temperature range of 40– 50 °C
may be considered when extended operation time is acceptable, par-
ticularly when not all applied enzymes exhibit adequate half-lives at
higher temperatures.
Simultaneously, understanding and optimizing process condi-
tions should be afforded equal attention and effort as enzyme
engineering in future research. This may involve optimizing melt-
extrusion parameters
56, investigating the feasibility of omitting energy-
intensive micronization stages, or implementing alternative pre-
treatment techniques
130, all of which could reduce the costs of the
current process11,12. A thorough understanding of the material prop-
erties associated with degradability is urgently required to assess the
feasibility of current research aimed at developing highly efﬁcient
enzymes speciﬁcally for crystalline PET. These forthcoming research
endeavors may address our knowledge gaps concerning the absent
information in the standardized parameter set (Tables1 and 2)t h a t
collectively impacts the future development of industrial PET
recycling.
At the enzyme discovery stage, researchers should move beyond
the trivial homology-based database mining and increase the use of
novel bioinformatics- or AI-based tools to discover or design new PET
hydrolase scaffolds
29,47. Moreover, the previously underutilized clas-
sical function-based metagenomics or microbiological techniques can
still be remarkably beneﬁcial for discovering novel sequence or
structural diversity of depolymerizing enzymes that have not yet been
included in the digital repository. We propose a more efﬁcient data-
sharing approach by characterizing novel enzymes and all known
mutants of benchmark enzymes, summarizing their biocatalytic
properties in the standardized format shown in Table2,a n dm a k i n g
them available online for free access. These will ultimately contribute
signiﬁcantly to the advancement of AI-based PET hydrolase engineer-
ing or design, as well as the development of speciﬁc AI models tailored
for interfacial biocatalysis.
Motivated by the successful industrialization of enzymatic PET
recycling, other hydrolysable waste plastics, such as polyurethanes,
polylactides, and polyamides, are logically emerging as the next wave
of substrates for potential biocatalytic depolymerization
13,131– 133.T h i s
ambition necessitates considering the lessons and experiences learned
from PET, such as using polymer feedstocks with precisely deﬁned
properties and the need for standardized conditions for evaluating
novel depolymerizing enzymes. Ultimately, we expect this article will
inspire researchers to collaborate and develop similar guidelines to
standardize the future bio-based plastic recycling industry.
Perspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-60016-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:4684 9
References
1. Xin, J. et al. Progress in the catalytic glycolysis of polyethylene
terephthalate.J. Environ. Manag.296, 113267 (2021).
2. Aryan, Y., Yadav, P. & Samadder, S. R. Life cycle assessment of the
existing and proposed plastic waste management options in India:
a case study.J. Clean. Prod.211,1 2 6 8–1283 (2019).
3. Tsochatzis, E. D., Lopes, J. A. & Corredig, M. Chemical testing of
mechanically recycled polyethylene terephthalate for food
packaging in the European Union.Resour. Conserv. Recycl.179,
106096 (2022).
4. Ragaert, K., Delva, L. & Van Geem, K. Mechanical and chemical
recycling of solid plastic waste.Waste Manag.69,2 4–58 (2017).
5. Ellis, L. D. et al. Chemical and biological catalysis for plastics
recycling and upcycling.Nat. Catal.4,5 3 9–556 (2021).
6. Tournier, V. et al. Enzymes’power for plastics degradation.Chem.
Rev. 123,5 6 1 2–5701 (2023).
7 . M ü l l e r ,R . - J . ,S c h r a d e r ,H . ,P r o f e ,J . ,D r e s l e r ,K .&D e c k w e r ,W . - D .
Enzymatic degradation of poly(ethylene terephthalate): rapid
hydrolyse using a hydrolase fromT. fusca. Macromol. Rapid
Commun. 26,1 4 0 0–1405 (2005).
8. Wei, R. et al. Mechanism-based design of efﬁcient PET hydrolases.
ACS Catal.12, 3382–3396 (2022).
9. Tournier, V. et al. An engineered PET depolymerase to break down
and recycle plastic bottles.Nature 580,2 1 6–219 (2020).
10. Gomollón-Bel, F. IUPAC’s2 0 2 3t o pt e ne m e r g i n gt e c h n o l o g i e si n
chemistry.Chem. Int.45,1 4–22 (2023).
11. Singh, A. et al. Techno-economic, life-cycle, and socioeconomic
impact analysis of enzymatic recycling of poly(ethylene ter-
ephthalate).Joule 5,2 4 7 9–2503 (2021).
12. Uekert, T. et al. Life cycle assessment of enzymatic poly(ethylene
terephthalate) recycling.Green. Chem.24,6 5 3 1–6543 (2022).
13. Wei, R., Weber, G., Blank, L. M. & Bornscheuer, U. T. Process
insights for harnessing biotechnology for plastic depolymeriza-
tion. Nat. Chem. Eng.2, 110–117 (2025).
14. Yoshida, S. et al. A bacterium that degrades and assimilates
poly(ethylene terephthalate).Science 351, 1196–1199 (2016).
15. Arnal, G. et al. Assessment of four engineered PET degrading
enzymes considering large-scale industrial applications.ACS
Catal. 13,1 3 1 5 6–13166 (2023).
16. Mican, J. et al. Exploring new galaxies: perspectives on the dis-
covery of novel PET-degrading enzymes.A p p l .C a t a l .B - E n v i r o n .
342, 123404 (2024).
17. Zhou, J., Cui, Z., Wei, R., Dong, W. & Jiang, M. Interfacial catalysis in
enzymatic PET plastic depolymerization.Trends Chem.7,
175–185 (2025).
18. Purdy, R. E. & Kolattukudy, P. E. Depolymerization of a hydroxy
fatty acid biopolymer, cutin, by an extracellular enzyme from
Fusarium solanif. pisi: Isolation and some properties of the
enzyme. Arch. Biochem. Biophys.159,6 1–69 (1973).
19. Fett, W. F., Wijey, C., Moreau, R. A. & Osman, S. F. Production of
cutinase byThermomonospora fuscaATCC 27730.J. Appl.
Microbiol.86,5 6 1–568 (1999).
20. Herrero Acero, E. et al. Enzymatic surface hydrolysis of PET: effect
of structural diversity on kinetic properties of cutinases from
Thermobiﬁda. Macromolecules44, 4632–4640 (2011).
21. Liu, R. et al. Polyethylene terephthalate (PET)-degrading bacteria
in the pelagic deep-sea sediments of the PaciﬁcO c e a n .Environ.
Pollut. 352, 124131 (2024).
22. Wilkes, R. A. et al. Mechanisms of polyethylene terephthalate pellet
fragmentation into nanoplastics and assimilable carbons by waste-
water comamonas.Environ. Sci. Technol. 58,1 9 3 3 8–19352 (2024).
23. Sulaiman, S. et al. Isolation of a novel cutinase homolog with
polyethylene terephthalate-degrading activity from leaf-branch
compost by using a metagenomic approach.Appl. Environ.
Microbiol.78,1 5 5 6–1562 (2012).
24. Sonnendecker, C. et al. Low carbon footprint recycling of post-
consumer PET plastic with a metagenomic polyester hydrolase.
ChemSusChem15, e202101062 (2022).
25. Meyer Cifuentes, I. E. et al. Molecular and biochemical differences
of the tandem and cold-adapted PET hydrolases Ple628 and
Ple629, isolated from a marine microbial consortium.Front.
Bioeng. Biotechnol.10, 930140 (2022).
26. Danso, D. et al. New insights into the function and global dis-
tribution of polyethylene terephthalate (PET)-degrading bacteria
and enzymes in marine and terrestrial metagenomes.Appl.
Environ. Microbiol.84
,e 0 2 7 7 3–02717 (2018).
27. Erickson, E. et al. Sourcing thermotolerant poly(ethylene ter-
ephthalate) hydrolase scaffolds from natural diversity.Nat. Com-
mun. 13, 7850 (2022).
28. Chen, J. et al. Global marine microbial diversity and its potential in
bioprospecting.Nature 633,3 7 1–379 (2024).
29. Seo, H. et al. Landscape proﬁling of PET depolymerases using a
natural sequence cluster framework.Science 387,e a d p 5 6 3 7
(2025).
30. Xi, X. et al. Secretory expression inBacillus subtilisand bio-
chemical characterization of a highly thermostable polyethylene
terephthalate hydrolase from bacterium HR29.Enzym. Microb.
Technol.143,1 0 9 7 1 5( 2 0 2 1 ) .
31. Hong, H. et al. Discovery and rational engineering of PET hydrolase
with both mesophilic and thermophilic PET hydrolase properties.
Nat. Commun.14, 4556 (2023).
32. Qi, X., Ji, M., Yin, C.-F., Zhou, N.-Y. & Liu, Y. Glacier as a source of
novel polyethylene terephthalate hydrolases.Environ. Microbiol.
25,2 8 2 2–2833 (2023).
33. Eiamthong, B. et al. Discovery and genetic code expansion of a
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) hydrolase from the human saliva
metagenome for the degradation and bio-functionalization of PET.
A n g e w .C h e m .I n t .E d .61, e202203061 (2022).
34. Sulaiman, S., You, D.-J., Kanaya, E., Koga, Y. & Kanaya, S. Crystal
structure and thermodynamic and kinetic stability of
metagenome-derived LC-cutinase.Biochemistry53,1 8 5 8–1869
(2014).
35. Zeng, W. et al. Substrate-binding mode of a thermophilic PET
hydrolase and engineering the enzyme to enhance the hydrolytic
efﬁcacy. ACS Catal.12,3 0 3 3–3040 (2022).
36. Pfaff, L. et al. Multiple substrate binding mode-guided engineering
of a thermophilic PET hydrolase.ACS Catal.12,9 7 9 0–9800
(2022).
37. Chatonnet, A., Perochon, M., Velluet, E. & Marchot, P. The
ESTHER database on alpha/beta hydrolase fold proteins— an
overview of recent developments.Chem. Biol. Interact.383,
110671 (2023).
38. Joo, S. et al. Structural insight into molecular mechanism of
poly(ethylene terephthalate) degradation.Nat. Commun.9,
382 (2018).
39. Bollinger, A. et al. A novel polyester hydrolase from the marine
bacteriumPseudomonas aestusnigri— structural and functional
insights.Front. Microbiol.11,1 1 4( 2 0 2 0 ) .
40. Perez-Garcia, P. et al. An archaeal lid-containing feruloyl esterase
degrades polyethylene terephthalate.Commun. Chem.6,
193 (2023).
41. Biundo, A. et al. Polyphenol oxidases exhibit promiscuous pro-
teolytic activity.Commun. Chem.3, 62 (2020).
42. Dimarogona, M. et al. Structural and functional studies of a
Fusarium oxysporumcutinase with polyethylene terephthalate
modiﬁcation potential.Biochim. Biophys. Acta Gen. Subj.1850,
2308–2317 (2015).
43. Ronkvist, ÅM., Xie, W., Lu, W. & Gross, R. A. Cutinase-catalyzed
hydrolysis of poly(ethylene terephthalate).Macromolecules42,
5128–5138 (2009).
Perspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-60016-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:4684 10
44. Lee, S. H. et al. Characterization and engineering of a fungal
poly(ethylene terephthalate) hydrolyzing enzyme fromAspergil-
lus fumigatiafﬁnis. ACS Catal.14,4 1 0 8–4116 (2024).
45. Brinch-Pedersen, W. et al. Discovery and surface charge engi-
neering of fungal cutinases for enhanced activity on poly(ethylene
terephthalate).ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng.12,7 3 2 9–7337 (2024).
46. Ding, Y., Zhang, S., Kong, X., Hess, H. & Zhang, Y. Replicating PET
hydrolytic activity by positioning active sites with smaller syn-
thetic protein scaffolds.Adv. Sci. 12, 2500859 (2025).
47. Lauko, A. et al. Computational design of serine hydrolases.Sci-
ence 388, adu2454 (2025).
48. Robles-Martín, A. et al. Sub-micro- and nano-sized polyethylene
terephthalate deconstruction withengineered protein nanopores.
Nat. Catal.6, 1174–1185 (2023).
49. Wei, R. & Bornscheuer, U. T. Designer catalytic nanopores meet
PET nanoparticles.Nat. Catal.6, 1105–1106 (2023).
50. Thomsen, T. B., Almdal, K. & Meyer, A. S. Signiﬁcance of poly(-
ethylene terephthalate) (PET) substrate crystallinity on enzymatic
degradation.N. Biotechnol.78,1 6 2–172 (2023).
51. Woodard, L. N. & Grunlan, M. A. Hydrolytic degradation and ero-
sion of polyester biomaterials.ACS Macro Lett.7,9 7 6–982 (2018).
52. Wei, R. et al. Conformationalﬁtting of aﬂexible oligomeric sub-
strate does not explain the enzymatic PET degradation.Nat.
Commun. 10, 5581 (2019).
53. Tarazona, N. A. et al. Rapid depolymerization of poly(ethylene
terephthalate) thinﬁlms by a dual-enzyme system and its impact
on material properties.Chem. Catal.2,3 5 7 3–3589 (2022).
5 4 . S h i n o t s u k a ,K . ,B l i z n y u k ,V .N .&A s s e n d e r ,H .E .N e a r - s u r f a c e
crystallization of PET.Polymer 53,5 5 5 4–5559 (2012).
55. Chang, A. C. et al. Understanding consequences and tradeoffs of
melt processing as a pretreatment for enzymatic depolymeriza-
tion of poly(ethylene terephthalate).Macromol. Rapid Commun.
43, 2100929 (2022).
56. Patel, A. et al. Melt processing pretreatment effects on enzymatic
depolymerization of poly(ethylene terephthalate).ACS Sustain.
Chem. Eng.10,1 3 6 1 9–13628 (2022).
57. Cui, Y. et al. Computational redesign of a hydrolase for nearly
complete PET depolymerization at industrially relevant high-solids
loading.Nat. Commun.15,1 4 1 7( 2 0 2 4 ) .
58. Xue, R. et al. Enzymatic upcycling of PET waste to calcium ter-
ephthalate for battery anodes.Angew. Chem. Int. Ed.63,
e202313633 (2024).
59. Cheng, Y., Cheng, Y., Zhou, S., Ruzha, Y. & Yang, Y. Closed-loop
recycling of PET fabric and bottle waste by tandem pre-
amorphization and enzymatic hydrolysis.Resour. Conserv. Recycl.
208,1 0 7 7 0 6( 2 0 2 4 ) .
60. Wei, R. et al. Biocatalytic degradation efﬁciency of postconsumer
polyethylene terephthalate packaging determined by their poly-
mer microstructures.Adv. Sci.6, 1900491 (2019).
61. Thomsen, T. B. et al. Rate response of poly(ethylene ter-
ephthalate)-hydrolases to substrate crystallinity: basis for under-
standing the lag phase.ChemSusChem16, e202300291 (2023).
62. Brizendine, R. K. et al. Particle size reduction of poly(ethylene
terephthalate) increases the rate of enzymatic depolymerization
but does not increase the overall conversion extent.ACS Sustain.
Chem. Eng.10, 9131–9140 (2022).
63. Liu, Y.-J. et al. Optimized whole-cell depolymerization of poly-
ethylene terephthalate to monomers using engineeredClos-
tridium thermocellum. J. Hazard. Mater.488, 137441 (2025).
64. Jabarin, S. A. Strain-induced crystallization of poly(ethylene ter-
ephthalate).Polym. Eng. Sci.32,1 3 4 1–1349 (1992).
65. Desrousseaux, M.-L. et al. A process for degrading plastic pro-
ducts. Patent WO2017198786A1. France (2017).
66. Schyns, Z. O. G. & Shaver, M. P. Mechanical recycling of packaging
plastics: a review.Macromol. Rapid Commun.42, 2000415 (2021).
67. Guo, B. et al. Conformational selection in biocatalytic plastic
degradation by PETase.ACS Catal.12, 3397–3409 (2022).
68. Cuthbertson, A. A. et al. Characterization of polymer properties
and identiﬁcation of additives in commercially available research
plastics.Green. Chem.26,7 0 6 7–7090 (2024).
69. Akram, E. et al. On the temperature dependence of enzymatic
degradation of poly(ethylene terephthalate).Chin. J. Catal.60,
284–293 (2024).
70. Jäckering, A. et al. From bulk to binding: decoding the entry of PET
into hydrolase binding pockets.JACS Au4, 4000–4012 (2024).
71. Welsing, G. et al. Two-step biocatalytic conversion of post-
consumer polyethylene terephthalate into value-added products
facilitated by genetic and bioprocess engineering.Bioresour.
Technol.417,1 3 1 8 3 7( 2 0 2 5 ) .
72. Cui, Y. et al. Computational redesign of a PETase for plastic bio-
degradation under ambient condition by the GRAPE strategy.ACS
Catal. 11,1 3 4 0–1350 (2021).
73. Lu, H. et al. Machine learning-aided engineering of hydrolases for
PET depolymerization.Nature 604,6 6 2–667 (2022).
74. Bell, E. L. et al. Directed evolution of an efﬁcient and thermostable
PET depolymerase.Nat. Catal.5,6 7 3–681 (2022).
75. Świderek, K. et al. Mechanistic studies of a lipase unveil effect of
pH on hydrolysis products of small PET modules.Nat. Commun.
14,3 5 5 6( 2 0 2 3 ) .
76. Denton, M. C. R. et al. Integration of pH control into Chi.Bio
reactors and demonstration with small-scale enzymatic
poly(ethylene terephthalate) hydrolysis. Biochemistry 63,
1599–1607 (2024).
77. Mückschel, B. et al. Ethylene glycol metabolism byPseudomonas
putida. Appl. Environ. Microbiol.78,8 5 3 1–8539 (2012).
78. Tiso, T. et al. Towards bio-upcycling of polyethylene ter-
ephthalate.Metab. Eng.66,1 6 7–178 (2021).
79. Narancic, T. et al. Genome analysis of the metabolically versatile
Pseudomonas umsongensisGO16: the genetic basis for PET
monomer upcycling into polyhydroxyalkanoates.Microb. Bio-
technol.14,2 4 6 3–2480 (2021).
80. Brandenberg, O. F., Schubert, O. T. & Kruglyak, L. Towards syn-
thetic PETtrophy: engineeringPseudomonas putidafor concurrent
polyethylene terephthalate (PET) monomer metabolism and PET
hydrolase expression.Microb. Cell Fact.21, 119 (2022).
81. Han, W. et al. Biodegradation of poly(ethylene terephthalate)
t h r o u g hP E T a s es u r f a c e - d i s p l a y :f r o mf u n c t i o nt os t r u c t u r e .J.
Hazard. Mater.461, 132632 (2024).
82. Li, Z., Waghmare, P. R., Dijkhuizen, L., Meng, X. & Liu, W. Research
advances on the consolidated bioprocessing of lignocellulosic
biomass.Eng. Microbiol.4, 100139 (2024).
83. Crosby, J. R. et al. Extreme thermophiles as emerging metabolic
engineering platforms.Curr. Opin. Biotechnol.59,5 5–64 (2019).
84. Yan, F., Wei, R., Cui, Q., Bornscheuer, U. T. & Liu, Y.-J. Thermophilic
whole-cell degradation of polyethylene terephthalate using
engineeredClostridium thermocellum. Microb. Biotechnol.14,
374–385 (2021).
85. Tiso, T. et al. The metabolic potential of plastics as biotechnolo-
gical carbon sources— review and targets for the future.Metab.
Eng. 71,7 7–98 (2022).
86. Giraldo-Narcizo, S., Guenani, N., Sánchez-Pérez, A. M. & Guerrero,
A. Accelerated polyethylene terephthalate (PET) enzymatic
degradation by room temperature alkali pre-treatment for
reduced polymer crystallinity.ChemBioChem24, e202200503
(2023).
8 7 . Y a n g ,T . ,X u ,Y . ,L i u ,G .&N o w a c k ,B .O l i g o m e r sa r eam a j o rf r a c t i o n
of the submicrometre particles released during washing of
polyester textiles.Nat. Water2,1 5 1–160 (2024).
88. Deng, H. et al. Microplastic pollution in water and sediment in a
textile industrial area.Environ. Pollut.258, 113658 (2020).
Perspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-60016-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:4684 11
89. Li, T., Menegatti, S. & Crook, N. Breakdown of polyethylene
therepthalate microplastics under saltwater conditions using
engineeredVibrio natriegens. AIChE J.69, e18228 (2023).
90. Zhou, Y. et al. Development of a novel“4E” polyethylene ter-
ephthalate bio-recycling processwith the potential for industrial
application: efﬁcient, economical, energy-saving, and eco-
friendly.Bioresour. Technol.391, 129913 (2024).
91. Zurier, H. S. & Goddard, J. M. PETase engineering for enhanced
degradation of microplasticﬁbers in simulated wastewater sludge
processing conditions.ACS EST Water3, 2210–2218 (2023).
9 2 . C h e m l a ,Y . ,S w e e n e y ,C .J . ,W o z n i a k ,C .A .&V o i g t ,C .A .D e s i g n
and regulation of engineered bacteria for environmental release.
Nat. Microbiol.10,2 8 1–300 (2025).
93. de Lorenzo, V. Environmental galenics: large-scale fortiﬁcation of
extant microbiomes with engineered bioremediation agents.Phi-
los. Trans. R. Soc. B-Biol. Sci.377, 20210395 (2022).
94. Pirillo, V., Pollegioni, L. & Molla, G. Analytical methods for the
investigation of enzyme-catalyzed degradation of polyethylene
terephthalate.FEBS J.288,4 7 3 0–4745 (2021).
95. Qiao, Y. et al. Fluorescence-activated droplet sorting of
PET degrading microorganisms.J. Hazard. Mater.424,1 2 7 4 1 7
(2022).
96. Shi, L. et al. Complete depolymerization of PET wastes by an
evolved PET hydrolase from directed evolution.Angew. Chem. Int.
Ed. 62, e202218390 (2023).
97. Taxeidis, G. et al. New labeled PET analogues enable the func-
tional screening and characterization of PET-degrading enzymes.
ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng.12,5 9 4 3–5952 (2024).
98. Belisário-Ferrari, M. R., Wei, R., Schneider, T., Honak, A. & Zim-
mermann, W. Fast turbidimetric assay for analyzing the enzymatic
hydrolysis of polyethylene terephthalate model substrates.Bio-
technol. J.14, 1800272 (2019).
99. von Haugwitz, G. et al. Structural insights into (tere)phthalate-
ester hydrolysis by a carboxylesterase and its role in promoting
PET depolymerization.ACS Catal.12,1 5 2 5 9–15270 (2022).
100. Li, A. et al. Discovery and mechanism-guided engineering of BHET
hydrolases for improved PET recycling and upcycling.Nat. Com-
mun. 14, 4169 (2023).
101. Groseclose, T. M. et al. A high-throughput screening platform for
engineering poly(ethylene terephthalate) hydrolases.ACS Catal.
14,1 4 6 2 2–
14638 (2024).
102. Wei, R. et al. Turbidimetric analysis of the enzymatic hydrolysis of
polyethylene terephthalate nanoparticles.J. Mol. Catal. B-Enzym
103,7 2–78 (2014).
103. Vogel, K. et al. Enzymatic degradation of polyethylene ter-
ephthalate nanoplastics analyzed in real time by isothermal titra-
tion calorimetry.Sci. Total Environ.773, 145111 (2021).
104. Pfaff, L., Breite, D., Badenhorst, C. P. S., Bornscheuer, U. T. & Wei,
R. Fluorimetric high-throughputscreening method for polyester
hydrolase activity using polyethylene terephthalate nanoparticles.
In Methods in Enzymology(eds Weber, G. et al.)648,2 5 3–270
(Academic Press, 2021).
105. Fu, X. et al. Single distal mutation enhances activity of known
PETases via stabilisation of PET-binding. Preprint athttps://www.
biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2024.09.11.612432v1(2024).
1 0 6 . T h o m s e n ,T .B . ,S c h u b e r t ,S .W . ,H u n t ,C .J . ,W e s t h ,P .&M e y e r ,A .
S. A new continuous assay for quantitative assessment of enzy-
matic degradation of poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET).Enzym.
Microb. Technol.162, 110142 (2023).
107. Weigert, S., Gagsteiger, A., Menzel, T. & Höcker, B. A versatile
assay platform for enzymatic poly(ethylene-terephthalate)
degradation.Protein Eng. Des. Sel.34, gzab022 (2021).
108. Liu, K. et al. A dualﬂuorescence assay enables high-throughput
screening for poly(ethylene terephthalate) hydrolases.Chem-
SusChem 16, e202202019 (2023).
109. Zhong-Johnson, E. Z. L., Voigt, C. A. & Sinskey, A. J. An absorbance
method for analysis of enzymatic degradation kinetics of poly(-
ethylene terephthalate)ﬁlms. Sci. Rep.11, 928 (2021).
110. Wei, R., Oeser, T., Billig, S. & Zimmermann, W. A high-throughput
assay for enzymatic polyester hydrolysis activity byﬂuorimetric
detection.Biotechnol. J.7,1 5 1 7–1521 (2012).
111. Gimeno-Pérez, M. et al. A coupled ketoreductase-diaphorase
assay for the detection of polyethylene terephthalate-hydrolyzing
activity.ChemSusChem15, e202102750 (2022).
112. Li, M. et al. Customization of ethylene glycol (EG)-induced BMOR-
based biosensor for the directed evolution of PET degrading
enzymes.Adv. Sci.12, 2413205 (2025).
113. Bayer, T. et al. Biosensor and chemo-enzymatic one-pot cascade
applications to detect and transform PET-derived terephthalic
acid in living cells.iScience25, 104326 (2022).
1 1 4 . D i e r k e s ,R .F .e ta l .A nu l t r a - s e n s i t i v eComamonas thiooxidans
biosensor for the rapid detection of enzymatic polyethylene ter-
ephthalate (PET) degradation.Appl. Environ. Microbiol.89,
e01603–e01622 (2023).
115. Hernández-Sancho, J. M. et al. A versatile microbial platform as a
tunable whole-cell chemical sensor.Nat. Commun.15,8 3 1 6
(2024).
1 1 6 . G a n t z ,M . ,M a t h i s ,S .V . ,N i n t z e l ,F .E .H . ,L i o ,P .&H o l l f e l d e r ,F .O n
synergy between ultrahigh throughput screening and machine
learning in biocatalyst engineering.Faraday Discuss.252,8 9–114
(2024).
1 1 7 . H e y d e ,S .A .H . ,A r n l i n gB å å t h ,J . ,W e s t h ,P . ,N ø r h o l m ,M .H .H .&
Jensen, K. Surface display as a functional screening platform for
detecting enzymes active on PET.Microb. Cell Fact.20, 93 (2021).
1 1 8 . C r i b a r i ,M .A .e ta l .U l t r a h i g h -throughput directed evolution of
polymer-degrading enzymes using yeast display.J. Am. Chem.
Soc. 145,2 7 3 8 0–27389 (2023).
1 1 9 . B a a t h ,J .A . ,B o r c h ,K . ,J e n s e n ,K . ,B r a s k ,J .&W e s t h ,P .C o m p a r a t i v e
biochemistry of four polyester (PET) hydrolases.ChemBioChem
22,1 6 2 7–1637 (2021).
1 2 0 . S c a n d o l a ,M . ,F o c a r e t e ,M .L .&F r i s o n i ,G .S i m p l ek i n e t i cm o d e lf o r
the heterogeneous enzymatic hydrolysis of natural poly(3-hydro-
xybutyrate).Macromolecules31, 3846–3851 (1998).
121. Erickson, E. et al. Comparative performance of PETase as a func-
tion of reaction conditions, substrate properties, and product
accumulation.ChemSusChem15, e202101932 (2022).
1 2 2 . K a r i ,J . ,A n d e r s e n ,M . ,B o r c h ,K .&W e s t h ,P .A ni n v e r s eM i c h a e l i s
Menten approach for general description of interfacial enzyme
kinetics.ACS Catal.7, 4904–4914 (2017).
123. Andersen, M., Kari, J., Borch, K. & Westh, P. Michaelis–Menten
equation for degradation of insoluble substrate.Math. Biosci.296,
93–97 (2018).
1 2 4 . A r n l i n gB å å t h ,J . ,J e n s e n ,K . ,B o r c h ,K . ,W e s t h ,P .&K a r i ,J .S a b a t i e r
principle for rationalizing enzymatic hydrolysis of a synthetic
polyester.JACS Au2, 1223–1231 (2022).
1 2 5 . S o u s a ,S .F . ,R a m o s ,M .J . ,L i m ,C .&F e r n a n d e s ,P .A .R e l a t i o n s h i p
between enzyme/substrate properties and enzyme efﬁciency in
hydrolases.ACS Catal.5, 5877–5887 (2015).
126. Schubert, S. W. et al. Relationships of crystallinity and reaction
rates for enzymatic degradation of poly (ethylene terephthalate),
PET. ChemSusChem17, e202301752 (2024).
127. Schwaminger, S. P. et al. Immobilization of PETase enzymes on
magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for the decomposition of
microplastic PET.Nanoscale Adv.3,4 3 9 5–4399 (2021).
1 2 8 . Z u r i e r ,H .S .&G o d d a r d ,J .M .D i r e c t e di m m o b i l i z a t i o no fP E T a s eo n
mesoporous silica enables sustained depolymerase activity in
synthetic wastewater conditions.ACS Appl. Bio Mat.
5,4 9 8 1–4992
(2022).
129. Branson, Y. et al. One-pot depolymerization of mixed plastics using
a dual enzyme system.ChemSusChem18, e202402416 (2025).
Perspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-60016-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:4684 12
130. Yan, Z.-F. et al. Design and construction of chemical-biological
module clusters for degradation and assimilation of poly(ethylene
terephthalate) waste.J. Environ. Manag.361, 121258 (2024).
131. Bayer, T. et al. Structural elucidation of a metagenomic uretha-
nase and its engineering towards enhanced hydrolysis proﬁles.
A n g e w .C h e m .I n t .E d .63, e202404492 (2024).
132. Bell, E. L. et al. Natural diversity screening, assay development,
and characterization of nylon-6 enzymatic depolymerization.Nat.
Commun. 15, 1217 (2024).
133. Li, Z. et al. Structure-guided engineering of a versatile urethanase
improves its polyurethane depolymerization activity.Adv. Sci.12,
2416019 (2025).
134. Then, J. et al. Ca
2+ and Mg2+ binding site engineering increases the
degradation of polyethylene terephthalateﬁlms by polyester
hydrolases fromThermobiﬁda fusca. Biotechnol. J.10,5 9 2–598
(2015).
135. Schmidt, J. et al. Effect of Tris, MOPS, and phosphate buffers on
the hydrolysis of polyethylene terephthalateﬁlms by polyester
hydrolases.FEBS Open Bio6,9 1 9–927 (2016).
136. Chen, C.-C. et al. General features to enhance enzymatic activity
of poly(ethylene terephthalate) hydrolysis.Nat. Catal.4,4 2 5–430
(2021).
137. Suzuki, K., Watanabe, T. & Kitamoto, H. A biodegradable plastic-
degrading cutinase-like enzyme from the phyllosphere yeast
Pseudozyma antarctica. PDB database entryhttps://doi.org/10.
2210/pdb7CC4/pdb(2020).
138. Suzuki, K. & Koitabashi, M. Crystal structure of a biodegradable
plastic-degrading cutinase fromParaphomas p .B 4 7 - 9 .P D Bd a t a -
base entryhttps://doi.org/10.2210/pdb7CY3/pdb(2020).
139. Hwang, J. et al. Structural and biochemical insights into bis(2-
hydroxyethyl) terephthalate degrading carboxylesterase isolated
from psychrotrophic bacteriumExiguobacterium antarcticum. Int.
J. Mol. Sci.24, 12022 (2023).
Acknowledgements
The authors R.W., L.M.B., and U.T.B. acknowledge funding from the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under
grant agreement no. 870294 for the MIX-UP project and no. 953214 for
the upPE-T project. L.M.B. acknowledges the support of the Werner
Siemens Foundation in the frame of the WSS Research Centre“catalaix”.
P.W. acknowledges support from Innovation Fund Denmark (Grant 5150-
00020A) and the Novo Nordisk Foundation (Grants NNF15OC0016606
and NNFSA170028392). G.W. acknowledges funding from the“Helm-
holtz Sustainability Challenge” project FINEST and the satellite project
PUreValue, funded by the Investment and Networking Fund of the
Helmholtz Association under grant agreement no. KA2-HSC-10 and
KA-HSC-13, respectively.
Author contributions
R.W., P.W., G.W., L.M.B., and U.T.B. collaboratively developed the con-
cept of this article and wrote the manuscript, with R.W. taking the lead.
Competing interests
U.T.B. is a member of the Scientiﬁc Advisory Board of Carbios. The
remaining authors (R.W., P.W., G.W., and L.M.B.) declare no competing
interests.
Additional information
Correspondenceand requests for materials should be addressed to
Ren Wei.
Peer review informationNature Communicationsthanks Sierin Lim and
the other, anonymous, reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer
review of this work.
Reprints and permissions informationis available at
http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s noteSpringer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur-
isdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open AccessThis article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate
credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the
Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed the licensed
material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted
material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third
party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative
Commons licence, unless indicatedotherwise in a credit line to the
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons
licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or
exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visithttp://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025
Perspective https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-60016-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:4684 13